Part   Canto Five


Song Prayers by Rtvija to the Lord Who Appears in King Nabhi's Yajna (SB 5.3.4-15)
TEXTS 4–5
åtvija ücuù
arhasi muhur arhattamärhaëam asmäkam anupathänäà namo nama ity etävat sad-upaçikñitaà ko 'rhati pumän prakåti-guëa-vyatikara-matir anéça éçvarasya parasya prakåti-puruñayor arväktanäbhir näma-rüpäkåtibhé rüpa-nirüpaëam; sakala-jana-nikäya-våjina-nirasana-çivatama-pravara-guëa-gaëaika-deça-kathanäd åte.
åtvijaù ücuù—the priests said; arhasi—please (accept); muhuù—again and again; arhat-tama—O most exalted, worshipable person; arhaëam—offering of worship; asmäkam—of us; anupathänäm—who are Your servants; namaù—respectful obeisances; namaù—respectful obeisances; iti—thus; etävat—so far; sat—by exalted personalities; upaçikñitam—instructed; kaù—what; arhati—is able (to make); pumän—man; prakåti—of material nature; guëa—of the modes; vyatikara—in the transformations; matiù—whose mind (is absorbed); anéçaù—who is most incapable; éçvarasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parasya—beyond; prakåti-puruñayoù—the jurisdiction of the three modes of material nature; arväktanäbhiù—which do not reach up to, or which are of this material world; näma-rüpa-äkåtibhiù—by names, forms and qualities; rüpa—of Your nature or position; nirüpaëam—ascertainment, perception; sakala—all; jana-nikäya—of mankind; våjina—sinful actions; nirasana—which wipe out; çivatama—most auspicious; pravara—excellent; guëa-gaëa—of the transcendental qualities; eka-deça—one part; kathanät—by speaking; åte—except.
The priests began to offer prayers to the Lord, saying: O most worshipable one, we are simply Your servants. Although You are full in Yourself, please, out of Your causeless mercy, accept a little service from us, Your eternal servants. We are not actually aware of Your transcendental form, but we can simply offer our respectful obeisances again and again, as instructed by the Vedic literatures and authorized äcäryas. Materialistic living entities are very much attracted to the modes of material nature, and therefore they are never perfect, but You are above the jurisdiction of all material conceptions. Your name, form and qualities are all transcendental and beyond the conception of experimental knowledge. Indeed, who can conceive of You? In the material world we can perceive only material names and qualities. We have no other power than to offer our respectful obeisances and prayers unto You, the transcendental person. The chanting of Your auspicious transcendental qualities will wipe out the sins of all mankind. That is the most auspicious activity for us, and we can thus partially understand Your supernatural position.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has nothing to do with material perception. Even the impersonalist Çaìkaräcärya says, näräyaëaù paro 'vyaktät: "Näräyaëa. the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is beyond the material conception." We cannot concoct the form and attributes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. We must simply accept the description given in Vedic literatures about the Lord's form and activities. As stated in Brahma-saàhitä (5.29):
cintämaëi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-våkña-
lakñävåteñu surabhér abhipälayantam
lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who is tending the cows, yielding all desires, in abodes built with spiritual gems and surrounded by millions of purpose trees. He is always served with great reverence and affection by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune." We can have some conception of the Absolute Truth, His form and His attributes simply by reading the descriptions given in Vedic literatures and authoritative statements given by exalted personalities like Brahmä, Närada, Çukadeva Gosvämé and others. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says, ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù: [Cc. Madhya 17.136] "We cannot conceive the name, form and qualities of Çré Kåñëa through our material senses." Because of this, other names for the Lord are adhokñaja and apräkåta, which indicate that He is beyond any material senses. Out of His causeless mercy upon His devotees, the Lord appeared before Mahäräja Näbhi. Similarly, when we are engaged in the Lord's devotional service, the Lord reveals Himself to us. Sevonmukhe hi jihvädau svayam eva sphuraty adaù. This is the only way to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù: [Bg. 18.55] one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead through devotional service. There is no other way. We have to hear from the authorities and from the çästras and consider the Supreme Lord in terms of their statements. We cannot imagine or concoct forms and attributes of the Lord.
TEXT 6
parijanänuräga-viracita-çabala-saàçabda-salila-sita-kisalaya-tulasikä-dürväìkurair api sambhåtayä saparyayä kila parama parituñyasi.
parijana—by Your servants; anuräga—in great ecstasy; viracita—executed; çabala—with a faltering voice; saàçabda—with prayers; salila—water; sita-kisalaya—twigs bearing new leaves; tulasikä—tulasé leaves; dürvä-aìkuraiù—and with newly grown grass; api—also; sambhåtayä—performed; saparyayä—by worship; kila—indeed; parama—O Supreme Lord; parituñyasi—You become satisfied.
O Supreme Lord, You are full in every respect. You are certainly very satisfied when Your devotees offer You prayers with faltering voices and in ecstasy bring You tulasé leaves, water, twigs bearing new leaves, and newly grown grass. This surely makes You satisfied.
One does not need great wealth, education or opulence to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one is fully absorbed in love and ecstasy, he need offer only a flower and a little water. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà yo me bhaktyä prayacchati: "If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will accept it." (Bg. 9.26)
The Supreme Lord can be pleased only by devotional service: therefore it is said here that the Lord is surely satisfied by devotion and nothing else. Quoting from the Gautaméya-tantra, the Hari-bhakti-viläsa states:
tulasé-dala-mätreëa
jalasya culukena vä
vikréëéte svam ätmänaà
bhaktebhyo bhakta-vatsalaù
"Çré Kåñëa, who is very affectionate toward His devotees, sells Himself to a devotee who offers merely a tulasé leaf and a palmful of water." The Supreme Lord is causelessly merciful upon His devotee, so much so that even the poorest of men can offer Him a little water and a flower in devotion and thus please Him. This is due to His affectionate dealings with His devotees.
TEXT 7
athänayäpi na bhavata ijyayoru-bhära-bharayä samucitam artham ihopalabhämahe.
atha—otherwise; anayä—this; api—even; na—not; bhavataù—of Your exalted personality; ijyayä—by performance of sacrifice; urubhära-bharayä—encumbered by much paraphernalia; samucitam—required; artham—use; iha—here; upalabhämahe—we can see.
We have engaged in Your worship with many things and have offered sacrifices unto You, but we think that there is no need for so many arrangements to please Your Lordship.
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says that if one is offered varied foods but has no appetite, the offering has no value. In a big sacrificial ceremony there may be many things accumulated to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but if there is no devotion, attachment or love for the Lord, the arrangement is useless. The Lord is complete in Himself, and He does not need anything from us. However, if we offer Him a little water, a flower and a tulasi leaf, He will accept them. Bhakti, devotional service, is the main way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is not a question of arranging huge sacrifices. The priests were regretful, thinking that they were not on the path of devotional service and that their sacrifice was not pleasing to the Lord.
TEXT 8
AaTMaNa WvaNauSavNaMaÅSaaVYaiTareke-<a bae>aUYaMaaNaaXaezPauåzaQaRSvæPaSYa ik-NTau
NaaQaaiXaz AaXaaSaaNaaNaaMaeTadi>aSa&raDaNaMaa}a& >aivTauMahRiTa )) 8 ))
ätmana evänusavanam aïjasävyatirekeëa bobhüyamänäçeña-puruñärtha-svarüpasya kintu näthäçiña äçäsänänäm etad abhisaàrädhana-mätraà bhavitum arhati.
ätmanaù—self-sufficiently; eva—certainly; anusavanam—at every moment; aïjasä—directly; avyatirekeëa—without stopping; bobhüyamäna—increasing; açeña—unlimitedly; puruña-artha—the goals of life; sva-rüpasya—Your actual identity; kintu—but; nätha—O Lord; äçiñaù—benedictions for material enjoyment; äçäsänänäm—of us, who are always desiring; etat—this; abhisaàrädhana—for getting Your mercy; mätram—only; bhavitum arhati—can be.
All of life's goals and opulences are directly, self-sufficiently, unceasingly and unlimitedly increasing in You at every moment. Indeed, You are unlimited enjoyment and blissful existence itself. As far as we are concerned, O Lord, we are always after material enjoyment. You do not need all these sacrificial arrangements, but they are meant for us so that we may be benedicted by Your Lordship. All these sacrifices are performed for our fruitive results, and they are not actually needed by You.
Being self-sufficient, the Supreme Lord does not need huge sacrifices. Fruitive activity for a more opulent life is for those who desire such material opulence for their interest. Yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko 'yaà karma-bandhanaù: [Bg. 3.9] if we do not act to satisfy the Supreme Lord, we engage in mäyä's activities. We may construct a gorgeous temple and spend thousands of dollars, but such a temple is not required by the Lord. The Lord has many millions of temples for His residence, and He does not need our attempt. He does not require opulent activity at all. Such engagement is meant for our benefit. If we engage our money in constructing a gorgeous temple, we are freed from the reactions of our endeavors. This is for our benefit. In addition, if we attempt to do something nice for the Supreme Lord, He is pleased with us and gives us His benediction. In conclusion, the gorgeous arrangements are not for the Lord's sake but for our own. If we somehow or other receive blessings and benedictions from the Lord, our consciousness can be purified and we can become eligible to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 9
tad yathä bäliçänäà svayam ätmanaù çreyaù param aviduñäà parama-parama-puruña prakarña-karuëayä sva-mahimänaà cäpavargäkhyam upakalpayiñyan svayaà näpacita evetaravad ihopalakñitaù.
tat—that; yathä—as; bäliçänäm—of the fools; svayam—by Yourself; ätmanaù—own; çreyaù—welfare; param—ultimate; aviduñäm—of persons who do not know; parama-parama-puruña—O Lord of lords; prakarña-karuëayä—by abundant causeless mercy; sva-mahimänam—Your personal glory; ca—and; apavarga-äkhyam—called apavarga (liberation); upakalpayiñyan—desiring to give; svayam—personally; na apacitaù—not properly worshiped; eva—although; itara-vat—like an ordinary person; iha—here; upalakñitaù—(You are) present and seen (by us).
O Lord of lords, we are completely ignorant of the execution of dharma, artha, käma and mokña, the process of liberation, because we do not actually know the goal of life. You have appeared personally before us like a person soliciting worship, but actually You are present here just so we can see You. You have come out of Your abundant and causeless mercy in order to serve our purpose, our interest, and give us the benefit of Your personal glory called apavarga, liberation. You have come, although You are not properly worshiped by us due to our ignorance.
Lord Viñëu was personally present at the sacrificial arena, but this does not mean that He had any interest in His own personal benefit. Similarly, the arcä-vigraha, the Deity in the temple, is present for the same purpose. Out of His causeless mercy, the Supreme Personality of Godhead presents Himself before us so that we can see Him. Since we have no transcendental vision, we cannot see the spiritual sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1] of the Lord; therefore, out of His causeless mercy He comes in a form we can see. We can only see material things like stone and wood, and therefore He accepts a form of stone and wood and thus accepts our service in the temple. This is an exhibition of the Lord's causeless mercy. Although He has no interest in such things, in order to receive our loving service He agrees to act as He does. We cannot actually offer suitable paraphernalia for the Lord's worship because we are completely ignorant. It was out of His causeless mercy that the Lord appeared in the sacrificial arena of Mahäräja Näbhi.
TEXT 10
athäyam eva varo hy arhattama yarhi barhiñi räjarñer varadarñabho bhavän nija-puruñekñaëa-viñaya äsét.
atha—then; ayam—this; eva—certainly; varaù—benediction; hi—indeed; arhat-tama—O most worshipable of the worshipable; yarhi—because; barhiñi—in the sacrifice; räja-åñeù—of King Näbhi; varada-åñabhaù—the best of the benefactors; bhavän—Your Lordship; nija-puruña—of Your devotees; ékñaëa-viñayaù—the object of the sight; äsét—has become.
O most worshipable of all, You are the best of all benefactors, and Your appearance at saintly King Näbhi's sacrificial arena is meant for our benediction. Because You have been seen by us, You have bestowed upon us the most valuable benediction.
Nija-puruña-ékñaëa-viñaya. In Bhagavad-gétä (9.29) Kåñëa says, samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu: "I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend to him."
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is equal to everyone. In that sense, He has no enemies and no friends. Everyone is enjoying the fruitive reactions of his own work, and the Lord, within everyone's heart, is observing and giving everyone the desired result. However, just as the devotees are always anxious to see the Supreme Lord satisfied in every way, similarly the Supreme Lord is very anxious to present Himself before His devotees. Çré Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.8):
pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
sambhavämi yuge yuge
"To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after millennium."
Thus Kåñëa's appearance is for the deliverance and satisfaction of His devotees. Actually He does not advent Himself simply to kill the demons, for that can be done by His agents. Lord Viñëu's appearance at the sacrificial arena of Mahäräja Näbhi was just to please the king and his assistants. Otherwise there was no reason for His being present there.
TEXT 11
asaìga-niçita-jïänänala-vidhütäçeña-malänäà bhavat-svabhävänäm ätmärämäëäà munénäm anavarata-pariguëita-guëa-gaëa parama-maìgaläyana-guëa-gaëa-kathano 'si.
asaìga—by detachment; niçita—strengthened; jïäna—of knowledge; anala—by the fire; vidhüta—removed; açeña—unlimited; malänäm—whose dirty things; bhavat-svabhävänäm—who have attained Your qualities; ätma-ärämäëäm—who are self-satisfied; munénäm—of great sages; anavarata—incessantly; pariguëita—recounted; guëa-gaëa—O Lord, whose spiritual qualities; parama-maìgala—supreme bliss; äyana—produces; guëa-gaëa-kathanaù—He, the chanting of whose attributes; asi—You are.
Dear Lord, all the great sages who are thoughtful and saintly persons incessantly recount Your spiritual qualities. These sages have already burned up all the unlimited dirty things and, by the fire of knowledge, strengthened their detachment from the material world. Thus they have attained Your qualities and are self-satisfied. Yet even for those who feel spiritual bliss in chanting Your attributes, Your personal presence is very rare.
The priests in Mahäräja Näbhi's sacrificial arena appreciated the personal presence of the Supreme Lord Viñëu, and they considered themselves very much obliged. The Lord's appearance is rare even for great saintly persons who have become completely detached from this material world and whose hearts are clean due to constantly chanting the glories of the Lord. Such people are satisfied by chanting the transcendental qualities of the Lord. The Lord's personal presence is not actually required. The priests are pointing out that the Lord's personal presence is very rare even for such elevated sages but that He was so kind to them that now He was personally present. Therefore the priests were very much obliged.
TEXT 12
atha kathaïcit skhalana-kñut-patana-jåmbhaëa-duravasthänädiñu vivaçänäà naù smaraëäya jvara-maraëa-daçäyäm api sakala-kaçmala-nirasanäni tava guëa-kåta-nämadheyäni vacana-gocaräëi bhavantu.
atha—still; kathaïcit—somehow or other; skhalana—stumbling; kñut—hunger; patana—falling down; jåmbhaëa—yawning; duravasthäna—because of being placed in an undesirable position; ädiñu—and so on; vivaçänäm—unable; naù—of ourselves; smaraëäya—to remember; jvara-maraëa-daçäyäm—in the case of having a high fever at the time of death; api—also; sakala—all; kaçmala—sins; nirasanäni—which can dispel; tava—Your; guëa—attributes; kåta—activities; nämadheyäni—names; vacana-gocaräëi—possible to be uttered; bhavantu—let them become.
Dear Lord, we may not be able to remember Your name, form and qualities due to stumbling, hunger, falling down, yawning or being in a miserable diseased condition at the time of death when there is a high fever. We therefore pray unto You, O Lord, for You are very affectionate to Your devotees. Please help us remember You and utter Your holy names, attributes and activities, which can dispel all the reactions of our sinful lives.
The real success in life is ante näräyaëa-småti—remembering the holy name, attributes, activities and form of the Lord at the time of death. Although we may be engaged in the Lord's devotional service in the temple, material conditions are so tough and inevitable that we may forget the Lord at the time of death due to a diseased condition or mental derangement. Therefore we should pray to the Lord to be able to remember His lotus feet without fail at the time of death, when we are in such a precarious condition. In this regard, one may also see Çrémad-Bhägavatam 6.2.9–10 and 14–15.
TEXT 13
kiïcäyaà räjarñir apatya-kämaù prajäà bhavädåçém äçäsäna éçvaram äçiñäà svargäpavargayor api bhavantam upadhävati prajäyäm artha-pratyayo dhanadam ivädhanaù phalékaraëam.
kiïca—moreover; ayam—this; räja-åñiù—pious King (Näbhi); apatya-kämaù—desiring offspring; prajäm—a son; bhavädåçém—exactly like You; äçäsänaù—hoping for; éçvaram—the supreme controller; äçiñäm—of benedictions; svarga-apavargayoù—of the heavenly planets and liberation; api—although; bhavantam—You; upadhävati—worships; prajäyäm—children; artha-pratyayaù—regarding as the ultimate goal of life; dhana-dam—unto a person who can give immense wealth as charity; iva—like; adhanaù—a poor man; phalékaraëam—a little husk.
Dear Lord, here is the great King Näbhi, whose ultimate goal in life is to have a son like You. Your Lordship, his position is like that of a person approaching a very rich man and begging for a little grain. Mahäräja Näbhi is so desirous of having a son that he is worshiping You for a son, although You can offer him any exalted position, including elevation to the heavenly planets or liberation back to Godhead.
The priests were a little ashamed that King Näbhi was performing a great sacrifice just to ask the Lord's benediction for a son. The Lord could offer him promotion to the heavenly planets or the Vaikuëöha planets. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has taught us how to approach the Supreme Lord and ask Him for the ultimate benediction. He said: na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà kavitäà vä jagad-éça kämaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4]. He did not want to ask the Supreme Lord for anything material. Material opulence means riches, a nice family, a good wife and many followers, but an intelligent devotee doesn't ask the Supreme Lord for anything material. His only prayer is: mama janmani janmanéçvare bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi. He wants to be engaged perpetually in the loving service of the Lord. He does not want promotion to the heavenly planets or mukti, liberation from material bondage. If this were the case, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu would not have said, mama janmani janmani. It doesn't matter to a devotee whether or not he takes birth life after life, as long as he remains a devotee. Actually eternal liberty means returning home, back to Godhead. A devotee is never concerned about anything material. Although Näbhi Mahäräja wanted a son like Viñëu, wanting a son like God is also a form of sense gratification. A pure devotee wants only to engage in the Lord's loving service.
TEXT 14
ko vä iha te 'paräjito 'paräjitayä mäyayänavasita-padavyänävåta-matir viñaya-viña-rayänävåta-prakåtir anupäsita-mahac-caraëaù.
kaù vä—who is that person; iha—within this material world; te—of Your Lordship; aparäjitaù—not conquered; aparäjitayä—by the unconquerable; mäyayä—illusory energy; anavasita-padavya—whose path cannot be ascertained; anävåta-matiù—whose intelligence is not bewildered; viñaya-viña—of material enjoyment, which is like poison; raya—by the course; anävåta—not covered; prakåtiù—whose nature; anupäsita—without worshiping; mahat-caraëaù—the lotus feet of great devotees.
Dear Lord, unless one worships the lotus feet of great devotees, one will be conquered by the illusory energy, and his intelligence will be bewildered. Indeed, who has not been carried away by the waves of material enjoyment, which are like poison? Your illusory energy is unconquerable. No one can see the path of this material energy or tell how it is working.
Mahäräja Näbhi was inclined to performing great sacrifices for begetting a son. The son might be as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but such a material desire—be it great or insignificant—is brought about by the influence of mäyä. A devotee does not at all desire anything for sense gratification. Devotion is therefore explained as devoid of material desires (anyäbhiläñitä-çünya). Everyone is subjected to the influence of mäyä and entangled in all kinds of material desire, and Mahäräja Näbhi was no exception. Freedom from mäyä's influence is possible when one engages in the service of the great devotees (mahac-caraëa-sevä). Without worshiping the lotus feet of a great devotee, one cannot be freed from mäyä's influence. Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura therefore says, chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä nistära päyeche kebä: "Who has been freed from mäyä's clutches without serving the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava?" Mäyä is aparäjita, and her influence is also aparäjita. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14):
daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome."
Only a devotee can surpass mäyä's great influence. It was no fault on Mahäräja Näbhi's part that he wanted a son. He wanted a son like the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the best of all sons. By the association of the Lord's devotee, one no longer desires material opulence. This is confirmed in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.54):
"sädhu-saìga", "sädhu-saìga" sarva-çästre kaya
lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya
and [Cc. Madhya 22.51]:
mahat-kåpä vinä kona karme 'bhakti' naya
kåñëa-bhakti düre rahu, saàsära nahe kñaya
If one is serious about escaping mäyä's influence and returning home, back to Godhead, one must associate with a sädhu (devotee). That is the verdict of all scriptures. By the slight association of a devotee, one can be freed from the clutches of mäyä. Without the mercy of the pure devotee, one cannot get freedom by any means. Certainly a pure devotee's association is necessary in order to obtain the loving service of the Lord. One cannot be freed from mäyä's clutches without sädhu-saìga [Cc. Madhya 22.83], the benediction of a great devotee. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (7.5.32) Prahläda Mahäräja says:
naiñäà matis tävad urukramäìghrià
spåçaty anarthäpagamo yad arthaù
mahéyasäà päda-rajo-'bhiñekaà
niñkiïcanänäà na våëéta yävat
One cannot become the Lord's pure devotee without taking the dust of a great devotee on his head (päda-rajo-'bhiñekam). A pure devotee is niñkiïcana; he has no material desire to enjoy the material world. One has to take shelter of such a pure devotee in order to attain his qualities. The pure devotee is always free from the clutches of mäyä and her influence.
TEXT 15
yad u ha väva tava punar adabhra-kartar iha samähütas taträrtha-dhiyäà mandänäà nas tad yad deva-helanaà deva-devärhasi sämyena sarvän prativoòhum aviduñäm.
yat—because; u ha väva—indeed; tava—Your; punaù—again; adabhra-kartaù—O Lord, who perform many activities; iha—here, in this arena of sacrifice; samähütaù—invited; tatra—therefore; artha-dhiyäm—who aspire to fulfill material desires; mandänäm—not very intelligent; naù—of us; tat—that; yat—which; deva-helanam—disrespect of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; deva-deva—Lord of lords; arhasi—please; sämyena—because of Your equipoised position; sarvän—everything; prativoòhum—tolerate; aviduñäm—of us, who are all ignorant.
O Lord, You perform many wonderful activities. Our only aim was to acquire a son by performing this great sacrifice; therefore our intelligence is not very sharp. We are not experienced in ascertaining life's goal. By inviting You to this negligible sacrifice for some material motive, we have certainly committed a great offense at Your lotus feet. Therefore, O Lord of lords, please excuse our offense because of Your causeless mercy and equal mind.
The priests were certainly unhappy to have called the Supreme Lord from Vaikuëöha for such an insignificant reason. A pure devotee never wants to see the Lord unnecessarily. The Lord is engaged in various activities, and the pure devotee does not want to see Him whimsically, for his own sense gratification. The pure devotee simply depends on the Lord's mercy, and when the Lord is pleased, he can see Him face to face. The Lord is unseen even by demigods like Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva. By calling on the Supreme Lord, the priests of Näbhi Mahäräja proved themselves unintelligent; nonetheless, the Lord came out of His causeless mercy. All of them therefore wanted to be excused by the Lord.
Worship of the Supreme Lord for material gain is not approved by authorities. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.16):
catur-vidhä bhajante mäà
janäù sukåtino 'rjuna
ärto jijïäsur arthärthé
jïäné ca bharatarñabha
"O best among the Bhäratas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render devotional service unto Me—the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute."
Initiation into bhakti begins when one is in a distressed condition or in want of money, or when one is inquisitive to understand the Absolute Truth. Nonetheless, people who approach the Supreme Lord in this way are not actually devotees. They are accepted as pious (sukåtinaù) due to their inquiring about the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Not knowing the various activities and engagements of the Lord, such people unnecessarily disturb the Lord for material gain. However, the Lord is so kind that even though disturbed, He fulfills the desires of such beggars. The pure devotee is anyäbhiläñitä-çünya; he has no motive behind his worship. He is not conducted by the influence of mäyä in the form of karma or jïäna. The pure devotee is always prepared to execute the order of the Lord without personal consideration. The åtvijaù, the priests at the sacrifice, knew very well the distinction between karma and bhakti, and because they considered themselves under the influence of karma, fruitive activity, they begged the Lord's pardon. They knew that the Lord had been invited to come for some paltry reason.
