
Song Prayers Offered by Lord Siva to Lord Sankarsana in Ilavrta-varsa (SB 5.17.17-24)

Text
bhaje bhajanyäraëa-päda-paìkajaà
bhagasya kåtsnasya paraà paräyaëam
bhakteñv alaà bhävita-bhüta-bhävanaà
bhaväpahaà tvä bhava-bhävam éçvaram
bhaje—I worship; bhajanya—O worshipable Lord; araëa-päda-paìkajam—whose lotus feet protect His devotees from all fearful situations; bhagasya—of opulences; kåtsnasya—of all different varieties (wealth, fame, strength, knowledge, beauty and renunciation); param—the best; paräyaëam—the ultimate shelter; bhakteñu—to the devotees; alam—beyond value; bhävita-bhüta-bhävanam—who manifests His different forms for the satisfaction of His devotees; bhava-apaham—who stops the devotees' repetition of birth and death; tvä—unto You; bhava-bhävam—who is the origin of the material creation; éçvaram—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
O my Lord, You are the only worshipable person, for You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all opulences. Your secure lotus feet are the only source of protection for all Your devotees, whom You satisfy by manifesting Yourself in various forms. O my Lord, You deliver Your devotees from the clutches of material existence. Nondevotees, however, remain entangled in material existence by Your will. Kindly accept me as Your eternal servant.
Text
na yasya mäyä-guëa-citta-våttibhir
nirékñato hy aëv api dåñöir ajyate
éçe yathä no 'jita-manyu-raàhasäà
kas taà na manyeta jigéñur ätmanaù
na—never; yasya—whose; mäyä—of the illusory energy; guëa—in the qualities; citta—of the heart; våttibhiù—by the activities (thinking, feeling and willing); nirékñataù—of Him who is glancing; hi—certainly; aëu—slightly; api—even; dåñöiù—vision; ajyate—is affected; éçe—for the purpose of regulating; yathä—as; naù—of us; ajita—who have not conquered; manyu—of anger; raàhasäm—the force; kaù—who; tam—unto Him (the Supreme Lord); na—not; manyeta—would worship; jigéñuù—aspiring to conquer; ätmanaù—the senses.
We cannot control the force of our anger. Therefore when we look at material things, we cannot avoid feeling attraction or repulsion for them. But the Supreme Lord is never affected in this way. Although He glances over the material world for the purpose of creating, maintaining and destroying it, He is not affected, even to the slightest degree. Therefore, one who desires to conquer the force of the senses must take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. Then he will be victorious.
Text
asad-dåço yaù pratibhäti mäyayä
kñébeva madhv-äsava-tämra-locanaù
na näga-vadhvo 'rhaëa éçire hriyä
yat-pädayoù sparçana-dharñitendriyäù
asat-dåçaù—for a person with polluted vision; yaù—who; pratibhäti—appears; mäyayä—the influence of mäyä; kñébaù—one who is inebriated or angry; iva—like; madhu—by honey; äsava—and liquor; tämra-locanaù—having eyes reddish like copper; na—not; näga-vadhvaù—the wives of the serpent demon; arhaëe—in worshiping; éçire—were unable to proceed; hriyä—because of bashfulness; yat-pädayoù—of whose lotus feet; sparçana—by the touching; dharñita—agitated; indriyäù—whose senses.
For persons with impure vision, the Supreme Lord's eyes appear like those of someone who indiscriminately drinks intoxicating beverages. Thus bewildered, such unintelligent persons become angry at the Supreme Lord, and due to their angry mood the Lord Himself appears angry and very fearful. However, this is an illusion. When the wives of the serpent demon were agitated by the touch of the Lord's lotus feet, due to shyness they could proceed no further in their worship of Him. Yet the Lord remained unagitated by their touch, for He is equipoised in all circumstances. Therefore who will not worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead?
Text
yam ähur asya sthiti-janma-saàyamaà
tribhir vihénaà yam anantam èñayaù
na veda siddhärtham iva kvacit sthitaà
bhü-maëòalaà mürdha-sahasra-dhämasu
yam—whom; ähuù—they said; asya—of the material world; sthiti—the maintenance; janma—creation; saàyamam—annihilation; tribhiù—these three; vihénam—without; yam—which; anantam—unlimited; èñayaù—all the great sages; na—not; veda—feels; siddha-artham—a mustard seed; iva—like; kvacit—where; sthitam—situated; bhü-maëòalam—the universe; mürdha-sahasra-dhämasu—on the hundreds and thousands of hoods of the Lord.
Lord Çiva continued: All the great sages accept the Lord as the source of creation, maintenance and destruction, although He actually has nothing to do with these activities. Therefore the Lord is called unlimited. Although the Lord in His incarnation as Çeña holds all the universes on His hoods, each universe feels no heavier than a mustard seed to Him. Therefore, what person desiring perfection will not worship the Lord?
Text
yasyädya äséd guëa-vigraho mahän
vijïäna-dhiñëyo bhagavän ajaù kila
yat-sambhavo 'haà tri-våtä sva-tejasä
vaikärikaà tämasam aindriyaà såje
ete vayaà yasya vaçe mahätmanaù
sthitäù çakuntä iva sütra-yantritäù
mahän ahaà vaikåta-tämasendriyäù
såjäma sarve yad-anugrahäd idam
yasya—from whom; ädyaù—the beginning; äsét—there was; guëa-vigrahaù—the incarnation of the material qualities; mahän—the total material energy; vijïäna—of full knowledge; dhiñëyaù—the reservoir; bhagavän—the most powerful; ajaù—Lord Brahmä; kila—certainly; yat—from whom; sambhavaù—born; aham—I; tri-våtä—having three varieties according to the three modes of nature; sva-tejasä—by my material strength; vaikärikam—all the demigods; tämasam—material elements; aindriyam—the senses; såje—I create; ete—all of these; vayam—we; yasya—of whom; vaçe—under the control; mahä-ätmanaù—great personalities; sthitäù—situated; çakuntäù—vultures; iva—like; sütra-yantritäù—bound by rope; mahän—the mahat-tattva; aham—I; vaikåta—the demigods; tämasa—the five material elements; indriyäù—senses; såjämaù—we create; sarve—all of us; yat—of whom; anugrahät—by the mercy; idam—this material world.
From that Supreme Personality of Godhead appears Lord Brahmä, whose body is made from the total material energy, the reservoir of intelligence predominated by the passionate mode of material nature. From Lord Brahmä, I myself am born as a representation of false ego known as Rudra. By my own power I create all the other demigods, the five elements and the senses. Therefore, I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than any of us and under whose control are situated all the demigods, material elements and senses, and even Lord Brahmä and I myself, like birds bound by a rope. Only by the Lord's grace can we create, maintain and annihilate the material world. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Being.
Text
yan-nirmitäà karhy api karma-parvaëéà
mäyäà jano 'yaà guëa-sarga-mohitaù
na veda nistäraëa-yogam aïjasä
tasmai namas te vilayodayätmane
yat—by whom; nirmitäm—created; karhi api—at any time; karma-parvaëém—which ties the knots of fruitive activity; mäyäm—the illusory energy; janaù—a person; ayam—this; guëa-sarga-mohitaù—bewildered by the three modes of material nature; na—not; veda—knows; nistäraëa-yogam—the process of getting out of material entanglement; aïjasä—soon; tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme); namaù—respectful obeisances; te—unto You; vilaya-udaya-ätmane—in whom everything is annihilated and from whom everything is again manifested.
The illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead binds all of us conditioned souls to this material world. Therefore, without being favored by Him, persons like us cannot understand how to get out of that illusory energy. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who is the cause of creation and annihilation.
Song Prayers by Bhadraśravā to Lord Hayasīrṣa in Bhadrāśva-varsa (SB 5.18.2-6)

Text
bhadraçravasa ücuù
oà namo bhagavate dharmäyätma-viçodhanäya nama iti.
bhadraçravasaù ücuù—the ruler Bhadraçravä and his intimate associates said; om—O Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dharmäya—the source of all religious principles; ätma-viçodhanäya—who purifies us of material contamination; namaù—our obeisances; iti—thus.
The ruler Bhadraçravä and his intimate associates utter the following prayer: We offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all religious principles, who cleanses the heart of the conditioned soul in this material world. Again and again we offer our respectful obeisances unto Him.
Text
aho vicitraà bhagavad-viceñöitaà
ghnantaà jano 'yaà hi miñan na paçyati
dhyäyann asad yarhi vikarma sevituà
nirhåtya putraà pitaraà jijéviñati
aho—alas; vicitram—wonderful; bhagavat-viceñöitam—the pastimes of the Lord; ghnantam—death; janaù—a person; ayam—this; hi—certainly; miñan—although seeing; na paçyati—does not see; dhyäyan—thinking about; asat—material happiness; yarhi—because; vikarma—forbidden activities; sevitum—to enjoy; nirhåtya—burning; putram—sons; pitaram—the father; jijéviñati—desires a long life.
Alas! How wonderful it is that the foolish materialist does not heed the great danger of impending death! He knows that death will surely come, yet he is nevertheless callous and neglectful. If his father dies, he wants to enjoy his father's property, and if his son dies, he wants to enjoy his son's possessions as well. In either case, he heedlessly tries to enjoy material happiness with the acquired money.
Text
vadanti viçvaà kavayaù sma naçvaraà
paçyanti cädhyätmavido vipaçcitaù
tathäpi muhyanti taväja mäyayä
su-vismitaà kåtyam ajaà nato 'smi tam
vadanti—they say authoritatively; viçvam—the entire material creation; kavayaù—great learned sages; sma—certainly; naçvaram—perishable; paçyanti—they see in trance; ca—also; adhyätma-vidaù—who have realized spiritual knowledge; vipaçcitaù—very learned scholars; tathä api—still; muhyanti—become illusioned; tava—your; aja—O unborn one; mäyayä—by the illusory energy; su-vismitam—most wonderful; kåtyam—activity; ajam—unto the supreme unborn one; nataù asmi—I offer my obeisances; tam—unto Him.
O unborn one, learned Vedic scholars who are advanced in spiritual knowledge certainly know that this material world is perishable, as do other logicians and philosophers. In trance they realize the factual position of this world, and they preach the truth as well. Yet even they are sometimes bewildered by Your illusory energy. This is Your own wonderful pastime. Therefore, I can understand that Your illusory energy is very wonderful, and I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Text
viçvodbhava-sthäna-nirodha-karma te
hy akartur aìgékåtam apy apävåtaù
yuktaà na citraà tvayi kärya-käraëe
sarvätmani vyatirikte ca vastutaù
viçva—of the whole universe; udbhava—of the creation; sthäna—of the maintenance; nirodha—of the annihilation; karma—these activities; te—of You (O dear Lord); hi—indeed; akartuù—aloof; aìgékåtam—still accepted by the Vedic literature; api—although; apävåtaù—untouched by all these activities; yuktam—befitting; na—not; citram—wonderful; tvayi—in You; kärya-käraëe—the original cause of all effects; sarva-ätmani—in all respects; vyatirikte—set apart; ca—also; vastutaù—the original substance.
O Lord, although You are completely detached from the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material world and are not directly affected by these activities, they are all attributed to You. We do not wonder at this, for Your inconceivable energies perfectly qualify You to be the cause of all causes. You are the active principle in everything, although You are separate from everything. Thus we can realize that everything is happening because of Your inconceivable energy.
Text
vedän yugänte tamasä tiraskåtän
rasätaläd yo nå-turaìga-vigrahaù
pratyädade vai kavaye 'bhiyäcate
tasmai namas te 'vitathehitäya iti
vedän—the four Vedas; yuga-ante—at the end of the millennium; tamasä—by the demon of ignorance personified; tiraskåtän—stolen away; rasätalät—from the lowest planetary system (Rasätala); yaù—who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); nå-turaìga-vigrahaù—assuming the form of half-horse, half-man; pratyädade—returned; vai—indeed; kavaye—to the supreme poet (Lord Brahmä); abhiyä-cate—when he asked for them; tasmai—unto Him (the form of Hayagréva); namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—to You; avitatha-éhitäya—whose resolution never fails; iti—thus.
At the end of the millennium, ignorance personified assumed the form of a demon, stole all the Vedas and took them down to the planet of Rasätala. The Supreme Lord, however, in His form of Hayagréva retrieved the Vedas and returned them to Lord Brahmä when he begged for them. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord, whose determination never fails.
Song Prayers by Prahlada Mahārāja to Lord Nrsimhadeva in Hari-varsa (SB 5.18.8-14) 

Text
oà namo bhagavate narasiàhäya namas tejas-tejase ävir-ävirbhava vajra-nakha vajra-daàñöra karmäçayän randhaya randhaya tamo grasa grasa oà svähä abhayam abhayam ätmani bhüyiñöhä oà kñraum.
om—O Lord; namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-siàhäya—known as Lord Nåsiàha; namaù—obeisances; tejaù-tejase—the power of all power; äviù-ävirbhava—please be fully manifest; vajra-nakha—O You who possess nails like thunderbolts; vajra-daàñöra—O You who possess teeth like thunderbolts; karma-äçayän—demoniac desires to be happy by material activities; randhaya randhaya—kindly vanquish; tamaù—ignorance in the material world; grasa—kindly drive away; grasa—kindly drive away; om—O my Lord; svähä—respectful oblations; abhayam—fearlessness; abhayam—fearlessness; ätmani—in my mind; bhüyiñöhäù—may You appear; om—O Lord; kñraum—the béja, or seed, of mantras offering prayers to Lord Nåsiàha.
I offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Nåsiàhadeva, the source of all power. O my Lord who possess nails and teeth just like thunderbolts, kindly vanquish our demonlike desires for fruitive activity in this material world. Please appear in our hearts and drive away our ignorance so that by Your mercy we may become fearless in the struggle for existence in this material world.
Text
svasty astu viçvasya khalaù prasédatäà
dhyäyantu bhütäni çivaà mitho dhiyä
manaç ca bhadraà bhajatäd adhokñaje
äveçyatäà no matir apy ahaituké
svasti—auspiciousness; astu—let there be; viçvasya—of the entire universe; khalaù—the envious (almost everyone); prasédatäm—let them be pacified; dhyäyantu—let them consider; bhütäni—all the living entities; çivam—auspiciousness; mithaù—mutual; dhiyä—by their intelligence; manaù—the mind; ca—and; bhadram—calmness; bhajatät—let it experience; adhokñaje—in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the perception of mind, intelligence and senses; äveçyatäm—let it be absorbed; naù—our; matiù—intelligence; api—indeed; ahaituké—without any motive.
May there be good fortune throughout the universe, and may all envious persons be pacified. May all living entities become calm by practicing bhakti-yoga, for by accepting devotional service they will think of each other's welfare. Therefore let us all engage in the service of the supreme transcendence, Lord Çré Kåñëa, and always remain absorbed in thought of Him.
Text
mägära-därätmaja-vitta-bandhuñu
saìgo yadi syäd bhagavat-priyeñu naù
yaù präëa-våttyä parituñöa ätmavän
siddhyaty adürän na tathendriya-priyaù
mä—not; agära—house; dära—wife; ätma-ja—children; vitta—bank balance; bandhuñu—among friends and relatives; saìgaù—association or attachment; yadi—if; syät—there must be; bhagavat-priyeñu—among persons to whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very dear; naù—of us; yaù—anyone who; präëa-våttyä—by the bare necessities of life; parituñöaù—satisfied; ätma-vän—who has controlled his mind and realized his self; siddhyati—becomes successful; adürät—very soon; na—not; tathä—so much; indriya-priyaù—a person attached to sense gratification.
My dear Lord, we pray that we may never feel attraction for the prison of family life, consisting of home, wife, children, friends, bank balance, relatives and so on. If we do have some attachment, let it be for devotees, whose only dear friend is Kåñëa. A person who is actually self-realized and who has controlled his mind is perfectly satisfied with the bare necessities of life. He does not try to gratify his senses. Such a person quickly advances in Kåñëa consciousness, whereas others, who are too attached to material things, find advancement very difficult.
Text
yat-saìga-labdhaà nija-vérya-vaibhavaà
térthaà muhuù saàspåçatäà hi mänasam
haraty ajo 'ntaù çrutibhir gato 'ìgajaà
ko vai na seveta mukunda-vikramam
yat—of whom (the devotees); saìga-labdham—achieved by the association; nija-vérya-vaibhavam—whose influence is uncommon; tértham—holy places like the Ganges; muhuù—repeatedly; saàspåçatäm—of those touching; hi—certainly; mänasam—the dirty things in the mind; harati—vanquishes; ajaù—the supreme unborn one; antaù—in the core of the heart; çrutibhiù—by the ears; gataù—entered; aìga-jam—dirty things or infections of the body; kaù—who; vai—indeed; na—not; seveta—would serve; mukunda-vikramam—the glorious activities of Mukunda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
By associating with persons for whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mukunda, is the all in all, one can hear of His powerful activities and soon come to understand them. The activities of Mukunda are so potent that simply by hearing of them one immediately associates with the Lord. For a person who constantly and very eagerly hears narrations of the Lord's powerful activities, the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead in the form of sound vibrations, enters within his heart and cleanses it of all contamination. On the other hand, although bathing in the Ganges diminishes bodily contaminations and infections, this process and the process of visiting holy places can cleanse the heart only after a long time. Therefore who is the sane man who will not associate with devotees to quickly perfect his life?
Text
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëä
manorathenäsati dhävato bahiù
yasya—of whom; asti—there is; bhaktiù—devotional service; bhagavati—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akiïcanä—without any motive; sarvaiù—with all; guëaiù—good qualities; tatra—there (in that person); samäsate—reside; suräù—all the demigods; harau—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; abhaktasya—of a person who is not devoted; kutaù—where; mahat-guëäù—good qualities; manorathena—by mental speculation; asati—in the temporary material world; dhävataù—who is running; bahiù—outside.
All the demigods and their exalted qualities, such as religion, knowledge and renunciation, become manifest in the body of one who has developed unalloyed devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva. On the other hand, a person devoid of devotional service and engaged in material activities has no good qualities. Even if he is adept at the practice of mystic yoga or the honest endeavor of maintaining his family and relatives, he must be driven by his own mental speculations and must engage in the service of the Lord's external energy. How can there be any good qualities in such a man?
Text
harir hi säkñäd bhagavän çarériëäm
ätmä jhañäëäm iva toyam épsitam
hitvä mahäàs taà yadi sajjate gåhe
tadä mahattvaà vayasä dampaténäm
hariù—the Lord; hi—certainly; säkñät—directly; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; çarériëäm—of all living entities who have accepted material bodies; ätmä—the life and soul; jhañäëäm—of the aquatics; iva—like; toyam—the vast water; épsitam—is desired; hitvä—giving up; mahän—a great personality; tam—Him; yadi—if; sajjate—becomes attached; gåhe—to household life; tadä—at that time; mahattvam—greatness; vayasä—by age; dam-paténäm—of the husband and wife.
Just as aquatics always desire to remain in the vast mass of water, all conditioned living entities naturally desire to remain in the vast existence of the Supreme Lord. Therefore if someone very great by material calculations fails to take shelter of the Supreme Soul but instead becomes attached to material household life, his greatness is like that of a young, low-class couple. One who is too attached to material life loses all good spiritual qualities.
Text
tasmäd rajo-räga-viñäda-manyu-
mäna-spåhä-bhayadainyädhimülam
hitvä gåhaà saàsåti-cakravälaà
nåsiàha-pädaà bhajatäkutobhayam iti
tasmät—therefore; rajaù—of passion or material desires; räga—attachment for material things; viñäda—then disappointment; manyu—anger; mäna-spåhä—the desire to be respectable in society; bhaya—fear; dainya—of poverty; adhimülam—the root cause; hitvä—giving up; gåham—household life; saàsåti-cakravälam—the cycle of repeated birth and death; nåsiàha-pädam—the lotus feet of Lord Nåsiàhadeva; bhajata—worship; akutaù-bhayam—the shelter of fearlessness; iti—thus.
Therefore, O demons, give up the so-called happiness of family life and simply take shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Nåsiàhadeva, which are the actual shelter of fearlessness. Entanglement in family life is the root cause of material attachment, indefatigable desires, moroseness, anger, despair, fear and the desire for false prestige, all of which result in the repetition of birth and death.
Song Prayers by Lakşmidevi to Lord Kāmadeva (Pradyumna) in Ketumāla-varsa (SB 5.18.18-23) 

Text
oà hräà hréà hrüà oà namo bhagavate håñékeçäya sarva-guëa-viçeñair vilakñitätmane äküténäà citténäà cetasäà viçeñäëäà cädhipataye ñoòaça-kaläya cchando-mayäyänna-mayäyämåta-mayäya sarva-mayäya sahase ojase baläya käntäya kämäya namas te ubhayatra bhüyät.
om—O Lord; hräm hrém hrüm—the seeds of the mantra, chanted for a successful result; om—O Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; håñékeçäya—unto Håñékeça, the Lord of the senses; sarva-guëa—with all transcendental qualities; viçeñaiù—with all varieties; vilakñita—particularly observed; ätmane—unto the soul of all living entities; äküténäm—of all kinds of activity; citténäm—of all kinds of knowledge; cetasäm—of the functions of the mind, such as determination and mental effort; viçeñäëäm—of their respective objects; ca—and; adhipataye—unto the master; ñoòaça-kaläya—whose parts are the sixteen original ingredients of creation (namely the five objects of the senses and the eleven senses, including the mind); chandaù-mayäya—unto the enjoyer of all ritualistic ceremonies; anna-mayäya—who maintains all living entities by supplying the necessities of life; amåta-mayäya—who awards eternal life; sarva-mayäya—who is all-pervading; sahase—the powerful; ojase—who supplies strength to the senses; baläya—who supplies strength to the body; käntäya—the supreme husband or master of all living entities; kämäya—who supplies all necessities for the devotees; namaù—respectful obeisances; te—unto You; ubhayatra—always (during both day and night, or both in this life and the next); bhüyät—may there be all good fortune.
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Håñékeça, the controller of all my senses and the origin of everything. As the supreme master of all bodily, mental and intellectual activities, He is the only enjoyer of their results. The five sense objects and eleven senses, including the mind, are His partial manifestations. He supplies all the necessities of life, which are His energy and thus nondifferent from Him, and He is the cause of everyone's bodily and mental prowess, which is also nondifferent from Him. Indeed, He is the husband and provider of necessities for all living entities. The purpose of all the Vedas is to worship Him. Therefore let us all offer Him our respectful obeisances. May He always be favorable toward us in this life and the next.
Text
striyo vratais tvä håñékeçvaraà svato
hy ärädhya loke patim äçäsate 'nyam
täsäà na te vai paripänty apatyaà
priyaà dhanäyüàñi yato 'sva-tanträù
striyaù—all women; vrataiù—by observing fasting and other vows; tvä—you; håñékeçvaram—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, master of the senses; svataù—of your own accord; hi—certainly; ärädhya—worshiping; loke—in the world; patim—a husband; äçäsate—ask for; anyam—another; täsäm—of all those women; na—not; te—the husbands; vai—indeed; paripänti—able to protect; apatyam—the children; priyam—very dear; dhana—the wealth; äyüàñi—or the duration of life; yataù—because; asva-tanträù—dependent.
My dear Lord, You are certainly the fully independent master of all the senses. Therefore all women who worship You by strictly observing vows because they wish to acquire a husband to satisfy their senses are surely under illusion. They do not know that such a husband cannot actually give protection to them or their children. Nor can he protect their wealth or duration of life, for he himself is dependent on time, fruitive results and the modes of nature, which are all subordinate to You.
Text
sa vai patiù syäd akutobhayaù svayaà
samantataù päti bhayäturaà janam
sa eka evetarathä mitho bhayaà
naivätmaläbhäd adhi manyate param
saù—he; vai—indeed; patiù—a husband; syät—would be; akutaù-bhayaù—who is not fearful of anyone; svayam—self-sufficient; samantataù—entirely; päti—maintains; bhaya-äturam—who is very afraid; janam—a person; saù—therefore he; ekaù—one; eva—only; itarathä—otherwise; mithaù—from one another; bhayam—fear; na—not; eva—indeed; ätma-läbhät—than the attainment of You; adhi—greater; manyate—is accepted; param—other thing.
He alone who is never afraid but who, on the contrary, gives complete shelter to all fearful persons can actually become a husband and protector. Therefore, my Lord, you are the only husband, and no one else can claim this position. If you were not the only husband, You would be afraid of others. Therefore persons learned in all Vedic literature accept only Your Lordship as everyone's master, and they think no one else a better husband and protector than You.
Text
yä tasya te päda-saroruhärhaëaà
nikämayet säkhila-käma-lampaöä
tad eva räsépsitam épsito 'rcito
yad-bhagna-yäcïä bhagavan pratapyate
yä—a woman who; tasya—of Him; te—of You; päda-saroruha—of the lotus feet; arhaëam—the worship; nikämayet—fully desires; sä—such a woman; akhila-käma-lampaöä—although maintaining all kinds of material desire; tat—that; eva—only; räsi—You award; épsitam—some other desired benediction; épsitaù—being looked to for; arcitaù—worshiped; yat—from which; bhagna-yäcïä—one who desires objects other than Your lotus feet and who thus becomes broken; bhagavan—O my Lord; pratapyate—is pained.
My dear Lord, You automatically fulfill all the desires of a woman who worships Your lotus feet in pure love. However, if a woman worships Your lotus feet for a particular purpose, You also quickly fulfill her desires, but in the end she becomes broken-hearted and laments. Therefore one need not worship Your lotus feet for some material benefit.
Text
mat-präptaye 'jeça-suräsurädayas
tapyanta ugraà tapa aindriye dhiyaù
åte bhavat-päda-paräyaëän na mäà
vindanty ahaà tvad-dhådayä yato 'jita
mat-präptaye—to obtain my mercy; aja—Lord Brahmä; éça—Lord Çiva; sura—the other demigods, headed by King Indra, Candra and Varuëa; asura-ädayaù—as well as the demons; tapyante—undergo; ugram—severe; tapaù—austerity; aindriye dhiyaù—whose minds are absorbed in thoughts of superior sense gratification; åte—unless; bhavat-päda-paräyaëät—one who is wholly and solely engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord's lotus feet; na—not; mäm—me; vindanti—obtain; aham—I; tvat—in You; hådayäù—whose hearts; yataù—therefore; ajita—O unconquerable one.
O supreme unconquerable Lord, when they become absorbed in thoughts of material enjoyment, Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, as well as other demigods and demons, undergo severe penances and austerities to receive my benedictions. But I do not favor anyone, however great he may be; unless he is always engaged in the service of Your lotus feet. Because I always keep You within my heart, I cannot favor anyone but a devotee.
Text
sa tvaà mamäpy acyuta çérñëi vanditaà
karämbujaà yat tvad-adhäyi sätvatäm
bibharñi mäà lakñma vareëya mäyayä
ka éçvarasyehitam ühituà vibhur iti
saù—that; tvam—You; mama—of me; api—also; acyuta—O infallible one; çérñëi—on the head; vanditam—worshiped; kara-ambujam—Your lotus hand; yat—which; tvat—by You; adhäyi—placed; sätvatäm—on the head of the devotees; bibharñi—You maintain; mäm—me; lakñma—as an insignia on Your chest; vareëya—O worshipable one; mäyayä—with deceit; kaù—who; éçvarasya—of the supremely powerful controller; éhitam—the desires; ühitum—to understand by reason and argument; vibhuù—is able; iti—thus.
O infallible one, Your lotus palm is the source of all benediction. Therefore Your pure devotees worship it, and You very mercifully place Your hand on their heads. I wish that You may also place Your hand on My head, for although You already bear my insignia of golden streaks on Your chest, I regard this honor as merely a kind of false prestige for me. You show Your real mercy to Your devotees, not to me. Of course, You are the supreme absolute controller, and no one can understand Your motives.
Song Prayers by Manu to Matsya in Ramyaka-varsa (SB 5.18.25-28)

Text
oà namo bhagavate mukhyatamäya namaù sattväya präëäyaujase sahase baläya mahä-matsyäya nama iti.
om—O my Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mukhya-tamäya—the first incarnation to appear; namaù—my respectful obeisances; sattväya—unto the pure transcendence; präëäya—the origin of life; ojase—the source of the potency of the senses; sahase—the origin of all mental power; baläya—the origin of bodily strength; mahä-matsyäya—unto the gigantic fish incarnation; namaù—respectful obeisances; iti—thus.
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is pure transcendence. He is the origin of all life, bodily strength, mental power and sensory ability. Known as Matsyävatära, the gigantic fish incarnation, He appears first among all the incarnations. Again I offer my obeisances unto Him.
Text
antar bahiç cäkhila-loka-pälakair
adåñöa-rüpo vicarasy uru-svanaù
sa éçvaras tvaà ya idaà vaçe 'nayan
nämnä yathä därumayéà naraù striyam
antaù—within; bahiù—without; ca—also; akhila-loka-pälakaiù—by the leaders of the different planets, societies, kingdoms and so on; adåñöa-rüpaù—not seen; vicarasi—You wander; uru—very great; svanaù—whose sounds (Vedic mantras); saù—He; éçvaraù—the supreme controller; tvam—You; yaù—who; idam—this; vaçe—under control; anayat—has brought; nämnä—by different names like brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra; yathä—exactly like; därumayém—made of wood; naraù—a man; striyam—a doll.
My dear Lord, just as a puppeteer controls his dancing dolls and a husband controls his wife, Your Lordship controls all the living entities in the universe, such as the brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras. Although You are in everyone's heart as the supreme witness and commander and are outside everyone as well, the so-called leaders of societies, communities and countries cannot realize You. Only those who hear the vibration of the Vedic mantras can appreciate You.
Text
yaà loka-päläù kila matsara-jvarä
hitvä yatanto 'pi påthak sametya ca
pätuà na çekur dvi-padaç catuñ-padaù
sarésåpaà sthäëu yad atra dåçyate
yam—whom (You); loka-päläù—the great leaders of the universe, beginning with Lord Brahmä; kila—what to speak of others; matsara-jvaräù—who are suffering from the fever of envy; hitvä—leaving aside; yatantaù—endeavoring; api—although; påthak—separately; sametya—combined; ca—also; pätum—to protect; na—not; çekuù—able; dvi-padaù—two-legged; catuù-padaù—four-legged; sarésåpam—reptiles; sthäëu—not moving; yat—whatever; atra—within this material world; dåçyate—is visible.
My Lord, from the great leaders of the universe, such as Lord Brahmä and other demigods, down to the political leaders of this world, all are envious of Your authority. Without Your help, however, they could neither separately nor concertedly maintain the innumerable living entities within the universe. You are actually the only maintainer of all human beings, of animals like cows and asses, and of plants, reptiles, birds, mountains and whatever else is visible within this material world.
Text
bhavän yugäntärëava ürmi-mälini
kñoëém imäm oñadhi-vérudhäà nidhim
mayä sahoru kramate 'ja ojasä
tasmai jagat-präëa-gaëätmane nama iti
bhavän—Your Lordship; yuga-anta-arëave—in the water of devastation at the end of the millennium; ürmi-mälini—possessing rows of big waves; kñoëém—the planet earth; imäm—this; oñadhi-vérudhäm—of all kinds of herbs and drugs; nidhim—the storehouse; mayä—me; saha—with; uru—great; kramate—You roamed; aja—O unborn one; ojasä—with speed; tasmai—unto Him; jagat—of the entire universe; präëa-gaëa-ätmane—the ultimate source of life; namaù—my respectful obeisances; iti—thus.
O almighty Lord, at the end of the millennium this planet earth, which is the source of all kinds of herbs, drugs and trees, was inundated by water and drowned beneath the devastating waves. At that time, You protected me along with the earth and roamed the sea with great speed. O unborn one, You are the actual maintainer of the entire universal creation, and therefore You are the cause of all living entities. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Song Prayers by Aryamā to Lord Kūrma in Hiranmaya-varsa (SB 5.18.30-33)

Text
oà namo bhagavate aküpäräya sarva-sattva-guëa-viçeñaëäyänupalakñita-sthänäya namo varñmaëe namo bhümne namo namo 'vasthänäya namas te.
om—O my Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aküpäräya—in the form of a tortoise; sarva-sattva-guëa-viçeñaëäya—whose form consists of çuddha-sattva, transcendental goodness; anupalakñita-sthänäya—unto You, whose position is not discernible; namaù—my respectful obeisances; varñmaëe—unto You who, although the oldest, are unaffected by time; namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhümne—to the great one who can go everywhere; namaù namaù—repeated obeisances; avasthänäya—the shelter of everything; namaù—respectful obeisances; te—unto You.
O my Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who have assumed the form of a tortoise. You are the reservoir of all transcendental qualities, and being entirely untinged by matter, You are perfectly situated in pure goodness. You move here and there in the water, but no one can discern Your position. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. Because of Your transcendental position, You are not limited by past, present and future. You are present everywhere as the shelter of all things, and therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You again and again.
Text
yad-rüpam etan nija-mäyayärpitam
artha-svarüpaà bahu-rüpa-rüpitam
saìkhyä na yasyästy ayathopalambhanät
tasmai namas te 'vyapadeça-rüpiëe
yat—of whom; rüpam—the form; etat—this; nija-mäyayä arpitam—manifested by Your personal potency; artha-svarüpam—this entire visible cosmic manifestation; bahu-rüpa-rüpitam—manifested in various forms; saìkhyä—the measurement; na—not; yasya—of which; asti—there is; ayathä—falsely; upalambhanät—from perceiving; tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme Lord); namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—unto You; avyapadeça—cannot be ascertained by mental speculation; rüpiëe—whose real form.
My dear Lord, this visible cosmic manifestation is a demonstration of Your own creative energy. Since the countless varieties of forms within this cosmic manifestation are simply a display of Your external energy, this viräö-rüpa [universal body] is not Your real form. Except for a devotee in transcendental consciousness, no one can perceive Your actual form. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Text
jaräyujaà svedajam aëòajodbhidaà
caräcaraà devarñi-pitå-bhütam aindriyam
dyauù khaà kñitiù çaila-sarit-samudra-
dvépa-graharkñety abhidheya ekaù
jaräyu-jam—one born from a womb; sveda-jam—one born from perspiration; aëòa-ja—one born from an egg; udbhidam—one born of the earth; cara-acaram—the moving and the stationary; deva—the demigods; åñi—the great sages; pitå—the inhabitants of Pitåloka; bhütam—the material elements air, fire, water and earth; aindriyam—all the senses; dyauù—the higher planetary systems; kham—the sky; kñitiù—the earthly planets; çaila—the hills and mountains; sarit—the rivers; samudra—the oceans; dvépa—the islands; graha-åkña—the stars and planets; iti—thus; abhidheyaù—to be variously named; ekaù—one.
My dear Lord, You manifest Your different energies in countless forms: as living entities born from wombs, from eggs and from perspiration; as plants and trees that grow out of the earth; as all living entities, both moving and standing, including the demigods, the learned sages and the pitäs; as outer space; as the higher planetary system containing the heavenly planets; and as the planet earth with its hills, rivers, seas, oceans and islands. Indeed, all the stars and planets are simply manifestations of Your different energies, but originally You are one without a second. Therefore there is nothing beyond You. This entire cosmic manifestation is therefore not false but is simply a temporary manifestation of Your inconceivable energy.
Text
yasminn asaìkhyeya-viçeña-näma-
rüpäkåtau kavibhiù kalpiteyam
saìkhyä yayä tattva-dåçäpanéyate
tasmai namaù säìkhya-nidarçanäya te iti
yasmin—in You (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); asaìkhyeya—innumerable; viçeña—particular; näma—names; rüpa—forms; äkåtau—possessing bodily features; kavibhiù—by great learned persons; kalpitä—imagined; iyam—this; saìkhyä—number; yayä—by whom; tattva—of the truth; dåçä—by knowledge; apanéyate—is extracted; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—respectful obeisances; säìkhya-nidarçanäya—who is the revealer of this numerical knowledge; te—unto You; iti—thus.
O my Lord, Your name, form and bodily features are expanded in countless forms. No one can determine exactly how many forms exist, yet You Yourself, in Your incarnation as the learned scholar Kapiladeva, have analyzed the cosmic manifestation as containing twenty-four elements. Therefore if one is interested in Säìkhya philosophy, by which one can enumerate the different truths, he must hear it from You. Unfortunately, nondevotees simply count the different elements and remain ignorant of Your actual form. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Song Prayers by Bhūmi Devi to Lord Varāha in Jambüdvipa (SB 5.18.35-39) 

Text
oà namo bhagavate mantra-tattva-liìgäya yajïa-kratave mahä-dhvarävayaväya mahä-puruñäya namaù karma-çukläya tri-yugäya namas te.
om—O Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mantra-tattva-liìgäya—who is understood in truth by different mantras; yajïa—in the form of animal sacrifices; kratave—and animal sacrifice; mahä-dhvara—great sacrifices; avayaväya—whose limbs and bodily parts; mahä-puruñäya—unto the Supreme Person; namaù—respectful obeisances; karma-çukläya—who purifies the fruitive activities of the living entities; tri-yugäya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full with six opulences and who appears in three yugas (remaining concealed in the fourth yuga); namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—unto You.
O Lord, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You as the gigantic person. Simply by chanting mantras, we shall be able to understand You fully. You are yajïa [sacrifice], and You are the kratu [ritual]. Therefore all the ritualistic ceremonies of sacrifice are part of Your transcendental body, and You are the only enjoyer of all sacrifices. Your form is composed of transcendental goodness. You are known as tri-yuga because in Kali-yuga You appear as a concealed incarnation and because You always fully possess the three pairs of opulences.
Text
yasya svarüpaà kavayo vipaçcito
guëeñu däruñv iva jäta-vedasam
mathnanti mathnä manasä didåkñavo
güòhaà kriyärthair nama éritätmane
yasya—whose; sva-rüpam—form; kavayaù—the greatly learned sages; vipaçcitaù—expert in ascertaining the Absolute Truth; guëeñu—in the material manifestation, consisting of the three modes of nature; däruñu—in wood; iva—like; jäta—manifested; vedasam—fire; mathnanti—stir; mathnä—with a piece of wood used for producing fire; manasä—by the mind; didåkñavaù—who are inquisitive; güòham—hidden; kriyä-arthaiù—by fruitive activities and their results; namaù—respectful obeisances; érita-ätmane—unto the Lord, who is manifested.
By manipulating a fire-generating stick, great saints and sages can bring forth the fire lying dormant within wood. In the same way, O Lord, those expert in understanding the Absolute Truth try to see You in everything—even in their own bodies. Yet you remain concealed. You are not to be understood by indirect processes involving mental or physical activities. Because You are self-manifested, only when You see that a person is wholeheartedly engaged in searching for You do You reveal Yourself. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Text
dravya-kriyä-hetv-ayaneça-kartåbhir
mäyä-guëair vastu-nirékñitätmane
anvékñayäìgätiçayätma-buddhibhir
nirasta-mäyäkåtaye namo namaù
dravya—by the objects of sense enjoyment; kriyä—the activities of the senses; hetu—the predominating deities of sensory activities; ayana—the body; éça—the predominating time; kartåbhiù—by false egotism; mäyä-guëaiù—by the modes of material nature; vastu—as a fact; nirékñita—being observed; ätmane—unto the Supreme Soul; anvékñayä—by careful consideration; aìga—by the limbs of yogic practice; atiçaya-ätma-buddhibhiù—by those whose intelligence has become fixed; nirasta—completely freed from; mäyä—the illusory energy; äkåtaye—whose form; namaù—all respectful obeisances; namaù—respectful obeisances.
The objects of material enjoyment [sound, form, taste, touch and smell], the activities of the senses, the controllers of sensory activities [the demigods], the body, eternal time and egotism are all creations of Your material energy. Those whose intelligence has become fixed by perfect execution of mystic yoga can see that all these elements result from the actions of Your external energy. They can also see Your transcendental form as Supersoul in the background of everything. Therefore I repeatedly offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Text
karoti viçva-sthiti-saàyamodayaà
yasyepsitaà nepsitam ékñitur guëaiù
mäyä yathäyo bhramate tad-äçrayaà
grävëo namas te guëa-karma-säkñiëe
karoti—performing; viçva—of the universe; sthiti—the maintenance; saàyama—winding up; udayam—creation; yasya—of whom; épsitam—desired; na—not; épsitam—desired; ékñituù—of the one glancing over; guëaiù—with the modes of material nature; mäyä—the material energy; yathä—as much as; ayaù—iron; bhramate—moves; tat-äçrayam—placed near that; grävëaù—a magnetic stone; namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—unto You; guëa-karma-säkñiëe—the witness of the actions and reactions of material nature.
O Lord, You do not desire the creation, maintenance or annihilation of this material world, but You perform these activities for the conditioned souls by Your creative energy. Exactly as a piece of iron moves under the influence of a lodestone, inert matter moves when You glance over the total material energy.
Text
pramathya daityaà prativäraëaà mådhe
yo mäà rasäyä jagad-ädi-sükaraù
kåtvägra-daàñöre niragäd udanvataù
kréòann ivebhaù praëatäsmi taà vibhum iti
pramathya—after killing; daityam—the demon; prativäraëam—most formidable opponent; mådhe—in the fight; yaù—He who; mäm—me (the earth); rasäyäù—fallen to the bottom of the universe; jagat—in this material world; ädi-sükaraù—the original form of a boar; kåtvä—keeping it; agra-daàñöre—on the end of the tusk; niragät—came out of the water; udanvataù—from the Garbhodaka Ocean; kréòan—playing; iva—like; ibhaù—elephant; praëatä asmi—I bow down; tam—to Him; vibhum—the Supreme Lord; iti—thus.
My Lord, as the original boar within this universe, You fought and killed the great demon Hiraëyakña. Then You lifted me [the earth] from the Garbhodaka Ocean on the end of Your tusk, exactly as a sporting elephant plucks a lotus flower from the water. I bow down before You.
Song Prayers by Hanumān and others in Kimpuruşa-varsa (SB 5.19.2-8)

Text
ärñöiñeëena saha gandharvair anugéyamänäà parama-kalyäëéà bhartå-bhagavat-kathäà samupaçåëoti svayaà cedaà gäyati.
ärñöiñeëena—Ärñöiñeëa, the chief personality of Kimpuruña-varña; saha—along with; gandharvaiù—by a company of Gandharvas; anugéyamänäm—being chanted; parama-kalyäëém—most auspicious; bhartå-bhagavat-kathäm—the glories of his master, who is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead; samupaçåëoti—he hears with great attention; svayam ca—and personally; idam—this; gäyati—chants.
A host of Gandharvas is always engaged in chanting the glories of Lord Rämacandra. That chanting is always extremely auspicious. Along with Ärñöiñeëa, the chief person in Kimpuruña-varña, Hanumänjé constantly hears those glories with complete attention. Hanumän chants the following mantras.
Text
MahaPauåzaYa MaharaJaaYa NaMa wiTa )) 3 ))
oà namo bhagavate uttamaçlokäya nama ärya-lakñaëa-çéla-vratäya nama upaçikñitätmana upäsita-lokäya namaù sädhu-väda-nikañaëäya namo brahmaëya-deväya mahä-puruñäya mahä-räjäya nama iti.
om—O my Lord; namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uttama-çlokäya—who is always worshiped with selected verses; namaù—my respectful obeisances; ärya-lakñaëa-çéla-vratäya—who possesses all the good qualities of advanced personalities; namaù—my respectful obeisances; upaçikñita-ätmane—unto You whose senses are under control; upäsita-lokäya—who is always remembered and worshiped by all the different classes of living entities; namaù—my respectful obeisances; sädhu-väda-nikañaëäya—to the Lord, who is like a stone for examining all the good qualities of a sädhu; namaù—my respectful obeisances; brahmaëya-deväya—who is worshiped by the most qualified brähmaëas; mahä-puruñäya—unto the Supreme Lord, who is worshiped by the puruña-sükta because of being the cause of this material creation; mahä-räjäya—unto the supreme king, or the king of all kings; namaù—my respectful obeisances; iti—thus.
Let me please Your Lordship by chanting the béja-mantra oàkära. I wish to offer my respectful obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead, who is the best among the most highly elevated personalities. Your Lordship is the reservoir of all the good qualities of Äryans, people who are advanced. Your character and behavior are always consistent, and You always control Your senses and mind. Acting just like an ordinary human being, You exhibit exemplary character to teach others how to behave. There is a touchstone that can be used to examine the quality of gold, but You are like a touchstone that can verify all good qualities. You are worshiped by brähmaëas who are the foremost of all devotees. You, the Supreme Person, are the king of kings, and therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Text
yat tad viçuddhänubhava-mätram ekaà
sva-tejasä dhvasta-guëa-vyavastham
pratyak praçäntaà sudhiyopalambhanaà
hy anäma-rüpaà nirahaà prapadye
yat—which; tat—to that supreme truth; viçuddha—transcendentally pure, without contamination by material nature; anubhava—experience; mätram—that sac-cid-änanda transcendental body; ekam—the one; sva-tejasä—by His own spiritual potency; dhvasta—vanquished; guëa-vyavastham—the influence of the modes of material nature; pratyak—transcendental, not to be seen with material eyes; praçäntam—undisturbed by material agitation; sudhiyä—by Kåñëa consciousness, or purified consciousness, uncontaminated by material desires, fruitive activities and speculative philosophy; upalambhanam—who can be achieved; hi—indeed; anäma-rüpam—without a material name and form; niraham—without a material ego; prapadye—let me offer my respectful obeisances.
The Lord, whose pure form [sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]] is uncontaminated by the modes of material nature, can be perceived by pure consciousness. In the Vedänta He is described as being one without a second. Because of His spiritual potency, He is untouched by the contamination of material nature, and because He is not subjected to material vision, He is known as transcendental. He has no material activities, nor has He a material form or name. Only in pure consciousness, Kåñëa consciousness, can one perceive the transcendental form of the Lord. Let us be firmly fixed at the lotus feet of Lord Rämacandra, and let us offer our respectful obeisances unto those transcendental lotus feet.
Text
martyävatäras tv iha martya-çikñaëaà
rakño-vadhäyaiva na kevalaà vibhoù
kuto 'nyathä syäd ramataù sva ätmanaù
sétä-kåtäni vyasanänéçvarasya
martya—as a human being; avatäraù—whose incarnation; tu—however; iha—in the material world; martya-çikñaëam—for teaching all the living entities, especially human beings; rakñaù-vadhäya—to kill the demon Rävaëa; eva—certainly; na—not; kevalam—only; vibhoù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kutaù—from where; anyathä—otherwise; syät—there would be; ramataù—of one enjoying; sve—in Himself; ätmanaù—the spiritual identity of the universe; sétä—of the wife of Lord Rämacandra; kåtäni—appearing due to the separation; vyasanäni—all the miseries; éçvarasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It was ordained that Rävaëa, chief of the Räkñasas, could not be killed by anyone but a man, and for this reason Lord Rämacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appeared in the form of a human being. Lord Rämacandra's mission, however, was not only to kill Rävaëa but also to teach mortal beings that material happiness centered around sex life or centered around one's wife is the cause of many miseries. He is the self-sufficient Supreme Personality of Godhead, and nothing is lamentable for Him. Therefore why else could He be subjected to tribulations by the kidnapping of mother Sétä?
Text
na vai sa ätmätmavatäà suhåttamaù
saktas tri-lokyäà bhagavän väsudevaù
na stré-kåtaà kaçmalam açnuvéta
na lakñmaëaà cäpi vihätum arhati
na—not; vai—indeed; saù—He; ätmä—the Supreme Soul; ätmavatäm—of the self-realized souls; suhåt-tamaù—the best friend; saktaù—attached; tri-lokyäm—to anything within the three worlds; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; väsudevaù—the all-pervading Lord; na—not; stré-kåtam—obtained because of His wife; kaçmalam—sufferings of separation; açnuvéta—would obtain; na—not; lakñmaëam—His younger brother Lakñmaëa; ca—also; api—certainly; vihätum—to give up; arhati—be able.
Since Lord Çré Rämacandra is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, He is not attached to anything in this material world. He is the most beloved Supersoul of all self-realized souls, and He is their very intimate friend. He is full of all opulences. Therefore He could not possibly have suffered because of separation from His wife, nor could He have given up His wife and Lakñmaëa, His younger brother. To give up either would have been absolutely impossible.
Text
na janma nünaà mahato na saubhagaà
na väì na buddhir näkåtis toña-hetuù
tair yad visåñöän api no vanaukasaç
cakära sakhye bata lakñmaëägrajaù
na—not; janma—birth in a very polished, aristocratic family; nünam—indeed; mahataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na—nor; saubhagam—great fortune; na—nor; väk—an elegant manner of speaking; na—nor; buddhiù—sharpness of intelligence; na—not; äkåtiù—features of the body; toña-hetuù—the cause of pleasure to the Lord; taiù—by all those above-mentioned qualities; yat—because; visåñöän—rejected; api—although; naù—us; vana-okasaù—the inhabitants of the forest; cakära—accepted; sakhye—in friendship; bata—alas; lakñmaëa-agra-jaù—Lord Çré Rämacandra, the elder brother of Lakñmaëa.
One cannot establish a friendship with the Supreme Lord Rämacandra on the basis of material qualities such as one's birth in an aristocratic family, one's personal beauty, one's eloquence, one's sharp intelligence or one's superior race or nation. None of these qualifications is actually a prerequisite for friendship with Lord Çré Rämacandra. Otherwise how is it possible that although we uncivilized inhabitants of the forest have not taken noble births, although we have no physical beauty and although we cannot speak like gentlemen, Lord Rämacandra has nevertheless accepted us as friends?
Text
suro 'suro väpy atha vänaro naraù
sarvätmanä yaù sukåtajïam uttamam
bhajeta rämaà manujäkåtià harià
ya uttarän anayat kosalän divam iti
suraù—demigod; asuraù—demon; vä api—or; atha—therefore; vä—or; anaraù—other than a human being (bird, beast, animal and so on); naraù—a human being; sarva-ätmanä—wholeheartedly; yaù—who; su-kåtajïam—easily made grateful; uttamam—most highly elevated; bhajeta—should worship; rämam—Lord Rämacandra; manuja-äkåtim—appearing as a human being; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaù—who; uttarän—of northern India; anayat—brought back; kosalän—the inhabitants of Kosala-deça, Ayodhyä; divam—to the spiritual world, Vaikuëöha; iti—thus.
Therefore, whether one is a demigod or a demon, a man or a creature other than man, such as a beast or bird, everyone should worship Lord Rämacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who appears on this earth just like a human being. There is no need of great austerities or penances to worship the Lord, for He accepts even a small service offered by His devotee. Thus He is satisfied, and as soon as He is satisfied, the devotee is successful. Indeed, Lord Çré Rämacandra brought all the devotees of Ayodhyä back home, back to Godhead [Vaikuëöha].
Song Prayers by Sri Nārada to Nara-Nārāyaṇa Rși in Bhārata-varsa (SB 5.19.11-15)

Text
NaMa wiTa )) 11 ))
oà namo bhagavate upaçama-çéläyoparatänätmyäya namo 'kiïcana-vittäya åñi-åñabhäya nara-näräyaëäya paramahaàsa-parama-gurave ätmärämädhipataye namo nama iti.
om—O Supreme Lord; namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upaçama-çéläya—who has mastered the senses; uparata-anätmyäya—having no attachment for this material world; namaù—my respectful obeisances; akiïcana-vittäya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the only asset of persons who have no material possessions; åñi-åñabhäya—the most exalted of saintly persons; nara-näräyaëäya—Nara-Näräyaëa; paramahaàsa-parama-gurave—the most exalted spiritual master of all paramahaàsas, liberated persons; ätmäräma-adhipataye—the best of self-realized persons; namaù namaù—my respectful obeisances again and again; iti—thus.
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Nara-Näräyaëa, the best of all saintly persons, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the most self-controlled and self-realized, He is free from false prestige, and He is the asset of persons who have no material possessions. He is the spiritual master of all paramahaàsas, who are the most exalted human beings, and He is the master of the self-realized. Let me offer my repeated obeisances at His lotus feet.
Text
gäyati cedam—
kartäsya sargädiñu yo na badhyate
na hanyate deha-gato 'pi daihikaiù
drañöur na dåg yasya guëair vidüñyate
tasmai namo 'sakta-vivikta-säkñiëe
gäyati—he sings; ca—and; idam—this; kartä—the executor; asya—of this cosmic manifestation; sarga-ädiñu—of the creation, maintenance and destruction; yaù—one who; na badhyate—is not attached as the creator, master or proprietor; na—not; hanyate—is victimized; deha-gataù api—although appearing as a human being; daihikaiù—by bodily tribulations such as hunger, thirst and fatigue; drañöuù—of Him who is the seer of everything; na—not; dåk—the power of vision; yasya—of whom; guëaiù—by the material qualities; vidüñyate—is polluted; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—my respectful obeisances; asakta—unto the Supreme person, who is unattached; vivikta—without affection; säkñiëe—the witness of everything.
Närada, the most powerful saintly sage, also worships Nara-Näräyaëa by chanting the following mantra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this visible cosmic manifestation, yet He is completely free from false prestige. Although to the foolish He appears to have accepted a material body like us, He is unaffected by bodily tribulations like hunger, thirst and fatigue. Although He is the witness who sees everything, His senses are unpolluted by the objects He sees. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto that unattached, pure witness of the world, the Supreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead.
Text
idaà hi yogeçvara yoga-naipuëaà
hiraëyagarbho bhagaväï jagäda yat
yad anta-käle tvayi nirguëe mano
bhaktyä dadhétojjhita-duñkalevaraù
idam—this; hi—certainly; yoga-éçvara—O my Lord, master of all mystic power; yoga-naipuëam—the expert process of executing yogic principles; hiraëya-garbhaù—Lord Brahmä; bhagavän—the most powerful; jagäda—spoke; yat—which; yat—which; anta-käle—at the time of death; tvayi—in You; nirguëe—the transcendence; manaù—the mind; bhaktyä—with a devotional attitude; dadhéta—one should place; ujjhita-duñkalevaraù—having given up his identification with the material body.
O my Lord, master of all mystic yoga, this is the explanation of the yogic process spoken of by Lord Brahmä [Hiraëyagarbha], who is self-realized. At the time of death, all yogés give up the material body with full detachment simply by placing their minds at Your lotus feet. That is the perfection of yoga.
Text
yathaihikämuñmika-käma-lampaöaù
suteñu däreñu dhaneñu cintayan
çaìketa vidvän kukalevarätyayäd
yas tasya yatnaù çrama eva kevalam
yathä—as; aihika—in the present life; amuñmika—in the expected future life; käma-lampaöaù—a person who is very attached to lusty desires for bodily enjoyment; suteñu—children; däreñu—wife; dhaneñu—wealth; cintayan—thinking about; çaìketa—is afraid; vidvän—a person advanced in spiritual knowledge; ku-kalevara—of this body, which is full of stool and urine; atyayät—because of loss; yaù—anyone; tasya—his; yatnaù—endeavors; çramaù—a waste of time and energy; eva—certainly; kevalam—only.
Materialists are generally very attached to their present bodily comforts and to the bodily comforts they expect in the future. Therefore they are always absorbed in thoughts of their wives, children and wealth and are afraid of giving up their bodies, which are full of stool and urine. If a person engaged in Kåñëa consciousness, however, is also afraid of giving up his body, what is the use of his having labored to study the çästras? It was simply a waste of time.
Text
tan naù prabho tvaà kukalevarärpitäà
tvan-mäyayähaà-mamatäm adhokñaja
bhindyäma yenäçu vayaà sudurbhidäà
vidhehi yogaà tvayi naù svabhävam iti
tat—therefore; naù—our; prabho—O my Lord; tvam—You; ku-kalevara-arpitäm—invested in this bad body full of stool and urine; tvat-mäyayä—by Your illusory energy; aham-mamatäm—the conception of "I and my"; adhokñaja—O Transcendence; bhindyäma—may give up; yena—by which; äçu—very soon; vayam—we; sudurbhidäm—which is very difficult to give up; vidhehi—please give; yogam—the mystic process; tvayi—unto You; naù—our; svabhävam—which is symptomized by a steady mind; iti—thus.
Therefore, O Lord, O Transcendence, kindly help us by giving us the power to execute bhakti-yoga so that we can control our restless minds and fix them upon You. We are all infected by Your illusory energy; therefore we are very attached to the body, which is full of stool and urine, and to anything related with the body. Except for devotional service, there is no way to give up this attachment. Therefore kindly bestow upon us this benediction.
Song Demigods Glorification of Birth in Bhārata-varsa (SB 5.19.21-27)

Text
etad eva hi devä gäyanti—
aho améñäà kim akäri çobhanaà
prasanna eñäà svid uta svayaà hariù
yair janma labdhaà nåñu bhäratäjire
mukunda-sevaupayikaà spåhä hi naù
etat—this; eva—indeed; hi—certainly; deväù—all the demigods; gäyanti—chant; aho—oh; améñäm—of these inhabitants of Bhärata-varña; kim—what; akäri—was done; çobhanam—pious, beautiful activities; prasannaù—pleased; eñäm—upon them; svit—or; uta—it is said; svayam—personally; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaiù—by whom; janma—birth; labdham—obtained; nåñu—in human society; bhärata-ajire—in the courtyard of Bhärata-varña; mukunda—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can offer liberation; sevä-aupayikam—which is the means of serving; spåhä—desire; hi—indeed; naù—our.
Since the human form of life is the sublime position for spiritual realization, all the demigods in heaven speak in this way: How wonderful it is for these human beings to have been born in the land of Bhärata-varña. They must have executed pious acts of austerity in the past, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself must have been pleased with them. Otherwise, how could they engage in devotional service in so many ways? We demigods can only aspire to achieve human births in Bhärata-varña to execute devotional service, but these human beings are already engaged there.
Text
kià duñkarair naù kratubhis tapo-vratair
dänädibhir vä dyujayena phalgunä
na yatra näräyaëa-päda-paìkaja-
småtiù pramuñöätiçayendriyotsavät
kim—what is the value; duñkaraiù—very difficult to perform; naù—our; kratubhiù—with performances of sacrifice; tapaù—with austerities; vrataiù—vows; däna-ädibhiù—with executing charitable activities and so on; vä—or; dyujayena—with achieving the heavenly kingdom; phalgunä—which is insignificant; na—no; yatra—where; näräyaëa-päda-paìkaja—of the lotus feet of Lord Näräyaëa; småtiù—the remembrance; pramuñöa—lost; atiçaya—excessive; indriya-utsavät—due to material sense gratification.
The demigods continue: After performing the very difficult tasks of executing Vedic ritualistic sacrifices, undergoing austerities, observing vows and giving charity, we have achieved this position as inhabitants of the heavenly planets. But what is the value of this achievement? Here we are certainly very engaged in material sense gratification, and therefore we can hardly remember the lotus feet of Lord Näräyaëa. Indeed, because of our excessive sense gratification, we have almost forgotten His lotus feet.
Text
kalpäyuñäà sthänajayät punar-bhavät
kñaëäyuñäà bhärata-bhüjayo varam
kñaëena martyena kåtaà manasvinaù
sannyasya saàyänty abhayaà padaà hareù
kalpa-äyuñäm—of those who have a life duration of many millions of years, like Lord Brahmä; sthäna-jayät—than achievement of the place or planetary systems; punaù-bhavät—which is liable to birth, death and old age; kñaëa-äyuñäm—of persons who have only one hundred years of life; bhärata-bhü-jayaù—a birth in the land of Bhärata-varña; varam—more valuable; kñaëena—for such a short life; martyena—by the body; kåtam—the work executed; manasvinaù—those actually understanding the value of life; sannyasya—surrendering unto the lotus feet of Kåñëa; saàyänti—they achieve; abhayam—where there is no anxiety; padam—the abode; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
A short life in the land of Bharata-varña is preferable to a life achieved in Brahmaloka for millions and billions of years because even if one is elevated to Brahmaloka he must return to repeated birth and death. Although life in Bhärata-varña, in a lower planetary system, is very short, one who lives there can elevate himself to full Kåñëa consciousness and achieve the highest perfection, even in this short life, by fully surrendering unto the lotus feet of the Lord. Thus one attains Vaikuëöhaloka, where there is neither anxiety nor repeated birth in a material body.
Text
na yatra vaikuëöha-kathä-sudhäpagä
na sädhavo bhägavatäs tad-äçrayäù
na yatra yajïeça-makhä mahotsaväù
sureça-loko 'pi na vai sa sevyatäm
na—not; yatra—where; vaikuëöha-kathä-sudhä-äpagäù—the nectarean rivers of discussions about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is called Vaikuëöha, or one who drives away all anxiety; na—nor; sädhavaù—devotees; bhägavatäù—always engaged in the service of the Lord; tat-äçrayäù—who are sheltered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na—nor; yatra—where; yajïa-éça-makhäù—the performance of devotional service to the Lord of sacrifices; mahä-utsaväù—which are actual festivals; sureça-lokaù—a place inhabited by the denizens of heaven; api—although; na—not; vai—certainly; saù—that; sevyatäm—be frequented.
An intelligent person does not take interest in a place, even in the topmost planetary system, if the pure Ganges of topics concerning the Supreme Lord's activities does not flow there, if there are not devotees engaged in service on the banks of such a river of piety, or if there are no festivals of saìkértana-yajïa to satisfy the Lord [especially since saìkértana-yajïa is recommended in this age].
Text
präptä nå-jätià tv iha ye ca jantavo
jïäna-kriyä-dravya-kaläpa-sambhåtäm
na vai yaterann apunar-bhaväya te
bhüyo vanaukä iva yänti bandhanam
präptäù—who have obtained; nå-jätim—a birth in human society; tu—certainly; iha—in this land of Bhärata-varña; ye—those who; ca—also; jantavaù—the living beings; jïäna—with knowledge; kriyä—with activities; dravya—of ingredients; kaläpa—with a collection; sambhåtäm—full; na—not; vai—certainly; yateran—endeavor; apunaù-bhaväya—for the position of immortality; te—such persons; bhüyaù—again; vanaukäù—birds; iva—like; yänti—go; bandhanam—to bondage.
Bhärata-varña offers the proper land and circumstances in which to execute devotional service, which can free one from the results of jïäna and karma. If one obtains a human body in the land of Bhärata-varña, with clear sensory organs with which to execute the saìkértana-yajïa, but in spite of this opportunity he does not take to devotional service, he is certainly like liberated forest animals and birds that are careless and are therefore again bound by a hunter.
Text
yaiù çraddhayä barhiñi bhägaço havir
niruptam iñöaà vidhi-mantra-vastutaù
ekaù påthaì-nämabhir ähuto mudä
gåhëäti pürëaù svayam äçiñäà prabhuù
yaiù—by whom (the inhabitants of Bhärata-varña); çraddhayä—faith and confidence; barhiñi—in the performance of Vedic ritualistic sacrifices; bhägaçaù—by division; haviù—oblations; niruptam—offered; iñöam—to the desired deity; vidhi—by the proper method; mantra—by reciting mantras; vastutaù—with the proper ingredients; ekaù—that one Supreme Personality of Godhead; påthak—separate; nämabhiù—by names; ähutaù—called; mudä—with great happiness; gåhëäti—He accepts; pürëaù—the Supreme Lord, who is full in Himself; svayam—personally; äçiñäm—of all benedictions; prabhuù—the bestower.
In India [Bhärata-varña], there are many worshipers of the demigods, the various officials appointed by the Supreme Lord, such as Indra, Candra and Sürya, all of whom are worshiped differently. The worshipers offer the demigods their oblations, considering the demigods part and parcel of the whole, the Supreme Lord. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts these offerings and gradually raises the worshipers to the real standard of devotional service by fulfilling their desires and aspirations. Because the Lord is complete, He offers the worshipers the benedictions they desire even if they worship only part of His transcendental body.
Text
satyaà diçaty arthitam arthito nåëäà
naivärthado yat punar arthitä yataù
svayaà vidhatte bhajatäm anicchatäm
icchäpidhänaà nija-päda-pallavam
satyam—certainly; diçati—He offers; arthitam—the object prayed for; arthitaù—being prayed to; nåëäm—by the human beings; na—not; eva—indeed; artha-daù—the bestower of benedictions; yat—which; punaù—again; arthitä—a demand for a benediction; yataù—from which; svayam—personally; vidhatte—He gives; bhajatäm—unto those engaged in His service; anicchatäm—although not desiring it; icchä-pidhänam—which covers all desirable things; nija-päda-pallavam—His own lotus feet.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead fulfills the material desires of a devotee who approaches Him with such motives, but He does not bestow benedictions upon the devotee that will cause him to demand more benedictions again. However, the Lord willingly gives the devotee shelter at His own lotus feet, even though such a person does not aspire for it, and that shelter satisfies all his desires. That is the Supreme Personality's special mercy.
Song Prayer by Mahārāja Ambarīşa to Sudarśana (SB 9.5.3-11)

Text
tvam agnir bhagavän süryas
tvaà somo jyotiñäà patiù
tvam äpas tvaà kñitir vyoma
väyur mätrendriyäëi ca
ambaréñaù—Mahäräja Ambaréña; uväca—said; tvam—you (are); agniù—the fire; bhagavän—the most powerful; süryaù—the sun; tvam—you (are); somaù—the moon; jyotiñäm—of all the luminaries; patiù—the master; tvam—you (are); äpaù—water; tvam—you (are); kñitiù—earth; vyoma—sky; väyuù—the air; mätra—the objects of the senses; indriyäëi—and the senses; ca—also.
Mahäräja Ambaréña said: O Sudarçana cakra, you are fire, you are the most powerful sun, and you are the moon, the master of all luminaries. You are water, earth and sky, you are the air, you are the five sense objects [sound, touch, form, taste and smell], and you are the senses also.
Text
sahasräräcyuta-priya
sarvästra-ghätin vipräya
svasti bhüyä iòaspate
sudarçana—O original vision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaù—respectful obeisances; tubhyam—unto you; sahasra-ara—O you who have thousands of spokes; acyuta-priya—O most favorite of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Acyuta; sarva-astra-ghätin—O destroyer of all weapons; vipräya—unto this brähmaëa; svasti—very auspicious; bhüyäù—just become; iòaspate—O master of the material world.
O most favorite of Acyuta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you have thousands of spokes. O master of the material world, destroyer of all weapons, original vision of the Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto you. Kindly give shelter and be auspicious to this brähmaëa.
Text
tvaà yajïo 'khila-yajïa-bhuk
tvaà loka-pälaù sarvätmä
tvaà tejaù pauruñaà param
tvam—you; dharmaù—religion; tvam—you; åtam—encouraging statements; satyam—the ultimate truth; tvam—you; yajïaù—sacrifice; akhila—universal; yajïa-bhuk—the enjoyer of the fruits resulting from sacrifice; tvam—you; loka-pälaù—the maintainer of the various planets; sarva-ätmä—all-pervading; tvam—you; tejaù—prowess; pauruñam—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; param—transcendental.
O Sudarçana wheel, you are religion, you are truth, you are encouraging statements, you are sacrifice, and you are the enjoyer of the fruits of sacrifice. You are the maintainer of the entire universe, and you are the supreme transcendental prowess in the hands of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are the original vision of the Lord, and therefore you are known as Sudarçana. Everything has been created by your activities, and therefore you are all-pervading.
Text
namaù sunäbhäkhila-dharma-setave
hy adharma-çéläsura-dhüma-ketave
trailokya-gopäya viçuddha-varcase
mano-javäyädbhuta-karmaëe gåëe
namaù—all respectful obeisances unto you; su-näbha—O you who have an auspicious hub; akhila-dharma-setave—whose spokes are considered to be a bridge of religion for the entire universe; hi—indeed; adharma-çéla—who are irreligious; asura—for the demons; dhüma-ketave—unto you who are like fire or an inauspicious comet; trailokya—of the three material worlds; gopäya—the maintainer; viçuddha—transcendental; varcase—whose effulgence; manaù-javäya—as speedy as the mind; adbhuta—wonderful; karmaëe—so active; gåëe—I simply utter.
O Sudarçana, you have a very auspicious hub, and therefore you are the upholder of all religion. You are just like an inauspicious comet for the irreligious demons. Indeed, you are the maintainer of the three worlds, you are full of transcendental effulgence, you are as quick as the mind, and you are able to work wonders. I can simply utter the word "namaù," offering all obeisances unto you.
Text
tvat-tejasä dharma-mayena saàhåtaà
tamaù prakäçaç ca dåço mahätmanäm
duratyayas te mahimä giräà pate
tvad-rüpam etat sad-asat parävaram
tvat-tejasä—by your effulgence; dharma-mayena—which is full of religious principles; saàhåtam—dissipated; tamaù—darkness; prakäçaù ca—illumination also; dåçaù—of all directions; mahä-ätmanäm—of great, learned personalities; duratyayaù—insurmountable; te—your; mahimä—glories; giräm pate—O master of speech; tvat-rüpam—your manifestation; etat—this; sat-asat—manifested and unmanifested; para-avaram—superior and inferior.
O master of speech, by your effulgence, full of religious principles, the darkness of the world is dissipated, and the knowledge of learned persons or great souls is manifested. Indeed, no one can surpass your effulgence, for all things, manifested and unmanifested, gross and subtle, superior and inferior, are but various forms of you that are manifested by your effulgence.
Text
yadä visåñöas tvam anaïjanena vai
balaà praviñöo 'jita daitya-dänavam
bähüdarorv-aìghri-çirodharäëi
våçcann ajasraà pradhane viräjase
yadä—when; visåñöaù—sent; tvam—your good self; anaïjanena—by the transcendental Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai—indeed; balam—the soldiers; praviñöaù—entering among; ajita—O indefatigable and unconquerable one; daitya-dänavam—of the Daityas and Dänavas, the demons; bähu—arms; udara—bellies; üru—thighs; aìghri—legs; çiraù-dharäëi—necks; våçcan—separating; ajasram—incessantly; pradhane—in the battlefield; viräjase—you stay.
O indefatigable one, when you are sent by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to enter among the soldiers of the Daityas and the Dänavas, you stay on the battlefield and unendingly separate their arms, bellies, thighs, legs and heads.
Text
sa tvaà jagat-träëa khala-prahäëaye
nirüpitaù sarva-saho gadä-bhåtä
viprasya cäsmat-kula-daiva-hetave
vidhehi bhadraà tad anugraho hi naù
saù—that person; tvam—your good self; jagat-träëa—O protector of the whole universe; khala-prahäëaye—in killing the envious enemies; nirüpitaù—are engaged; sarva-sahaù—all-powerful; gadä-bhåtä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viprasya—of this brähmaëa; ca—also; asmat—our; kula-daiva-hetave—for the good fortune of the dynasty; vidhehi—kindly do; bhadram—all-good; tat—that; anugrahaù—favor; hi—indeed; naù—our.
O protector of the universe, you are engaged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as His all-powerful weapon in killing the envious enemies. For the benefit of our entire dynasty, kindly favor this poor brähmaëa. This will certainly be a favor for all of us.
Text
sva-dharmo vä svanuñöhitaù
kulaà no vipra-daivaà ced
dvijo bhavatu vijvaraù
yadi—if; asti—there is; dattam—charity; iñöam—worshiping the Deity; vä—either; sva-dharmaù—occupational duty; vä—either; su-anuñöhitaù—perfectly performed; kulam—dynasty; naù—our; vipra-daivam—favored by the brähmaëas; cet—if so; dvijaù—this brähmaëa; bhavatu—may become; vijvaraù—without a burning (from the Sudarçana cakra).
If our family has given charity to the proper persons, if we have performed ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices, if we have properly carried out our occupational duties, and if we have been guided by learned brähmaëas, I wish, in exchange, that this brähmaëa be freed from the burning caused by the Sudarçana cakra.
Text
ekaù sarva-guëäçrayaù
sarva-bhütätma-bhävena
dvijo bhavatu vijvaraù
yadi—if; naù—unto us; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prétaù—is satisfied; ekaù—without any duplicate; sarva-guëa-äçrayaù—the reservoir of all transcendental qualities; sarva-bhüta-ätma-bhävena—by a merciful attitude toward all living entities; dvijaù—this brähmaëa; bhavatu—may become; vijvaraù—freed from all burning.
If the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is one without a second, who is the reservoir of all transcendental qualities, and who is the life and soul of all living entities, is pleased with us, we wish that this brähmaëa, Durväsä Muni, be freed from the pain of being burned.
Song Prayers by Amśuman to Lord Kapiladeva (SB 9.8.21-26)

Text
aàçumän uväca
na paçyati tväà param ätmano 'jano
na budhyate 'dyäpi samädhi-yuktibhiù
kuto 'pare tasya manaù-çaréra-dhé-
visarga-såñöä vayam aprakäçäù
aàçumän uväca—Aàçumän said; na—not; paçyati—can see; tväm—Your Lordship; param—transcendental; ätmanaù—of us living beings; ajanaù—Lord Brahmä; na—not; budhyate—can understand; adya api—even today; samädhi—by meditation; yuktibhiù—or by mental speculation; kutaù—how; apare—others; tasya—his; manaù-çaréra-dhé—who consider the body or mind to be the self; visarga-såñöäù—created beings within the material world; vayam—we; aprakäçäù—without transcendental knowledge.
Aàçumän said: My Lord, even Lord Brahmä is to this very day unable to understand Your position, which is far beyond himself, either by meditation or by mental speculation. So what to speak of others like us, who have been created by Brahmä in various forms as demigods, animals, human beings, birds and beasts? We are completely in ignorance. Therefore, how can we know You, who are the Transcendence?
Text
ye deha-bhäjas tri-guëa-pradhänä
guëän vipaçyanty uta vä tamaç ca
yan-mäyayä mohita-cetasas tväà
viduù sva-saàsthaà na bahiù-prakäçäù
ye—those persons who; deha-bhäjaù—have accepted the material body; tri-guëa-pradhänäù—influenced by the three modes of material nature; guëän—the manifestation of the three modes of material nature; vipaçyanti—can see only; uta—it is so said; vä—either; tamaù—the mode of ignorance; ca—and; yat-mäyayä—by the illusory energy of whom; mohita—has been bewildered; cetasaù—the core of whose heart; tväm—Your Lordship; viduù—know; sva-saàstham—situated in one's own body; na—not; bahiù-prakäçäù—those who can see only the products of external energy.
My Lord, You are fully situated in everyone's heart, but the living entities, covered by the material body, cannot see You, for they are influenced by the external energy, conducted by the three modes of material nature. Their intelligence being covered by sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa, they can see only the actions and reactions of these three modes of material nature. Because of the actions and reactions of the mode of ignorance, whether the living entities are awake or sleeping, they can see only the workings of material nature; they cannot see Your Lordship.
Text
taà tväà ahaà jïäna-ghanaà svabhäva-
pradhvasta-mäyä-guëa-bheda-mohaiù
sanandanädyair munibhir vibhävyaà
kathaà vimüòhaù paribhävayämi
tam—that personality; tväm—unto You; aham—I; jïäna-ghanam—Your Lordship, who are concentrated knowledge; svabhäva—by spiritual nature; pradhvasta—free from contamination; mäyä-guëa—caused by the three modes of material nature; bheda-mohaiù—by exhibition of the bewilderment of differentiation; sanandana-ädyaiù—by such personalities as the four Kumäras (Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanätana and Sanat-kumära); munibhiù—by such great sages; vibhävyam—worshipable; katham—how; vimüòhaù—being fooled by the material nature; paribhävayämi—can I think of You.
O my Lord, sages freed from the influence of the three modes of material nature—sages such as the four Kumäras [Sanat, Sanaka, Sanandana and Sanätana]—are able to think of You, who are concentrated knowledge. But how can an ignorant person like me think of You?
Text
praçänta mäyä-guëa-karma-liìgam
anäma-rüpaà sad-asad-vimuktam
jïänopadeçäya gåhéta-dehaà
namämahe tväà puruñaà puräëam
praçänta—O completely peaceful one; mäyä-guëa—the modes of material nature; karma-liìgam—symptomized by fruitive activities; anäma-rüpam—one who has no material name or form; sat-asat-vimuktam—transcendental to the manifested and nonmanifested modes of material nature; jïäna-upadeçäya—for distributing transcendental knowledge (as in Bhagavad-gétä); gåhéta-deham—has assumed a form like a material body; namämahe—I offer my respectful obeisances; tväm—unto You; puruñam—the Supreme Person; puräëam—the original.
O completely peaceful Lord, although material nature, fruitive activities and their consequent material names and forms are Your creation, You are unaffected by them. Therefore, Your transcendental name is different from material names, and Your form is different from material forms. You assume a form resembling a material body just to give us instructions like those of Bhagavad-gétä, but actually You are the supreme original person. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Text
vastu-buddhyä gåhädiñu
bhramanti käma-lobherñyä-
moha-vibhränta-cetasaù
tvat-mäyä—through Your material energy; racite—which is manufactured; loke—in this world; vastu-buddhyä—accepting as factual; gåha-ädiñu—in hearth and home, etc.; bhramanti—wander; käma—by lusty desires; lobha—by greed; érñyä—by envy; moha—and by illusion; vibhränta—is bewildered; cetasaù—the cores of whose hearts.
O my Lord, those whose hearts are bewildered by the influence of lust, greed, envy and illusion are interested only in false hearth and home in this world created by Your mäyä. Attached to home, wife and children, they wander in this material world perpetually.
Text
käma-karmendriyäçayaù
moha-päço dåòhaç chinno
bhagavaàs tava darçanät
adya—today; naù—our; sarva-bhüta-ätman—O You, who are the Supersoul; käma-karma-indriya-äçayaù—being under the influence of lusty desires and fruitive activities; moha-päçaù—this hard knot of illusion; dåòhaù—very strong; chinnaù—broken; bhagavan—O my Lord; tava darçanät—simply by seeing You.
O Supersoul of all living entities, O Personality of Godhead, simply by seeing You I have now been freed from all lusty desires, which are the root cause of insurmountable illusion and bondage in the material world.
Song Prayers by Brāhmaṇas to Lord Rāmacandra (SB 9.11.6-7)

Text
bhagavan bhuvaneçvara
yan no 'ntar-hådayaà viçya
tamo haàsi sva-rociñä
aprattam—not given; naù—unto us; tvayä—by Your Lordship; kim—what; nu—indeed; bhagavan—O Supreme Lord; bhuvana-éçvara—O master of the whole universe; yat—because; naù—our; antaù-hådayam—within the core of the heart; viçya—entering; tamaù—the darkness of ignorance; haàsi—You annihilate; sva-rociñä—by Your own effulgence.
O Lord, You are the master of the entire universe. What have You not given to us? You have entered the core of our hearts and dissipated the darkness of our ignorance by Your effulgence. This is the supreme gift. We do not need a material donation.
Text
rämäyäkuëöha-medhase
uttamaçloka-dhuryäya
nyasta-daëòärpitäìghraye
namaù—we offer our respectful obeisances; brahmaëya-deväya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who accepts the brähmaëas as His worshipable deity; rämäya—unto Lord Rämacandra; akuëöha-medhase—whose memory and knowledge are never disturbed by anxiety; uttamaçloka-dhuryäya—the best of very famous persons; nyasta-daëòa-arpita-aìghraye—whose lotus feet are worshiped by sages beyond the jurisdiction of punishment.
O Lord, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who have accepted the brähmaëas as Your worshipable deity. Your knowledge and memory are never disturbed by anxiety. You are the chief of all famous persons within this world, and Your lotus feet are worshiped by sages who are beyond the jurisdiction of punishment. O Lord Rämacandra, let us offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
