fgvjbhknkfc

Song Prayers by Demigods to Lord Nrsimha (SB 7.8.40-56)
TEXT 40
çré-brahmoväca
nato 'smy anantäya duranta-çaktaye
vicitra-véryäya pavitra-karmaëe
viçvasya sarga-sthiti-saàyamän guëaiù
sva-lélayä sandadhate 'vyayätmane


çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; nataù—bowed down; asmi—I am; anantäya—unto the unlimited Lord; duranta—very difficult to find an end to; çaktaye—who possesses different potencies; vicitra-véryäya—having varieties of prowess; pavitra-karmaëe—whose actions have no reaction (even though doing contrary things, He remains without contamination by the material modes); viçvasya—of the universe; sarga—creation; sthiti—maintenance; saàyamän—and annihilation; guëaiù—by the material qualities; sva-lélayä—very easily; sandadhate—performs; avyaya-ätmane—whose personality never deteriorates.

Lord Brahmä prayed: My Lord, You are unlimited, and You possess unending potencies. No one can estimate or calculate Your prowess and wonderful influence, for Your actions are never polluted by the material energy. Through the material qualities, You very easily create the universe, maintain it and again annihilate it, yet You remain the same, without deterioration. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
The activities of the Lord are always wonderful. His personal servants Jaya and Vijaya were confidential friends, yet they were cursed, and they accepted bodies of demons. Again, in the family of one such demon, Prahläda Mahäräja was caused to take birth to exhibit the behavior of an exalted devotee, and then the Lord accepted the body of Nåsiàhadeva to kill that same demon, who by the Lord's own will had taken birth in a demoniac family. Therefore, who can understand the Lord's transcendental activities? Not to speak of understanding the transcendental activities of the Lord, no one can understand even the activities of His servants. In Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 23.39) it is said, täìra väkya, kriyä, mudrä vijïeha nä bhujhaya: no one can understand the activities of the Lord's servants. Therefore, what to speak of the activities of the Lord? Who can understand how Kåñëa is benefiting the entire world? The Lord is addressed as duranta-çakti because no one can understand His potencies and how He acts.
TEXT 41
çré-rudra uväca
kopa-kälo yugäntas te
hato 'yam asuro 'lpakaù
tat-sutaà pähy upasåtaà
bhaktaà te bhakta-vatsala


çré-rudraù uväca—Lord Çiva offered his prayer; kopa-kälaù—the right time for Your anger (for the purpose of annihilating the universe); yuga-antaù—the end of the millennium; te—by You; hataù—killed; ayam—this; asuraù—great demon; alpakaù—very insignificant; tat-sutam—his son (Prahläda Mahäräja); pähi—just protect; upasåtam—who is surrendered and standing nearby; bhaktam—devotee; te—of Your Lordship; bhakta-vatsala—O my Lord, who are so affectionate to Your devotee.

Lord Çiva said: The end of the millennium is the time for Your anger. Now that this insignificant demon Hiraëyakaçipu has been killed, O my Lord, who are naturally affectionate to Your devotee, kindly protect his son Prahläda Mahäräja, who is standing nearby as Your fully surrendered devotee.

PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the creator of the material world. There are three processes in creation—namely creation, maintenance and finally annihilation. During the period of annihilation, at the end of each millennium, the Lord becomes angry, and the part of anger is played by Lord Çiva, who is therefore called Rudra. When the Lord appeared in great anger to kill Hiraëyakaçipu, everyone was extremely afraid of the Lord's attitude, but Lord Çiva, knowing very well that the Lord's anger is also His lélä, was not afraid. Lord Çiva knew that he would have to play the part of anger for the Lord. Käla means Lord Çiva (Bhairava), and kopa refers to the Lord's anger. These words, combined together as kopa-käla, refer to the end of each millennium. Actually the Lord is always affectionate toward His devotees, even though He may appear very angry. Because He is avyayätmä—because He never falls down—even when angry the Lord is affectionate toward His devotees. Therefore Lord Çiva reminded the Lord to act like an affectionate father toward Prahläda Mahäräja, who was standing by the Lord's side as an exalted, fully surrendered devotee.
TEXT 42
çré-indra uväca
pratyänétäù parama bhavatä träyatä naù sva-bhägä
daityäkräntaà hådaya-kamalaà tad-gåhaà pratyabodhi
käla-grastaà kiyad idam aho nätha çuçrüñatäà te
muktis teñäà na hi bahu-matä närasiàhäparaiù kim


çré-indraù uväca—Indra, the king of heaven, said; pratyänétäù—recovered; parama—O Supreme; bhavatä—by Your Lordship; träyatä—who are protecting; naù—us; sva-bhägäù—shares in the sacrifices; daitya-äkräntam—afflicted by the demon; hådaya-kamalam—the lotuslike cores of our hearts; tat-gåham—which is actually Your residence; pratyabodhi—it has been illuminated; käla-grastam—devoured by time; kiyat—insignificant; idam—this (world); aho—alas; nätha—O Lord; çuçrüñatäm—for those who are always engaged in the service; te—of You; muktiù—liberation from material bondage; teñäm—of them (the pure devotees); na—not; hi—indeed; bahu-matä—thought very important; nära-siàha—O Lord Nåsiàhadeva, half lion and half human being; aparaiù kim—then what is the use of other possessions.

King Indra said: O Supreme Lord, You are our deliverer and protector. Our shares of sacrifices, which are actually Yours, have been recovered from the demon by You. Because the demoniac king Hiraëyakaçipu was most fearsome, our hearts, which are Your permanent abode, were all overtaken by him. Now, by Your presence, the gloom and darkness in our hearts have been dissipated. O Lord, for those who always engage in Your service, which is more exalted than liberation, all material opulence is insignificant. They do not even care for liberation, not to speak of the benefits of käma, artha and dharma.

PURPORT
In this material world there are two kinds of people—the devatäs (demigods) and the asuras (demons). Although the demigods are attached to material enjoyment, they are devotees of the Lord who act according to the rules and regulations of the Vedic injunctions. During the reign of Hiraëyakaçipu, everyone was disturbed in the routine duties of Vedic civilization. When Hiraëyakaçipu was killed, all the demigods, who had always been disturbed by Hiraëyakaçipu, felt relief in their general way of life.
Because the government in Kali-yuga is full of demons, the living conditions of devotees are always disturbed. Devotees cannot perform yajïa, and thus they cannot partake of the remnants of food offered in yajïa for the worship of Lord Viñëu. The hearts of the demigods are always filled with fear of the demons, and therefore they cannot think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The engagement of the demigods is to think of the Lord always within the cores of their hearts. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (6.47):
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"And of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all." The demigods fully absorb themselves in meditation upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead to become perfect yogés, but because of the presence of demons, their hearts are filled with the activities of the demons. Thus their hearts, which are meant to be the abode of the Supreme Lord, are practically occupied by the demons. All the demigods felt relieved when Hiraëyakaçipu was dead, for they could easily think of the Lord. They could then receive the results of sacrifices and become happy even though in the material world.
TEXT 43
çré-åñaya ücuù
tvaà nas tapaù paramam ättha yad ätma-tejo
yenedam ädi-puruñätma-gataà sasarktha
tad vipraluptam amunädya çaraëya-päla
rakñä-gåhéta-vapuñä punar anvamaàsthäù


çré-åñayaù ücuù—the great sages said; tvam—You; naù—our; tapaù—austerity; paramam—topmost; ättha—instructed; yat—which; ätma-tejaù—Your spiritual power; yena—by which; idam—this (material world); ädi-puruña—O supreme original Personality of Godhead; ätma-gatam—merged within Yourself; sasarktha—(You) created; tat—that process of austerity and penance; vipraluptam—stolen; amunä—by that demon (Hiraëyakaçipu); adya—now; çaraëya-päla—O supreme maintainer of those who need to be sheltered; rakñä-gåhéta-vapuñä—by Your body, which You accept to give protection; punaù—again; anvamaàsthäù—You have approved.

All the saintly persons present offered their prayers in this way: O Lord, O supreme maintainer of those sheltered at Your lotus feet, O original Personality of Godhead, the process of austerity and penance, in which You instructed us before, is the spiritual power of Your very self. It is by austerity that You create the material world, which lies dormant within You. This austerity was almost stopped by the activities of this demon, but now, by Yourself appearing in the form of Nåsiàhadeva, which is meant just to give us protection, and by killing this demon, You have again approved the process of austerity.

PURPORT
The living entities wandering within the jurisdiction of the 8,400,000 species of life get the opportunity for self-realization in the human form and gradually in such other elevated forms as those of the demigods, Kinnaras and Cäraëas, as will be described below. In the higher statuses of life, beginning from human life, the main duty is tapasya, or austerity. As Åñabhadeva advised His sons, tapo divyaà putrakä yena sattvaà çuddhyet [SB 5.5.1]. To rectify our material existence, austerity (tapasya) is absolutely necessary. However, when people in general come under the control of a demon or a demoniac ruling power, they forget this process of tapasya and gradually also become demoniac. All the saintly persons, who were generally engaged in austerity, felt relieved when Hiraëyakaçipu was killed by the Lord in the form of Nåsiàhadeva. They realized that the original instruction concerning human life—that it is meant for tapasya for self-realization—was reaffirmed by the Lord when He killed Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 44
çré-pitara ücuù
çräddhäni no 'dhibubhuje prasabhaà tanüjair
dattäni tértha-samaye 'py apibat tilämbu
tasyodarän nakha-vidérëa-vapäd ya ärcchat
tasmai namo nåharaye 'khila-dharma-goptre


çré-pitaraù ücuù—the inhabitants of Pitåloka said; çräddhäni—the performances of the çräddha ceremony (offering of food grains to dead forefathers by a particular process); naù—our; adhibubhuje—enjoyed; prasabham—by force; tanüjaiù—by our sons and grandsons; dattäni—offered; tértha-samaye—at the time of bathing in the holy places; api—even; apibat—drank; tila-ambu—offerings of water with sesame seeds; tasya—of the demon; udarät—from the abdomen; nakha-vidérëa—pierced by the nails of the hand; vapät—the skin of the intestines of which; yaù—He who (the Personality of Godhead); ärcchat—obtained; tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); namaù—respectful obeisances; nå-haraye—who has appeared as half lion and half man (Nåhari); akhila—universal; dharma—religious principles; goptre—who maintains.

The inhabitants of Pitåloka prayed: Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto Lord Nåsiàhadeva, the maintainer of the religious principles of the universe. He has killed Hiraëyakaçipu, the demon who by force enjoyed all the offerings of the çräddha ceremonies performed by our sons and grandsons on the anniversaries of our death and who drank the water with sesame seeds offered in holy places of pilgrimage. By killing this demon, O Lord, You have taken back all this stolen property from his abdomen by piercing it with Your nails. We therefore wish to offer our respectful obeisances unto You.

PURPORT
It is the duty of all householders to offer food grains to all their departed forefathers, but during the time of Hiraëyakaçipu this process was stopped; no one would offer çräddha oblations of food grains to the forefathers with great respect. Thus when there is a demoniac rule, everything concerning the Vedic principles is turned upside down, all the religious ceremonies of yajïa are stopped, the resources meant to be spent for yajïa are taken away by the demoniac government, everything becomes chaotic, and consequently the entire world becomes hell itself. When the demons are killed by the presence of Nåsiàhadeva, everyone feels comfortable, irrespective of the planet upon which he lives.
TEXT 45
çré-siddhä ücuù
yo no gatià yoga-siddhäm asädhur
ahärñéd yoga-tapo-balena
nänä darpaà taà nakhair vidadära
tasmai tubhyaà praëatäù smo nåsiàha


çré-siddhäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Siddhaloka said; yaù—the person who; naù—our; gatim—perfection; yoga-siddhäm—achieved by mystic yoga; asädhuù—most uncivilized and dishonest; ahärñét—stole away; yoga—of mysticism; tapaù—and austerities; balena—by the power; nänä darpam—proud due to wealth, opulence and strength; tam—him; nakhaiù—by the nails; vidadära—pierced; tasmai—unto him; tubhyam—unto You; praëatäù—bowed down; smaù—we are; nåsiàha—O Lord Nåsiàhadeva.

The inhabitants of Siddhaloka prayed: O Lord Nåsiàhadeva, because we belong to Siddhaloka, we automatically achieve perfection in all eight kinds of mystic power. Yet Hiraëyakaçipu was so dishonest that by the strength of his power and austerity, he took away our powers. Thus he became very proud of his mystic strength. Now, because this rogue has been killed by Your nails, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You.

PURPORT
On earth there are many yogés who can exhibit some feeble mystic power by manufacturing pieces of gold like magic, but the inhabitants of the planet Siddhaloka are actually extremely powerful in mysticism. They can fly from one planet to another without airplanes. This is called laghima-siddhi. They can actually become very light and fly in the sky. By a severe type of austerity, however, Hiraëyakaçipu excelled all the inhabitants of Siddhaloka and created disturbances for them. The residents of Siddhaloka were also beaten by the powers of Hiraëyakaçipu. Now that Hiraëyakaçipu had been killed by the Lord, the inhabitants of Siddhaloka also felt relieved.
TEXT 46
çré-vidyädharä ücuù
vidyäà påthag dhäraëayänuräddhäà
nyañedhad ajïo bala-vérya-dåptaù
sa yena saìkhye paçuvad dhatas taà
mäyä-nåsiàhaà praëatäù sma nityam


çré-vidyädharäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Vidyädhara-loka prayed; vidyäm—mystic formulas (by which one can appear and disappear); påthak—separately; dhäraëayä—by various meditations within the mind; anuräddhäm—attained; nyañedhat—stopped; ajïaù—this fool; bala-vérya-dåptaù—puffed up by bodily strength and his ability to conquer anyone; saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); yena—by whom; saìkhye—in battle; paçu-vat—exactly like an animal; hataù—killed; tam—unto Him; mäyä-nåsiàham—appearing as Lord Nåsiàhadeva by the influence of His own energy; praëatäù—fallen; sma—certainly; nityam—eternally.

The inhabitants of Vidyädhara-loka prayed: Our acquired power to appear and disappear in various ways according to varieties of meditation was banned by that foolish Hiraëyakaçipu because of his pride in his superior bodily strength and his ability to conquer others. Now the Supreme Personality of Godhead has killed him just as if the demon were an animal. Unto that supreme pastime form of Lord Nåsiàhadeva, we eternally offer our respectful obeisances.
TEXT 47
çré-nägä ücuù
yena päpena ratnäni
stré-ratnäni håtäni naù
tad-vakñaù-päöanenäsäà
dattänanda namo 'stu te


çré-nägäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Nägaloka, who look like serpents, said; yena—by which person; päpena—the most sinful (Hiraëyakaçipu); ratnäni—the jewels on our heads; stré-ratnäni—beautiful wives; håtäni—taken away; naù—our; tat—his; vakñaù-päöanena—by the piercing of the chest; äsäm—of all the women (who were kidnapped); datta-änanda—O Lord, You are the source of the pleasure; namaù—our respectful obeisances; astu—let there be; te—unto You.

The inhabitants of Nägaloka said: The most sinful Hiraëyakaçipu took away all the jewels on our hoods and all our beautiful wives. Now, since his chest has been pierced by Your nails, You are the source of all pleasure to our wives. Thus we together offer our respectful obeisances unto You.

PURPORT
No one is peaceful if his wealth and wife are forcibly taken away. All the inhabitants of Nägaloka, which is situated below the earthly planetary system, were in great anxiety because their wealth had been stolen and their wives kidnapped by Hiraëyakaçipu. Now, Hiraëyakaçipu having been killed, their wealth and wives were returned, and their wives felt satisfied. The inhabitants of various lokas, or planets, offered their respectful obeisances unto the Lord because they were relieved by the death of Hiraëyakaçipu. Disturbances similar to those created by Hiraëyakaçipu are now taking place all over the world because of demoniac governments. As stated in the Twelfth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the men of the governments of Kali-yuga will be no better than rogues and plunderers. Thus the populace will be harassed on one side by scarcity of food and on another by heavy taxation by the government. In other words, the people in most parts of the world in this age are harassed by the ruling principles of Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 48
çré-manava ücuù
manavo vayaà tava nideça-käriëo
ditijena deva paribhüta-setavaù
bhavatä khalaù sa upasaàhåtaù prabho
karaväma te kim anuçädhi kiìkarän


çré-manavaù ücuù—all the Manus offered their respectful obeisances by saying; manavaù—the leaders of the universal affairs (especially in connection with giving knowledge to humanity about how to live lawfully under the protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead); vayam—we; tava—of Your Lordship; nideça-käriëaù—the carriers of the orders; diti-jena—by Hiraëyakaçipu, the son of Diti; deva—O Lord; paribhüta—disregarded; setavaù—whose laws of morality concerning the varëäçrama system in human society; bhavatä—by Your Lordship; khalaù—the most envious rascal; saù—he; upasaàhåtaù—killed; prabho—O Lord; karaväma—shall we do; te—Your; kim—what; anuçädhi—please direct; kiìkarän—Your eternal servants.

All the Manus offered their prayers as follows: As Your order carriers, O Lord, we, the Manus, are the law-givers for human society, but because of the temporary supremacy of this great demon, Hiraëyakaçipu, our laws for maintaining varëäçrama-dharma were destroyed. O Lord, now that You have killed this great demon, we are in our normal condition. Kindly order us, Your eternal servants, what to do now.

PURPORT
In many places in Bhagavad-gétä, the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, refers to the varëäçrama-dharma of four varëas and four äçramas. He teaches people about this varëäçrama-dharma so that all of human society can live peacefully by observing the principles for the four social divisions and four spiritual divisions (varëa and äçrama) and thus make advancement in spiritual knowledge. The Manus compiled the Manu-saàhitä. The word saàhitä means Vedic knowledge, and manu indicates that this knowledge is given by Manu. The Manus are sometimes incarnations of the Supreme Lord and sometimes empowered living entities. Formerly, many long years ago, Lord Kåñëa instructed the sun-god. The Manus are generally sons of the sun-god. Therefore, while speaking to Arjuna about the importance of Bhagavad-gétä, Kåñëa said, imaà vivasvate yogaà proktavän aham avyayam vivasvän manave präha: [Bg. 4.1] "This instruction was given to Vivasvän, the sun-god, who in turn instructed his son Manu." Manu gave the law known as Manu-saàhitä, which is full of directions based on varëa and äçrama concerning how to live as a human being. These are very scientific ways of life, but under the rule of demons like Hiraëyakaçipu, human society breaks all these systems of law and order and gradually becomes lower and lower. Thus there is no peace in the world. The conclusion is that if we want real peace and order in the human society, we must follow the principles laid down by the Manu-saàhitä and confirmed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa.
TEXT 49
çré-prajäpataya ücuù
prajeçä vayaà te pareçäbhisåñöä
na yena prajä vai såjämo niñiddhäù
sa eña tvayä bhinna-vakñä nu çete
jagan-maìgalaà sattva-mürte 'vatäraù


çré-prajäpatayaù ücuù—the great personalities who created the various living beings offered their prayers by saying; prajä-éçäù—the prajäpatis created by Lord Brahmä, who have created generations of living entities; vayam—we; te—of You; para-éça—O Supreme Lord; abhisåñöäù—born; na—not; yena—by whom (Hiraëyakaçipu); prajäù—living entities; vai—indeed; såjämaù—we create; niñiddhäù—being forbidden; saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); eñaù—this; tvayä—by You; bhinna-vakñäù—whose chest has been split; nu—indeed; çete—lies down; jagat-maìgalam—for the auspiciousness of the whole world; sattva-mürte—in this transcendental form of pure goodness; avatäraù—this incarnation.

The prajäpatis offered their prayers as follows: O Supreme Lord, Lord of even Brahmä and Çiva, we, the prajäpatis, were created by You to execute Your orders, but we were forbidden by Hiraëyakaçipu to create any more good progeny. Now the demon is lying dead before us, his chest pierced by You. Let us therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto You, whose incarnation in this form of pure goodness is meant for the welfare of the entire universe.
TEXT 50
çré-gandharvä ücuù
vayaà vibho te naöa-näöya-gäyakä
yenätmasäd vérya-balaujasä kåtäù
sa eña néto bhavatä daçäm imäà
kim utpathasthaù kuçaläya kalpate


çré-gandharväù ücuù—the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka (who are usually engaged as musicians of the heavenly planets) said; vayam—we; vibho—O Lord; te—Your; naöa-näöya-gäyakäù—dancers and singers in dramatic performances; yena—by whom; ätmasät—under subjection; vérya—of his valor; bala—and bodily strength; ojasä—by the influence; kåtäù—made (brought); saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); eñaù—this; nétaù—brought; bhavatä—by Your Lordship; daçäm imäm—to this condition; kim—whether; utpathasthaù—anyone who is an upstart; kuçaläya—for auspiciousness; kalpate—is capable.

The inhabitants of Gandharvaloka prayed: Your Lordship, we ever engage in Your service by dancing and singing in dramatic performances, but this Hiraëyakaçipu, by the influence of his bodily strength and valor, brought us under his subjugation. Now he has been brought to this low condition by Your Lordship. What benefit can result from the activities of such an upstart as Hiraëyakaçipu?

PURPORT
By being a very obedient servant of the Supreme Lord, one becomes extremely powerful in bodily strength, influence and effulgence, whereas the fate of demoniac upstarts is ultimately to fall down like Hiraëyakaçipu. Hiraëyakaçipu and persons like him may be very powerful for some time, but the obedient servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead like the demigods remain powerful always. They are victorious over the influence of Hiraëyakaçipu by the grace of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 51
çré-cäraëä ücuù
hare taväìghri-paìkajaà
bhaväpavargam äçritäù
yad eña sädhu-håc-chayas
tvayäsuraù samäpitaù


çré-cäraëäù ücuù—the inhabitants of the Cäraëa planet said; hare—O Lord; tava—Your; aìghri-paìkajam—lotus feet; bhava-apavargam—the only shelter for becoming free from the contamination of material existence; äçritäù—sheltered at; yat—because; eñaù—this; sädhu-håt-çayaù—stake in the hearts of all honest persons; tvayä—by Your Lordship; asuraù—the demon (Hiraëyakaçipu); samäpitaù—finished.

The inhabitants of the Cäraëa planet said: O Lord, because You have destroyed the demon Hiraëyakaçipu, who was always a stake in the hearts of all honest men, we are now relieved, and we eternally take shelter of Your lotus feet, which award the conditioned soul liberation from materialistic contamination.

PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His transcendental form of Narahari, Nåsiàhadeva, is always ready to kill the demons, who always create disturbances in the minds of honest devotees. To spread the Kåñëa consciousness movement, devotees have to face many dangers and impediments all over the world, but a faithful servant who preaches with great devotion to the Lord must know that Lord Nåsiàhadeva is always his protector.
TEXT 52
çré-yakñä ücuù
vayam anucara-mukhyäù karmabhis te mano-jïais
ta iha diti-sutena präpitä vähakatvam
sa tu jana-paritäpaà tat-kåtaà jänatä te
narahara upanétaù païcatäà païca-viàça


çré-yakñäù ücuù—the inhabitants of the Yakña planet prayed; vayam—we; anucara-mukhyäù—the chief among Your many servants; karmabhiù—by services; te—unto You; mano-jïaiù—very pleasing; te—they; iha—at the present moment; diti-sutena—by Hiraëyakaçipu, the son of Diti; präpitäù—forced to engage as; vähakatvam—the palanquin carriers; saù—he; tu—but; jana-paritäpam—the miserable condition of everyone; tat-kåtam—caused by him; jänatä—knowing; te—by You; nara-hara—O Lord in the form of Nåsiàha; upanétaù—is put to; païcatäm—death; païca-viàça—O twenty-fifth principle (the controller of the other twenty-four elements).

The inhabitants of Yakñaloka prayed: O controller of the twenty-four elements, we are considered the best servants of Your Lordship because of rendering services pleasing to You, yet we engaged as palanquin carriers by the order of Hiraëyakaçipu, the son of Diti. O Lord in the form of Nåsiàhadeva, You know how this demon gave trouble to everyone, but now You have killed him, and his body is mixing with the five material elements.

PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is the controller of the ten senses, the five material elements, the five sense objects, the mind, the intelligence, the false ego and the soul. Therefore He is addressed as païca-viàça, the twenty-fifth element. The inhabitants of the Yakña planet are supposed to be the best of all servants, but Hiraëyakaçipu engaged them as palanquin carriers. The entire universe was in trouble because of Hiraëyakaçipu, but now that Hiraëyakaçipu's body was mixing with the five material elements—earth, water, fire, air and sky—everyone felt relief. Upon Hiraëyakaçipu's death, the Yakñas were reinstated in their original service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus they felt obliged to the Lord and offered their prayers.
TEXT 53
çré-kimpuruñä ücuù
vayaà kimpuruñäs tvaà tu
mahä-puruña éçvaraù
ayaà kupuruño nañöo
dhik-kåtaù sädhubhir yadä


çré-kimpuruñäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Kimpuruña-loka said; vayam—we; kimpuruñäù—the inhabitants of Kimpuruña-loka, or insignificant living entities; tvam—Your Lordship; tu—however; mahä-puruñaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; éçvaraù—the supreme controller; ayam—this; ku-puruñaù—most sinful person, Hiraëyakaçipu; nañöaù—slain; dhik-kåtaù—being condemned; sädhubhiù—by the saintly persons; yadä—when.

The inhabitants of Kimpuruña-loka said: We are insignificant living entities, and You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller. Therefore how can we offer suitable prayers unto You? When this demon was condemned by devotees because they were disgusted with him, he was then killed by You.

PURPORT
The cause of the Supreme Lord's appearance upon this earth is stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.7-8) by the Lord Himself:
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
 [Bg. 4.7]
pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
sambhavämi yuge yuge
 [Bg. 4.8]
"Whenever and wherever there is a decrease in religious principles and a predominant rise in irreligion, at that time I descend Myself. To deliver the pious and annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I Myself appear, millennium after millennium." The Lord appears in order to execute two kinds of activities—to kill the demons and to protect the devotees. When the devotees are too disturbed by the demons, the Lord certainly appears in different incarnations to give the devotees protection. The devotees following in the footsteps of Prahläda Mahäräja should not be disturbed by the demoniac activities of the nondevotees. Rather, they should stick to their principles as sincere servants of the Lord and rest assured that the demoniac activities directed against them will not be able to stop their devotional service.
TEXT 54
çré-vaitälikä ücuù
sabhäsu satreñu tavämalaà yaço
gétvä saparyäà mahatéà labhämahe
yas täm anaiñéd vaçam eña durjano
dviñöyä hatas te bhagavan yathämayaù


çré-vaitälikäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Vaitälika-loka said; sabhäsu—in great assemblies; satreñu—in the arenas of sacrifice; tava—Your; amalam—without any spot of material contamination; yaçaù—reputation; gétvä—singing; saparyäm—respectful position; mahatém—great; labhämahe—we achieved; yaù—he who; täm—that (respectful position); anaiñét—brought under; vaçam—his control; eñaù—this; durjanaù—crooked person; dviñöyä—by great fortune; hataù—killed; te—by You; bhagavan—O Lord; yathä—exactly like; ämayaù—a disease.

The inhabitants of Vaitälika-loka said: Dear Lord, because of chanting Your spotless glories in great assemblies and arenas of sacrifice, we were accustomed to great respect from everyone. This demon, however, usurped that position. Now, to our great fortune, You have killed this great demon, exactly as one cures a chronic disease.
TEXT 55
çré-kinnarä ücuù
vayam éça kinnara-gaëäs tavänugä
ditijena viñöim amunänukäritäù
bhavatä hare sa våjino 'vasädito
narasiàha nätha vibhaväya no bhava


çré-kinnaräù ücuù—the inhabitants of the Kinnara planet said; vayam—we; éça—O Lord; kinnara-gaëäù—the inhabitants of the Kinnara planet; tava—Your; anugäù—faithful servants; diti-jena—by the son of Diti; viñöim—service without remuneration; amunä—by that; anukäritäù—caused to perform; bhavatä—by You; hare—O Lord; saù—he; våjinaù—most sinful; avasäditaù—destroyed; narasiàha—O Lord Nåsiàhadeva; nätha—O master; vibhaväya—for the happiness and opulence; naù—of us; bhava—You please be.

The Kinnaras said: O supreme controller, we are ever-existing servants of Your Lordship, but instead of rendering service to You, we were engaged by this demon in his service, constantly and without remuneration. This sinful man has now been killed by You. Therefore, O Lord Nåsiàhadeva, our master, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You. Please continue to be our patron.
TEXT 56
çré-viñëu-pärñadä ücuù
adyaitad dhari-nara-rüpam adbhutaà te
dåñöaà naù çaraëada sarva-loka-çarma
so 'yaà te vidhikara éça vipra-çaptas
tasyedaà nidhanam anugrahäya vidmaù


çré-viñëu-pärñadäù ücuù—the associates of Lord Viñëu in Vaikuëöhaloka said; adya—today; etat—this; hari-nara—of half lion and half human being; rüpam—form; adbhutam—very wonderful; te—Your; dåñöam—seen; naù—of us; çaraëa-da—the everlasting bestower of shelter; sarva-loka-çarma—which brings good fortune to all the various planets; saù—he; ayam—this; te—of Your Lordship; vidhikaraù—order carrier (servant); éça—O Lord; vipra-çaptaù—being cursed by the brähmaëas; tasya—of him; idam—this; nidhanam—killing; anugrahäya—for the special favor; vidmaù—we understand.

The associates of Lord Viñëu in Vaikuëöha offered this prayer: O Lord, our supreme giver of shelter, today we have seen Your wonderful form as Lord Nåsiàhadeva, meant for the good fortune of all the world. O Lord, we can understand that Hiraëyakaçipu was the same Jaya who engaged in Your service but was cursed by brähmaëas and who thus received the body of a demon. We understand that his having now been killed is Your special mercy upon him.

PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu's coming to this earth and acting as the Lord's enemy was prearranged. Jaya and Vijaya were cursed by the brähmaëas Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanätana and Sanat-kumära because Jaya and Vijaya checked these four Kumäras. The Lord accepted this cursing of His servants and agreed that they would have to go to the material world and would then return to Vaikuëöha after serving the term of the curse. Jaya and Vijaya were very much perturbed, but the Lord advised them to act as enemies, for then they would return after three births; otherwise, ordinarily, they would have to take seven births. With this authority, Jaya and Vijaya acted as the Lord's enemies, and now that these two were dead, all the Viñëudütas understood that the Lord's killing of Hiraëyakaçipu was special mercy bestowed upon them.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Eighth Chapter, of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Nåsiàhadeva Slays the king of the Demons."

Song Offered by Prahlada Maharaja to Pacify Lord Nrsimha (SB 7.10.8-50)
TEXT 8
indriyäëi manaù präëa
ätmä dharmo dhåtir matiù
hréù çrés tejaù småtiù satyaà
yasya naçyanti janmanä


indriyäëi—the senses; manaù—the mind; präëaù—the life air; ätmä—the body; dharmaù—religion; dhåtiù—patience; matiù—intelligence; hréù—shyness; çréù—opulence; tejaù—strength; småtiù—memory; satyam—truthfulness; yasya—of which lusty desires; naçyanti—are vanquished; janmanä—from the very beginning of birth.

O my Lord, because of lusty desires from the very beginning of one's birth, the functions of one's senses, mind, life, body, religion, patience, intelligence, shyness, opulence, strength, memory and truthfulness are vanquished.

PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, kämaà håd-rogam. Materialistic life means that one is afflicted by a formidable disease called lusty desire. Liberation means freedom from lusty desires because it is only due to such desires that one must accept repeated birth and death. As long as one's lusty desires are unfulfilled, one must take birth after birth to fulfill them. Because of material desires, therefore, one performs various types of activities and receives various types of bodies with which to try to fulfill desires that are never satisfied. The only remedy is to take to devotional service, which begins when one is free from all material desires. Anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu  1.1.11]. Anya-abhiläñitä means "material desire," and çünyam means "free from." The spiritual soul has spiritual activities and spiritual desires, as described by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu: mama janmani janmanéçvare bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi [Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4]. Unalloyed devotion to the service of the Lord is the only spiritual desire. To fulfill this spiritual desire, however, one must be free from all material desires. Desirelessness means freedom from material desires. This is described by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé as anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu  1.1.11]. As soon as one has material desires, one loses his spiritual identity. Then all the paraphernalia of one's life, including one's senses, body, religion, patience and intelligence, are deviated from one's original Kåñëa consciousness. As soon as one has material desires, one cannot properly use his senses, intelligence, mind and so on for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Mäyävädé philosophers want to become impersonal, senseless and mindless, but that is not possible. The living entity must be living, always existing with desires, ambitions and so on. These should be purified, however, so that one can desire spiritually and be spiritually ambitious, without material contamination. In every living entity these propensities exist because he is a living entity. When materially contaminated, however, one is put into the hands of material misery (janma-måtyu jarä-vyädhi [Bg. 13.9]). If one wants to stop repeated birth and death, one must take to the devotional service of the Lord.
sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà
tat-paratvena nirmalam
håñékeëa håñékeça-
sevanaà bhaktir ucyate
 [Cc. Madhya 19.170]
"Bhakti, or devotional service, means engaging all our senses in the service of the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all the senses. When the spirit soul renders service unto the Supreme, there are two side effects. One is freed from all material designations, and, simply by being employed in the service of the Lord, one's senses are purified."
TEXT 9
vimuïcati yadä kämän
mänavo manasi sthitän
tarhy eva puëòarékäkña
bhagavattväya kalpate


vimuïcati—gives up; yadä—whenever; kämän—all material desires; mänavaù—human society; manasi—within the mind; sthitän—situated; tarhi—at that time only; eva—indeed; puëòaréka-akña—O lotus-eyed Lord; bhagavattväya—to be equally as opulent as the Lord; kalpate—becomes eligible.

O my Lord, when a human being is able to give up all the material desires in his mind, he becomes eligible to possess wealth and opulence like Yours.

PURPORT
Atheistic men sometimes criticize a devotee by saying, "If you do not want to take any benediction from the Lord and if the servant of the Lord is as opulent as the Lord Himself, why do you ask for the benediction of being engaged as the Lord's servant?" Çrédhara Svämé comments, bhagavattväya bhagavat-samän aiçvaryäya. Bhagavattva, becoming as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, does not mean becoming one with Him or equal to Him, although in the spiritual world the servant is equally as opulent as the master. The servant of the Lord is engaged in the service of the Lord as a servant, friend, father, mother or conjugal lover, all of whom are equally as opulent as the Lord. This is acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva. The master and servant are different yet equal in opulence. This is the meaning of simultaneous difference from the Supreme Lord and oneness with Him.
TEXT 10
oà namo bhagavate tubhyaà
puruñäya mahätmane
haraye 'dbhuta-siàhäya
brahmaëe paramätmane


oà—O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Person; tubhyam—unto You; puruñäya—unto the Supreme Person; mahä-ätmane—unto the Supreme Soul, or the Supersoul; haraye—unto the Lord, who vanquishes all the miseries of devotees; adbhuta-siàhäya—unto Your wonderful lionlike form as Nåsiàhadeva; brahmaëe—unto the Supreme Brahman; parama-ätmane—unto the Supreme Soul.

O my Lord, full of six opulences, O Supreme Person! O Supreme Soul, killer of all miseries! O Supreme Person in the form of a wonderful lion and man, let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

PURPORT
In the previous verse Prahläda Mahäräja has explained that a devotee can achieve the platform of bhagavattva, being as good as the Supreme Person, but this does not mean that the devotee loses his position as a servant. A pure servant of the Lord, although as opulent as the Lord, is still meant to offer respectful obeisances to the Lord in service. Prahläda Mahäräja was engaged in pacifying the Lord, and therefore he did not consider himself equal to the Lord. He defined his position as a servant and offered respectful obeisances unto the Lord.
TEXT 11
çré-bhagavän uväca
naikäntino me mayi jätv ihäçiña
äçäsate 'mutra ca ye bhavad-vidhäù
tathäpi manvantaram etad atra
daityeçvaräëäm anubhuìkñva bhogän


çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; na—not; ekäntinaù—unalloyed, without desires except for the one desire for devotional service; me—from Me; mayi—unto Me; jätu—any time; iha—within this material world; äçiñaù—benedictions; äçäsate—intent desire; amutra—in the next life; ca—and; ye—all such devotees who; bhavat-vidhäù—like you; tathäpi—still; manvantaram—the duration of time until the end of the life of one Manu; etat—this; atra—within this material world; daitya-éçvaräëäm—of the opulences of materialistic persons; anubhuìkñva—you can enjoy; bhogän—all material opulences.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahläda, a devotee like you never desires any kind of material opulences, either in this life or in the next. Nonetheless, I order you to enjoy the opulences of the demons in this material world, acting as their king until the end of the duration of time occupied by Manu.

PURPORT
One Manu lives for a duration of time calculated to be an aggregate of seventy-one yuga cycles, each of which equals 4,300,000 years. Although atheistic men like to enjoy material opulences and they endeavor with great energy to build big residences, roads, cities and factories, unfortunately they cannot live more than eighty, ninety or at the utmost one hundred years. Although the materialist exerts so much energy to create a kingdom of hallucinations, he is unable to enjoy it for more than a few years. However, because Prahläda Mahäräja was a devotee, the Lord allowed him to enjoy material opulence as the king of the materialists. Prahläda Mahäräja had taken birth in the family of Hiraëyakaçipu, who was the topmost materialist, and since Prahläda was the bona fide heir of his father, the Supreme Lord allowed him to enjoy the kingdom created by his father for so many years that no materialist could calculate them. A devotee does not have to desire material opulence, but if he is a pure devotee, there is ample opportunity for him to enjoy material happiness also, without personal endeavor. Therefore, everyone is advised to take to devotional service under all circumstances. If one desires material opulence, he can also become a pure devotee, and his desires will be fulfilled. It is stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.3.10):
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"Whether one desires everything or nothing, or whether he desires to merge into the existence of the Lord, he is intelligent only if he worships Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by rendering transcendental loving service."
TEXT 12
kathä madéyä juñamäëaù priyäs tvam
äveçya mäm ätmani santam ekam
sarveñu bhüteñv adhiyajïam éçaà
yajasva yogena ca karma hinvan


kathäù—messages or instructions; madéyäù—given by Me; juñamäëaù—always hearing or contemplating; priyäù—extremely pleasing; tvam—yourself; äveçya—being fully absorbed in; mäm—Me; ätmani—within the core of your heart; santam—existing; ekam—one (the same Supreme Soul); sarveñu—in all; bhüteñu—living entities; adhiyajïam—the enjoyer of all ritualistic ceremonies; éçam—the Supreme Lord; yajasva—worship; yogena—by bhakti-yoga, devotional service; ca—also; karma—fruitive activities; hinvan—giving up.

It does not matter that you are in the material world. You should always, continuously, hear the instructions and messages given by Me and always be absorbed in thought of Me, for I am the Supersoul existing in the core of everyone's heart. Therefore, give up fruitive activities and worship Me.

PURPORT
When a devotee becomes materially very opulent, one should not think that he is enjoying the results of his fruitive activities. A devotee in this material world uses all material opulences for the service of the Lord because he is planning how to serve the Lord with these opulences, as advised by the Lord Himself. Whatever material opulence is within his possession he engages to expand the glories and service of the Lord. A devotee never performs any fruitive or ritualistic ceremony to enjoy the results of such karma. Rather, a devotee knows that karma-käëòa is meant for the less intelligent man. Narottama däsa Öhäkura says in his Prema-bhakti-candrikä; karma-käëòa, jïäna-käëòa, kevala viñera bhäëòa: both karma-käëòa and jïäna-käëòa—fruitive activities and speculation about the Supreme Lord—are like pots of poison. One who is attracted to karma-käëòa and jïäna-käëòa spoils his existence as a human being. Therefore a devotee is never interested in karma-käëòa or jïäna-käëòa, but is simply interested in favorable service to the Lord (änukülyena kåñëänuçélanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]), or cultivation of spiritual activities in devotional service.
TEXT 13
bhogena puëyaà kuçalena päpaà
kalevaraà käla-javena hitvä
kértià viçuddhäà sura-loka-gétäà
vitäya mäm eñyasi mukta-bandhaù


bhogena—by feelings of material happiness; puëyam—pious activities or their results; kuçalena—by acting piously (devotional service is the best of all pious activities); päpam—all kinds of reactions to impious activities; kalevaram—the material body; käla-javena—by the most powerful time factor; hitvä—giving up; kértim—reputation; viçuddhäm—transcendental or fully purified; sura-loka-gétäm—praised even in the heavenly planets; vitäya—spreading all through the universe; mäm—unto Me; eñyasi—you will come back; mukta-bandhaù—being liberated from all bondage.

My dear Prahläda, while you are in this material world you will exhaust all the reactions of pious activity by feeling happiness, and by acting piously you will neutralize impious activity. Because of the powerful time factor, you will give up your body, but the glories of your activities will be sung in the upper planetary systems, and being fully freed from all bondage, you will return home, back to Godhead.

PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says: evaà prahlädasyäàçena sädhana-siddhatvaà nitya-siddhatvaà ca näradädivaj jïeyam. There are two classes of devotees—the sädhana-siddha and the nitya-siddha. Prahläda Mahäräja is a mixed siddha; that is, he is perfect partly because of executing devotional service and partly because of eternal perfection. Thus he is compared to such devotees as Närada. Formerly, Närada Muni was the son of a maidservant, and therefore in his next birth he attained perfection (sädhana-siddhi) because of having executed devotional service. Yet he is also a nitya-siddha because he never forgets the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The word kuçalena is very important. One should live in the material world very expertly. The material world is known as the world of duality because one sometimes has to act impiously and sometimes has to act piously. Although one does not want to act impiously, the world is so fashioned that there is always danger (padaà padaà yad vipadäm [SB 10.14.58]). Thus even when performing devotional service a devotee has to create many enemies. Prahläda Mahäräja himself had experience of this, for even his father became his enemy. A devotee should expertly manage to think always of the Supreme Lord so that the reactions of suffering cannot touch him. This is the expert management of päpa-puëya—pious and impious activities. An exalted devotee like Prahläda Mahäräja is jévan-mukta; he is liberated even in this very life in the material body.
TEXT 14
ya etat kértayen mahyaà
tvayä gétam idaà naraù
tväà ca mäà ca smaran käle
karma-bandhät pramucyate


yaù—anyone who; etat—this activity; kértayet—chants; mahyam—unto Me; tvayä—by you; gétam—prayers offered; idam—this; naraù—human being; tväm—you; ca—as well as; mäm ca—Me also; smaran—remembering; käle—in due course of time; karma-bandhät—from the bondage of material activities; pramucyate—becomes free.

One who always remembers your activities and My activities also, and who chants the prayers you have offered, becomes free, in due course of time, from the reactions of material activities.

PURPORT
Here it is stated that anyone who chants and hears about the activities of Prahläda Mahäräja and, in relationship with Prahläda's activities, the activities of Nåsiàhadeva, gradually becomes free from all the bondage of fruitive activities. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.15, 2.56):
yaà hi na vyathayanty ete
puruñaà puruñarñabha
sama-duùkha-sukhaà dhéraà
so 'måtatväya kalpate
"O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation."
duùkheñv anudvigna-manäù
sukheñu vigata-spåhaù
véta-räga-bhaya-krodhaù
sthita-dhér munir ucyate
 [Bg. 2.56]
"One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who is not elated when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fear and anger, is called a sage of steady mind." A devotee should not be aggrieved in an awkward position, nor should he feel extraordinarily happy in material opulence. This is the way of expert management of material life. Because a devotee knows how to manage expertly, he is called jévan-mukta. As Rüpa Gosvämé explains in Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu:
éhä yasya harer däsye
karmaëä manasä girä
nikhiläsv apy avasthäsu
jévan-muktaù sa ucyate
"A person acting in Kåñëa consciousness (or, in other words, in the service of Kåñëa) with his body, mind, intelligence and words is a liberated person even within this material world, although he may be engaged in many so-called material activities." Because of constantly engaging in devotional service, in any condition of life, a devotee is free from all material bondage.
bhaktiù punäti man-niñöhä
çva-päkän api sambhavät
"Even one born in a family of meat-eaters is purified if he engages in devotional service." (SB 11.14.21) Çréla Jéva Gosvämé cites this verse in logically supporting that anyone who chants about the pure life and activities of Prahläda Mahäräja is freed from the reactions of material activities.
TEXTS 15–17
çré-prahräda uväca
varaà varaya etat te
varadeçän maheçvara
yad anindat pitä me
tväm avidväàs teja aiçvaram
viddhämarñäçayaù säkñät
sarva-loka-guruà prabhum
bhrätå-heti måñä-dåñöis
tvad-bhakte mayi cäghavän
tasmät pitä me püyeta
durantäd dustaräd aghät
pütas te 'päìga-saàdåñöas
tadä kåpaëa-vatsala


çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja said; varam—benediction; varaye—I pray; etat—this; te—from You; varada-éçät—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who offers benedictions even to such exalted demigods as Brahmä and Çiva; mahä-éçvara—O my Supreme Lord; yat—that; anindat—vilified; pitä—father; me—my; tväm—You; avidvän—without knowledge of; tejaù—strength; aiçvaram—supremacy; viddha—being polluted; amarña—with anger; äçayaù—within the heart; säkñät—directly; sarva-loka-gurum—unto the supreme spiritual master of all living beings; prabhum—unto the supreme master; bhrätå-hä—the killer of his brother; iti—thus; måñä-dåñöiù—falsely envious because of a false conception; tvat-bhakte—unto Your devotee; mayi—unto me; ca—and; agha-vän—who committed heavily sinful activities; tasmät—from that; pitä—father; me—my; püyeta—may be purified; durantät—very great; dustarät—difficult to pass over; aghät—from all sinful activities; pütaù—(although he was) purified; te—of You; apäìga—by the glance over him; saàdåñöaù—being looked at; tadä—at that time; kåpaëa-vatsala—O You who are merciful to the materialistic.

Prahläda Mahäräja said: O Supreme Lord, because You are so merciful to the fallen souls, I ask You for only one benediction. I know that my father, at the time of his death, had already been purified by Your glance upon him, but because of his ignorance of Your beautiful power and supremacy, he was unnecessarily angry at You, falsely thinking that You were the killer of his brother. Thus he directly blasphemed Your Lordship, the spiritual master of all living beings, and committed heavily sinful activities directed against me, Your devotee. I wish that he be excused for these sinful activities.

PURPORT
Although Hiraëyakaçipu was purified as soon as he came in contact with the Lord's lap and the Lord saw him, Prahläda Mahäräja still wanted to hear from the Lord's own mouth that his father had been purified by the Lord's causeless mercy. Prahläda Mahäräja offered this prayer to the Lord for the sake of his father. As a Vaiñëava son, despite all the inconveniences imposed upon him by his father, he could not forget his father's affection.
TEXT 18
çré-bhagavän uväca
triù-saptabhiù pitä pütaù
pitåbhiù saha te 'nagha
yat sädho 'sya kule jäto
bhavän vai kula-pävanaù


çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; triù-saptabhiù—seven multiplied by three (that is to say, twenty-one); pitä—father; pütaù—purified; pitåbhiù—with your forefathers; saha—all together; te—your; anagha—O most sinless personality (Prahläda Mahäräja); yat—because; sädho—O great saintly person; asya—of this person; kule—in the dynasty; jätaù—took birth; bhavän—you; vai—indeed; kula-pävanaù—the purifier of the whole dynasty.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahläda, O most pure, O great saintly person, your father has been purified, along with twenty-one forefathers in your family. Because you were born in this family, the entire dynasty has been purified.

PURPORT
The word triù-saptabhiù means seven multiplied by three. In one's family one can count back four or five generations—to one's great-grandfather or even one's great-grandfather's father—but since the Lord mentions twenty-one forefathers, this indicates that the benediction expands to other families also. Before the present family in which one has taken birth, one must have been born in other families. Thus when a Vaiñëava takes birth in a family, by the grace of the Lord he purifies not only that family but also the families of his previous births.
TEXT 19
yatra yatra ca mad-bhaktäù
praçäntäù sama-darçinaù
sädhavaù samudäcäräs
te püyante 'pi kékaöäù


yatra yatra—wherever and whenever; ca—also; mat-bhaktäù—My devotees; praçäntäù—extremely peaceful; sama-darçinaù—equipoised; sädhavaù—decorated with all good qualities; samudäcäräù—equally magnanimous; te—all of them; püyante—are purified; api—even; kékaöäù—a degraded country or the inhabitants of such a place.

Whenever and wherever there are peaceful, equipoised devotees who are well behaved and decorated with all good qualities, that place and the dynasties there, even if condemned, are purified.

PURPORT
Wherever exalted devotees stay, not only they and their dynasties but the entire country is purified.
TEXT 20
sarvätmanä na hiàsanti
bhüta-grämeñu kiïcana
uccävaceñu daityendra
mad-bhäva-vigata-spåhäù


sarva-ätmanä—in all respects, even in the modes of anger and jealousy; na—never; hiàsanti—they are envious; bhüta-grämeñu—among all species of life; kiïcana—toward any one of them; ucca-avaceñu—the lower and higher living entities; daitya-indra—O my dear Prahläda, King of the Daityas; mat-bhäva—because of devotional service unto Me; vigata—given up; spåhäù—all material modes of anger and greed.

My dear Prahläda, King of the Daityas, because of being attached to devotional service to Me, My devotee does not distinguish between lower and higher living entities. In all respects, he is never jealous of anyone.
TEXT 21
bhavanti puruñä loke
mad-bhaktäs tväm anuvratäù
bhavän me khalu bhaktänäà
sarveñäà pratirüpa-dhåk


bhavanti—become; puruñäù—persons; loke—in this world; mat-bhaktäù—My pure devotees; tväm—you; anuvratäù—following in your footsteps; bhavän—you; me—My; khalu—indeed; bhaktänäm—of all devotees; sarveñäm—in different mellows; pratirüpa-dhåk—tangible example.

Those who follow your example will naturally become My pure devotees. You are the best example of My devotee, and others should follow in your footsteps.

PURPORT
In this connection, Çréla Madhväcärya quotes a verse from the Skanda Puräëa:
åte tu tättvikän devän
näradädéàs tathaiva ca
prahrädäd uttamaù ko nu
viñëu-bhaktau jagat-traye
There are many, many devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they have been enumerated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.3.20) as follows:
svayambhür näradaù çambhuù
kumäraù kapilo manuù
prahlädo janako bhéñmo
balir vaiyäsakir vayam
Of the twelve authorized devotees—Lord Brahmä, Närada, Lord Çiva, Kapila, Manu and so on—Prahläda Mahäräja is understood to be the best example.
TEXT 22
kuru tvaà preta-kåtyäni
pituù pütasya sarvaçaù
mad-aìga-sparçanenäìga
lokän yäsyati suprajäù


kuru—perform; tvam—you; preta-kåtyäni—the ritualistic ceremony performed after death; pituù—of your father; pütasya—already purified; sarvaçaù—in all respects; mat-aìga—My body; sparçanena—by touching; aìga—My dear child; lokän—to planets; yäsyati—he will be elevated; su-prajäù—to become a devotee-citizen.

My dear child, your father has already been purified just by the touch of My body at the time of his death. Nonetheless, the duty of a son is to perform the çräddha ritualistic ceremony after his father's death so that his father may be promoted to a planetary system where he may become a good citizen and devotee.

PURPORT
In this regard, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that although Hiraëyakaçipu was already purified, he had to take birth on a higher planetary system to become a devotee again. Prahläda Mahäräja was advised to perform the ritualistic ceremony as a matter of etiquette, for the Supreme Personality of Godhead under no circumstances wants to stop the regulative principles. Madhva Muni also instructs:
madhu-kaiöabhau bhakty-abhävä
dürau bhagavato måtau
tama eva kramäd äptau
bhaktyä ced yo harià yayau
When the demons Madhu and Kaiöabha were killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, their kinsmen also observed the ritualistic ceremonies so that these demons could return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 23
pitryaà ca sthänam ätiñöha
yathoktaà brahmavädibhiù
mayy äveçya manas täta
kuru karmäëi mat-paraù


pitryam—paternal; ca—also; sthänam—place, throne; ätiñöha—sit upon; yathä-uktam—as described; brahmavädibhiù—by the followers of Vedic civilization; mayi—unto Me; äveçya—being fully absorbed; manaù—the mind; täta—My dear boy; kuru—just execute; karmäëi—the regulative duties; mat-paraù—just for the sake of My work.

After performing the ritualistic ceremonies, take charge of your father's kingdom. Sit upon the throne and do not be disturbed by materialistic activities. Please keep your mind fixed upon Me. Without transgressing the injunctions of the Vedas, as a matter of formality you may perform your particular duties.

PURPORT
When one becomes a devotee, he no longer has any duty to the Vedic regulative principles. One has many duties to perform, but if one becomes fully devoted to the Lord, he no longer has any such obligations. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.5.41):
devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam
One who has fully surrendered to the lotus feet of the Lord is no longer a debtor to his forefathers, the great sages, human society, the common man or any living entity.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead nonetheless advised Prahläda Mahäräja to follow the regulative principles, for since he was going to be the king, others would follow his example. Thus Lord Nåsiàhadeva advised Prahläda Mahäräja to engage in his political duties so that people would become the Lord's devotees.
yad yad äcarati çreñöhas
tad tad evetaro janaù
sa yat pramäëaà kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
"Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues." (Bg. 3.21) One should not be attached to any materialistic activities, but a devotee may perform such activities as an example to show the common man that one should not deviate from the Vedic injunctions.
TEXT 24
çré-närada uväca
prahrädo 'pi tathä cakre
pitur yat sämparäyikam
yathäha bhagavän räjann
abhiñikto dvijätibhiù


çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; prahrädaù—Prahläda Mahäräja; api—also; tathä—in that way; cakre—executed; pituù—of his father; yat—whatever; sämparäyikam—ritualistic ceremonies performed after death; yathä—even as; äha—order; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; räjan—O King Yudhiñöhira; abhiñiktaù—he was enthroned in the kingdom; dvi-jätibhiù—by the brähmaëas present.

Çré Närada Muni continued: Thus, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead ordered, Prahläda Mahäräja performed the ritualistic ceremonies for his father. O King Yudhiñöhira, he was then enthroned in the kingdom of Hiraëyakaçipu, as directed by the brähmaëas.
PURPORT
It is essential that society be divided into four groups of men—brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras. Here we see that although Prahläda was perfect in every respect, he nonetheless followed the instructions of the brähmaëas who performed the Vedic rituals. Therefore in society there must be a very intelligent class of leaders who are well versed in the Vedic knowledge so that they can guide the entire populace to follow the Vedic principles and thus gradually become most perfect and eligible to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 25
prasäda-sumukhaà dåñövä
brahmä naraharià harim
stutvä vägbhiù paviträbhiù
präha devädibhir våtaù


prasäda-sumukham—whose face was bright because the Supreme Lord was pleased; dåñövä—seeing this situation; brahmä—Lord Brahmä; nara-harim—unto Lord Nåsiàhadeva; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; stutvä—offering prayers; vägbhiù—by transcendental words; paviträbhiù—without any material contamination; präha—addressed (the Lord); deva-ädibhiù—by other demigods; våtaù—surrounded.

Lord Brahmä, surrounded by the other demigods, was bright-faced because the Lord was pleased. Thus he offered prayers to the Lord with transcendental words.
TEXT 26
çré-brahmoväca
deva-deväkhilädhyakña
bhüta-bhävana pürvaja
diñöyä te nihataù päpo
loka-santäpano 'suraù


çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; deva-deva—O my Lord, Lord of all the demigods; akhila-adhyakña—owner of the whole universe; bhüta-bhävana—O cause of all living entities; pürva-ja—O original Personality of Godhead; diñöyä—by Your example or because of our good fortune; te—by You; nihataù—killed; päpaù—most sinful; loka-santäpanaù—giving trouble to the entire universe; asuraù—the demon Hiraëyakaçipu.

Lord Brahmä said: O Supreme Lord of all lords, proprietor of the entire universe, O benedictor of all living entities, O original person [Ädi-puruña], because of our good fortune You have now killed this sinful demon, who was giving trouble to the entire universe.

PURPORT
The word pürvaja is described in Bhagavad-gétä (10.8): ahaà sarvasya prabhavo mattaù sarvaà pravartate. All the demigods, including Lord Brahmä, are manifested from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the original person, the cause of all causes, is Govinda, the ädi-puruñam.
TEXT 27
yo 'sau labdha-varo matto
na vadhyo mama såñöibhiù
tapo-yoga-balonnaddhaù
samasta-nigamän ahan


yaù—the person who; asau—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); labdha-varaù—being given the extraordinary benediction; mattaù—from me; na vadhyaù—not to be killed; mama såñöibhiù—by any living being created by me; tapaù-yoga-bala—by austerity, mystic power and strength; unnaddhaù—thus being very proud; samasta—all; nigamän—Vedic injunctions; ahan—disregarded, transgressed.

This demon, Hiraëyakaçipu, received from me the benediction that he would not be killed by any living being within my creation. With this assurance and with strength derived from austerities and mystic power, he became excessively proud and transgressed all the Vedic injunctions.
TEXT 28
diñöyä tat-tanayaù sädhur
mahä-bhägavato 'rbhakaù
tvayä vimocito måtyor
diñöyä tväà samito 'dhunä


diñöyä—by fortune; tat-tanayaù—his son; sädhuù—who is a great saintly person; mahä-bhägavataù—a great and exalted devotee; arbhakaù—although a child; tvayä—by Your Lordship; vimocitaù—released; måtyoù—from the clutches of death; diñöyä—also by great fortune; tväm samitaù—perfectly under Your shelter; adhunä—now.

By great fortune, Hiraëyakaçipu's son Prahläda Mahäräja has now been released from death, for although he is a child, he is an exalted devotee. Now he is fully under the protection of Your lotus feet.
TEXT 29
etad vapus te bhagavan
dhyäyataù paramätmanaù
sarvato goptå santräsän
måtyor api jighäàsataù


etat—this; vapuù—body; te—Your; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; dhyäyataù—those who meditate upon; parama-ätmanaù—of the Supreme Person; sarvataù—from everywhere; goptå—the protector; santräsät—from all kinds of fear; måtyoù api—even from fear of death; jighäàsataù—if one is envied by an enemy.

My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are the Supreme Soul. If one meditates upon Your transcendental body, You naturally protect him from all sources of fear, even the imminent danger of death.

PURPORT
Everyone is sure to die, for no one is excused from the hands of death, which is but a feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (måtyuù sarva-haraç cäham [Bg. 10.34]). When one becomes a devotee, however, he is not destined to die according to a limited duration of life. Everyone has a limited duration of life, but a devotee's lifetime can be extended by the mercy of the Supreme Lord, who is able to nullify the results of one's karma. Karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhäjäà [Bs. 5.54]. This is the statement of Brahma-saàhitä (5.54). A devotee is not under the laws of karma. Therefore even a devotee's scheduled death can be avoided by the causeless mercy of the Supreme Lord. God protects the devotee even from the extreme danger of death.
TEXT 30
çré-bhagavän uväca
maivaà vibho 'suräëäà te
pradeyaù padma-sambhava
varaù krüra-nisargäëäm
ahénäm amåtaà yathä


çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead replied (to Brahmä); mä—do not; evam—thus; vibho—O great person; asuräëäm—unto the demons; te—by you; pradeyaù—bestow benedictions; padma-sambhava—O Lord Brahmä, born from the lotus flower; varaù—benediction; krüra-nisargäëäm—persons who are by nature very cruel and jealous; ahénäm—to snakes; amåtam—nectar or milk; yathä—just as.

The Personality of Godhead replied: My dear Lord Brahmä, O great lord born from the lotus flower, just as it is dangerous to feed milk to a snake, so it is dangerous to give benedictions to demons, who are by nature ferocious and jealous. I warn you not to give such benedictions to any demon again.
TEXT 31
çré-närada uväca
ity uktvä bhagavän räjaàs
tataç cäntardadhe hariù
adåçyaù sarva-bhütänäà
püjitaù parameñöhinä


çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; iti uktvä—saying this; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; räjan—O King Yudhiñöhira; tataù—from that place; ca—also; antardadhe—disappeared; hariù—the Lord; adåçyaù—without being visible; sarva-bhütänäm—by all kinds of living entities; püjitaù—being worshiped; parameñöhinä—by Lord Brahmä.

Närada Muni continued: O King Yudhiñöhira, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is not visible to an ordinary human being, spoke in this way, instructing Lord Brahmä. Then, being worshiped by Brahmä, the Lord disappeared from that place.
TEXT 32
tataù sampüjya çirasä
vavande parameñöhinam
bhavaà prajäpatén devän
prahrädo bhagavat-kaläù


tataù—thereafter; sampüjya—worshiping; çirasä—by bowing the head; vavande—offered prayers; parameñöhinam—to Lord Brahmä; bhavam—to Lord Çiva; prajäpatén—to the great demigods entrusted with increasing the population; devän—to all the great demigods; prahrädaù—Prahläda Mahäräja; bhagavat-kaläù—influential parts of the Lord.

Prahläda Mahäräja then worshiped and offered prayers to all the demigods, such as Brahmä, Çiva and the Prajäpatis, who are all parts of the Lord.
TEXT 33
tataù kävyädibhiù särdhaà
munibhiù kamaläsanaù
daityänäà dänavänäà ca
prahrädam akarot patim


tataù—thereafter; kävya-ädibhiù—with Çukräcärya and others; särdham—and with; munibhiù—great saintly persons; kamala-äsanaù—Lord Brahmä; daityänäm—of all the demons; dänavänäm—of all the giants; ca—and; prahrädam—Prahläda Mahäräja; akarot—created; patim—the master or king.

Thereafter, along with Çukräcärya and other great saints, Lord Brahmä, whose seat is on the lotus flower, made Prahläda the king of all the demons and giants in the universe.

PURPORT
By the grace of Lord Nåsiàhadeva, Prahläda Mahäräja became a greater king than his father, Hiraëyakaçipu. Prahläda's inauguration was performed by Lord Brahmä in the presence of other saintly persons and demigods.
TEXT 34
pratinandya tato deväù
prayujya paramäçiñaù
sva-dhämäni yayü räjan
brahmädyäù pratipüjitäù


pratinandya—congratulating; tataù—thereafter; deväù—all the demigods; prayujya—having offered; parama-äçiñaù—exalted benedictions; sva-dhämäni—to their respective abodes; yayuù—returned; räjan—O King Yudhiñöhira; brahma-ädyäù—all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä; pratipüjitäù—being thoroughly worshiped (by Prahläda Mahäräja).

O King Yudhiñöhira, after all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä, were properly worshiped by Prahläda Mahäräja, they offered Prahläda their utmost benedictions and then returned to their respective abodes.
TEXT 35
evaà ca pärñadau viñëoù
putratvaà präpitau diteù
hådi sthitena hariëä
vaira-bhävena tau hatau


evam—in this way; ca—also; pärñadau—the two personal associates; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; putratvam—becoming the sons; präpitau—having gotten; diteù—of Diti; hådi—within the core of the heart; sthitena—being situated; hariëä—by the Supreme Lord; vaira-bhävena—by conceiving as an enemy; tau—both of them; hatau—were killed.

Thus the two associates of Lord Viñëu who had become Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu, the sons of Diti, were both killed. By illusion they had thought that the Supreme Lord, who is situated in everyone's heart, was their enemy.

PURPORT
The discourse concerning Lord Nåsiàhadeva and Prahläda Mahäräja began when Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira asked Närada how Çiçupäla had merged into the body of Kåñëa. Çiçupäla and Dantavakra were the same Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu. Here Närada Muni is relating how in three different births the associates of Lord Viñëu were killed by Lord Viñëu Himself. First they were the demons Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 36
punaç ca vipra-çäpena
räkñasau tau babhüvatuù
kumbhakarëa-daça-grévau
hatau tau räma-vikramaiù


punaù—again; ca—also; vipra-çäpena—being cursed by the brähmaëas; räkñasau—the two Räkñasas; tau—both of them; babhüvatuù—incarnated as; kumbhakarëa-daça-grévau—known as Kumbhakarëa and the ten-headed Rävaëa (in their next birth); hatau—they also were killed; tau—both of them; räma-vikramaiù—by the extraordinary strength of Lord Rämacandra.

Being cursed by the brähmaëas, the same two associates took birth again as Kumbhakarëa and the ten-headed Rävaëa. These two Räkñasas were killed by Lord Rämacandra's extraordinary power.
TEXT 37
çayänau yudhi nirbhinna-
hådayau räma-çäyakaiù
tac-cittau jahatur dehaà
yathä präktana-janmani


çayänau—being laid down; yudhi—on the battlefield; nirbhinna—being pierced; hådayau—in the core of the heart; räma-çäyakaiù—by the arrows of Lord Rämacandra; tat-cittau—thinking or being conscious of Lord Rämacandra; jahatuù—gave up; deham—body; yathä—even as; präktana-janmani—in their previous births.

Pierced by the arrows of Lord Rämacandra, both Kumbhakarëa and Rävaëa lay on the ground and left their bodies, fully absorbed in thought of the Lord, just as they had in their previous births as Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 38
täv ihätha punar jätau
çiçupäla-karüña-jau
harau vairänubandhena
paçyatas te saméyatuù


tau—both of them; iha—in this human society; atha—in this way; punaù—again; jätau—took their births; çiçupäla—Çiçupäla; karüña-jau—Dantavakra; harau—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vaira-anubandhena—by the bondage of considering the Lord an enemy; paçyataù—were looking on; te—while you; saméyatuù—merged or went into the lotus feet of the Lord.

They both took birth again in human society as Çiçupäla and Dantavakra and continued in the same enmity toward the Lord. It is they who merged into the body of the Lord in your presence.

PURPORT
Vairänubandhena. Acting like the Lord's enemy is also beneficial for the living entity. Kämäd dveñäd bhayät snehäd. Whether in lusty desire, anger, fear or envy of the Lord, somehow or other, as recommended by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé (tasmät kenäpy upäyena [SB 7.1.32]), one should become attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and ultimately achieve the goal of returning home, back to Godhead. What, then, is to be said of one who is related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead as a servant, friend, father, mother or conjugal lover?
TEXT 39
enaù pürva-kåtaà yat tad
räjänaù kåñëa-vairiëaù
jahus te 'nte tad-ätmänaù
kéöaù peçaskåto yathä


enaù—this sinful activity (of blaspheming the Supreme Lord); pürva-kåtam—executed in previous births; yat—which; tat—that; räjänaù—kings; kåñëa-vairiëaù—always acting as enemies of Kåñëa; jahuù—gave up; te—all of them; ante—at the time of death; tat-ätmänaù—attaining the same spiritual body and form; kéöaù—a worm; peçaskåtaù—(captured by) a black drone; yathä—just like.

Not only Çiçupäla and Dantavakra but also many, many other kings who acted as enemies of Kåñëa attained salvation at the time of death. Because they thought of the Lord, they received spiritual bodies and forms the same as His, just as worms captured by a black drone obtain the same type of body as the drone.

PURPORT
The mystery of yogic meditation is explained here. Real yogés always meditate on the form of Viñëu within their hearts. Consequently, at the time of death they give up their bodies while thinking of the form of Viñëu and thus attain Viñëuloka, Vaikuëöhaloka, where they receive bodily features the same as those of the Lord. From the Sixth Canto we have already learned that when the Viñëudütas came from Vaikuëöha to deliver Ajämila, they looked exactly like Viñëu, with four hands and the same features as Viñëu. Therefore, we may conclude that if one practices thinking of Viñëu and is fully absorbed in thinking of Him at the time of death, one returns home, back to Godhead. Even enemies of Kåñëa who thought of Kåñëa in fear (bhaya), such as King Kaàsa, received bodies in a spiritual identity similar to that of the Lord.
TEXT 40
yathä yathä bhagavato
bhaktyä paramayäbhidä
nåpäç caidyädayaù sätmyaà
hares tac-cintayä yayuù


yathä yathä—just as; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktyä—by devotional service; paramayä—supreme; abhidä—incessantly thinking of such activities; nåpäù—kings; caidya-ädayaù—Çiçupäla, Dantavakra and others; sätmyam—the same form; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-cintayä—by constantly thinking of Him; yayuù—returned home, back to Godhead.

By devotional service, pure devotees who incessantly think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead receive bodies similar to His. This is known as särüpya-mukti. Although Çiçupäla, Dantavakra and other kings thought of Kåñëa as an enemy, they also achieved the same result.

PURPORT
In Caitanya-caritämåta, in connection with Lord Caitanya's instructions to Sanätana Gosvämé, it is explained that a devotee should externally execute his routine devotional service in a regular way but should always inwardly think of the particular mellow in which he is attracted to the service of the Lord. This constant thought of the Lord makes the devotee eligible to return home, back to Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9), tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti: after giving up his body, a devotee does not again receive a material body, but goes back to Godhead and receives a spiritual body resembling those of the Lord's eternal associates whose activities he followed. However the devotee likes to serve the Lord, he may constantly think of the Lord's associates—the cowherd boys, the gopés, the Lord's father and mother, His servants and the trees, land, animals, plants and water in the Lord's abode. Because of constantly thinking of these features, one acquires a transcendental position. Kings like Çiçupäla, Dantavakra, Kaàsa, Pauëòraka, Narakäsura and Sälva were all similarly delivered. This is confirmed by Madhväcärya:
pauëòrake narake caiva
çälve kaàse ca rukmiëi
äviñöäs tu harer bhaktäs
tad-bhaktyä harim äpire
Pauëòraka, Narakäsura, Sälva and Kaàsa were all inimical toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but because all these kings constantly thought of Him, they achieved the same liberation—särüpya-mukti. The jïäna-bhakta, the devotee who follows the path of jïäna, also attains the same destination. If even the enemies of the Lord achieve salvation by constantly thinking about the Lord, what is to be said of pure devotees who always engage in the Lord's service and who think of nothing but the Lord in every activity?
TEXT 41
äkhyätaà sarvam etat te
yan mäà tvaà paripåñöavän
damaghoña-sutädénäà
hareù sätmyam api dviñäm


äkhyätam—described; sarvam—everything; etat—this; te—unto you; yat—whatever; mäm—unto me; tvam—you; paripåñöavän—inquired; damaghoña-suta-ädénäm—of the son of Damaghoña (Çiçupäla) and others; hareù—of the Lord; sätmyam—equal bodily features; api—even; dviñäm—although they were inimical.

Everything you asked me about how Çiçupäla and others attained salvation although they were inimical has now been explained to you by me.
TEXT 42
eñä brahmaëya-devasya
kåñëasya ca mahätmanaù
avatära-kathä puëyä
vadho yaträdi-daityayoù


eñä—all this; brahmaëya-devasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is worshiped by all brähmaëas; kåñëasya—of Kåñëa, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca—also; mahä-ätmanaù—the Supersoul; avatära-kathä—narrations about His incarnations; puëyä—pious, purifying; vadhaù—killing; yatra—wherein; ädi—in the beginning of the millennium; daityayoù—of the demons (Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu).

In this narration about Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, various expansions or incarnations of the Lord have been described, and the killing of the two demons Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu has also been described.

PURPORT
Avatäras, or incarnations, are expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead—Kåñëa, Govinda.
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca
vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is the original person—nondual, infallible, and without beginning. Although He expands into unlimited forms, He is still the original, and although He is the oldest person, He always appears as a fresh youth. Such eternal, blissful and all-knowing forms of the Lord cannot be understood by the academic wisdom of the Vedas, but they are always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees." (Bs. 5.33) The Brahma-saàhitä describes the avatäras. Indeed, all the avatäras are described in the authentic scriptures. No one can become an avatära, or incarnation, although this has become fashionable in the Age of Kali. The avatäras are described in the authentic scriptures (çästras), and therefore before one risks accepting a pretender as an avatära, one should refer to the çästras. The çästras say everywhere that Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead and that He has innumerable avatäras, or incarnations. Elsewhere in the Brahma-saàhitä it is said, rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan: [Bs. 5.39] Räma, Nåsiàha, Varäha and many others are consecutive expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After Kåñëa comes Balaräma, after Balaräma is Saìkarñaëa, then Aniruddha, Pradyumna, Näräyaëa and then the puruña-avatäras—Mahä-Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. All of them are avatäras.
One must hear about the avatäras. Narrations about such avatäras are called avatära-kathä, the narrations of Kåñëa's expansions. Hearing and chanting these narrations is completely pious. Såëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù [SB 1.2.17]. One who hears and chants can become puëya, purified of material contamination.
Whenever there are references to the avatäras, religious principles are established, and demons who are against Kåñëa are killed. The Kåñëa consciousness movement is spreading all over the world with two aims—to establish Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and to kill all the pretenders who falsely present themselves as avatäras. The preachers of the Kåñëa consciousness movement must carry this conviction very carefully within their hearts and kill the demons who in many tactful ways vilify the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. If we take shelter of Nåsiàhadeva and Prahläda Mahäräja, it will be easier to kill the demons who are against Kåñëa and to thus reestablish Kåñëa's supremacy. Kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam: [SB 1.3.28] Kåñëa is the Supreme Lord, the original Lord. Prahläda Mahäräja is our guru, and Kåñëa is our worshipable God. As advised by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. If we can be successful in getting the mercy of Prahläda Mahäräja and also that of Nåsiàhadeva, then our Kåñëa consciousness movement will be extremely successful.
The demon Hiraëyakaçipu had so many ways to try to become God himself, but although Prahläda Mahäräja was chastised and threatened in many ways, he rigidly refused to accept his powerful demoniac father as God. Following in the footsteps of Prahläda Mahäräja, we should reject all the rascals who pretend to be God. We must accept Kåñëa and His incarnations, and no one else.
TEXTS 43–44
prahrädasyänucaritaà
mahä-bhägavatasya ca
bhaktir jïänaà viraktiç ca
yäthärthyaà cäsya vai hareù
sarga-sthity-apyayeçasya
guëa-karmänuvarëanam
parävareñäà sthänänäà
kälena vyatyayo mahän


prahrädasya—of Prahläda Mahäräja; anucaritam—characteristics (understood by reading or describing his activities); mahä-bhägavatasya—of the great and exalted devotee; ca—also; bhaktiù—devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jïänam—complete knowledge of the Transcendence (Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän); viraktiù—renunciation of material existence; ca—also; yäthärthyam—just to understand each of them perfectly; ca—and; asya—of this; vai—indeed; hareù—always in reference to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarga—of creation; sthiti—maintenance; apyaya—and annihilation; éçasya—of the master (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); guëa—of the transcendental qualities and opulences; karma—and activities;  anuvarëanam—description within the disciplic succession; para-avareñäm—of different types of living entities known as demigods and demons; sthänänäm—of the various planets or places to live; kälena—in due course of time; vyatyayaù—the annihilation of everything; mahän—although very great.

This narration describes the characteristics of the great and exalted devotee Prahläda Mahäräja, his staunch devotional service, his perfect knowledge, and his perfect detachment from material contamination. It also describes the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the cause of creation, maintenance and annihilation. Prahläda Mahäräja, in his prayers, has described the transcendental qualities of the Lord and has also described how the various abodes of the demigods and demons, regardless of how materially opulent, are destroyed by the mere direction of the Lord.

PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is filled with descriptions of the characteristics of various devotees, with reference to the service of the Lord. This Vedic literature is called Bhägavatam because it deals with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotee. By studying Çrémad-Bhägavatam under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master, one can perfectly understand the science of Kåñëa, the nature of the material and spiritual worlds, and the aim of life. Çrémad-Bhägavatam amalaà puräëam. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the spotless Vedic literature, as we have discussed in the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Therefore, simply by understanding Çrémad-Bhägavatam, one can understand the science of the activities of the devotees, the activities of the demons, the permanent abode and the temporary abode. Through Çrémad-Bhägavatam, everything is perfectly known.
TEXT 45
dharmo bhägavatänäà ca
bhagavän yena gamyate
äkhyäne 'smin samämnätam
ädhyätmikam açeñataù


dharmaù—religious principles; bhägavatänäm—of the devotees; ca—and; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yena—by which; gamyate—one can understand; äkhyäne—in the narration; asmin—this; samämnätam—is perfectly described; ädhyätmikam—transcendence; açeñataù—without reservations.

The principles of religion by which one can actually understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are called bhägavata-dharma. In this narration, therefore, which deals with these principles, actual transcendence is properly described.

PURPORT
Through the principles of religion, one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Brahman (the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord) and Paramätmä (the localized aspect of the Lord). When one is well conversant with all these principles, he becomes a devotee and performs bhägavata-dharma. Prahläda Mahäräja, the spiritual master in the line of disciplic succession, advised that this bhägavata-dharma be instructed to students from the very beginning of their education (kaumära äcaret präjïo dharmän bhägavatän iha [SB 7.6.1]). To understand the science of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the real purpose of education. Çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]. One must simply hear about and describe Lord Viñëu and His various incarnations. This narration concerning Prahläda Mahäräja and Lord Nåsiàhadeva, therefore, has properly described spiritual, transcendental subjects.
TEXT 46
ya etat puëyam äkhyänaà
viñëor véryopabåàhitam
kértayec chraddhayä çrutvä
karma-päçair vimucyate


yaù—anyone who; etat—this; puëyam—pious; äkhyänam—narration; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; vérya—the supreme power; upabåàhitam—in which is described; kértayet—chants or repeats; çraddhayä—with great faith; çrutvä—after properly hearing (from the right source); karma-päçaiù—from the bondage of fruitive activities; vimucyate—becomes liberated.

One who hears and chants this narration about the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, is certainly liberated from material bondage without fail.
TEXT 47
etad ya ädi-puruñasya mågendra-léläà
daityendra-yütha-pa-vadhaà prayataù paöheta
daityätmajasya ca satäà pravarasya puëyaà
çrutvänubhävam akuto-bhayam eti lokam


etat—this narration; yaù—anyone who; ädi-puruñasya—of the original Personality of Godhead; måga-indra-léläm—pastimes as a lion and human being combined; daitya-indra—of the king of the demons; yütha-pa—as strong as an elephant; vadham—the killing; prayataù—with great attention; paöheta—reads; daitya-ätma-jasya—of Prahläda Mahäräja, the son of the demon; ca—also; satäm—among elevated devotees; pravarasya—the best; puëyam—pious; çrutvä—hearing; anubhävam—the activities; akutaù-bhayam—where there is no fear anywhere or at any time; eti—reaches; lokam—the spiritual world.

Prahläda Mahäräja was the best among exalted devotees. Anyone who with great attention hears this narration concerning the activities of Prahläda Mahäräja, the killing of Hiraëyakaçipu, and the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nåsiàhadeva, surely reaches the spiritual world, where there is no anxiety.
TEXT 48
yüyaà nå-loke bata bhüri-bhägä
lokaà punänä munayo 'bhiyanti
yeñäà gåhän ävasatéti säkñäd
güòhaà paraà brahma manuñya-liìgam


yüyam—all of you (the Päëòavas); nå-loke—within this material world; bata—however; bhüri-bhägäù—extremely fortunate; lokam—all the planets; punänäù—who can purify; munayaù—great saintly persons; abhiyanti—almost always come to visit; yeñäm—of whom; gåhän—the house; ävasati—resides in; iti—thus; säkñät—directly; güòham—very confidential; param brahma—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; manuñya-liìgam—appearing just like a human being.

Närada Muni continued: My dear Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, all of you [the Päëòavas] are extremely fortunate, for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, lives in your palace just like a human being. Great saintly persons know this very well, and therefore they constantly visit this house.

PURPORT
After hearing about the activities of Prahläda Mahäräja, a pure devotee should be very anxious to follow in his footsteps, but such a devotee might be disappointed, thinking that not every devotee can come to the standard of Prahläda Mahäräja. This is the nature of a pure devotee; he always thinks himself to be the lowest, to be incompetent and unqualified. Thus after hearing the narration of Prahläda Mahäräja's activities, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, who was on the same standard of devotional service as Prahläda, might have been thinking of his own humble position. Närada Muni, however, could understand Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira's mind, and therefore he immediately encouraged him by saying that the Päëòavas were not less fortunate; they were as good as Prahläda Mahäräja because although Lord Nåsiàhadeva appeared for Prahläda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His original form as Kåñëa was always living with the Päëòavas. Although the Päëòavas, because of the influence of Kåñëa's yogamäyä, could not think of their fortunate position, every saintly person, including the great sage Närada, could understand it, and therefore they constantly visited Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
Any pure devotee who is constantly conscious of Kåñëa is naturally very fortunate. The word nå-loke, meaning "within the material world," indicates that before the Päëòavas there had been many, many devotees, such as the descendants of the Yadu dynasty and Vasiñöha, Maréci, Kaçyapa, Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, who were all extremely fortunate. The Päëòavas, however, were better than all of them because Kåñëa Himself lived with them constantly. Närada Muni therefore specifically mentioned that within this material world (nå-loke) the Päëòavas were the most fortunate.
TEXT 49
sa vä ayaà brahma mahad-vimågya-
kaivalya-nirväëa-sukhänubhütiù
priyaù suhåd vaù khalu mätuleya
ätmärhaëéyo vidhi-kåd guruç ca


saù—that (Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa); vä—also; ayam—this; brahma—the impersonal Brahman (which is an emanation from Kåñëa); mahat—by great personalities; vimågya—searched for; kaivalya—oneness; nirväëa-sukha—of transcendental happiness; anubhütiù—the source of practical experience; priyaù—very, very dear; suhåt—well-wisher; vaù—of you; khalu—indeed; mätuleyaù—the son of a maternal uncle; ätmä—exactly like body and soul together; arhaëéyaù—worshipable (because He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead); vidhi-kåt—(yet He serves you as) an order carrier; guruù—your supreme advisor; ca—as well.

The impersonal Brahman is Kåñëa Himself because Kåñëa is the source of the impersonal Brahman. He is the origin of the transcendental bliss sought by great saintly persons, yet He, the Supreme Person, is your most dear friend and constant well-wisher and is intimately related to you as the son of your maternal uncle. Indeed, He is always like your body and soul. He is worshipable, yet He acts as your servant and sometimes as your spiritual master.

PURPORT
There is always a difference of opinion about the Absolute Truth. One class of transcendentalists concludes that the Absolute Truth is impersonal, and another class concludes that the Absolute Truth is a person. In Bhagavad-gétä, the Absolute Truth is accepted as the Supreme Person. Indeed, that Supreme Person Himself, Lord Kåñëa, instructs in Bhagavad-gétä, brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham [Bg. 14.27], mattaù parataraà nänyat [Bg. 7.7]. "The impersonal Brahman is My partial manifestation, and there is no truth superior to Me." That same Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, acted as the supreme friend and relative of the Päëòavas, and sometimes He even acted as their servant by carrying a letter from the Päëòavas to Dhåtaräñöra and Duryodhana. Because Kåñëa was the well-wisher of the Päëòavas, He also acted as guru by becoming the spiritual master of Arjuna. Arjuna accepted Kåñëa as his spiritual master (çiñyas te 'haà çädhi mäà tväà prapannam [Bg. 2.7]), and Kåñëa sometimes chastised him. For example, the Lord said, açocyän anvaçocas tvaà prajïä-vädäàç ca bhäñase: [Bg. 2.11] "while speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not worthy of grief." The Lord also said, kutas tvä kaçmalam idaà viñame samupasthitam: "My dear Arjuna, how have these impurities come upon you?" Such was the intimate relationship between the Päëòavas and Kåñëa. In the same way, a pure devotee of the Lord is always with Kåñëa through thick and thin; his way of life is Kåñëa. This is the statement of the authority Çré Närada Muni.
TEXT 50
na yasya säkñäd bhava-padmajädibhé
rüpaà dhiyä vastutayopavarëitam
maunena bhaktyopaçamena püjitaù
prasédatäm eña sa sätvatäà patiù


na—not; yasya—of whom; säkñät—directly; bhava—Lord Çiva; padma-ja—Lord Brahmä (born from the lotus); ädibhiù—by them and others also; rüpam—the form; dhiyä—even by meditation; vastutayä—fundamentally; upavarëitam—described and perceived; maunena—by samädhi, deep meditation; bhaktyä—by devotional service; upaçamena—by renunciation; püjitaù—worshiped; prasédatäm—may He be pleased; eñaù—this; saù—He; sätvatäm—of the great devotees; patiù—the master.

Exalted persons like Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä could not properly describe the truth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. May the Lord, who is always worshiped as the protector of all devotees by great saints who observe vows of silence, meditation, devotional service and renunciation, be pleased with us.

PURPORT
The Absolute Truth is sought by different persons in different ways, yet He remains inconceivable. Nonetheless, devotees like the Päëòavas, the gopés, the cowherd boys, Mother Yaçodä, Nanda Mahäräja and all the inhabitants of Våndävana do not need to practice conventional processes of meditation to attain the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for He remains with them through thick and thin. Therefore a saint like Närada, understanding the difference between transcendentalists and pure devotees, always prays that the Lord will be pleased with him.


