
Song Prayers by Demigods to Lord Nrsimha (SB 7.8.40-56)

TEXT 40
çré-brahmoväca
nato 'smy anantäya duranta-çaktaye
vicitra-véryäya pavitra-karmaëe
viçvasya sarga-sthiti-saàyamän guëaiù
sva-lélayä sandadhate 'vyayätmane
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; nataù—bowed down; asmi—I am; anantäya—unto the unlimited Lord; duranta—very difficult to find an end to; çaktaye—who possesses different potencies; vicitra-véryäya—having varieties of prowess; pavitra-karmaëe—whose actions have no reaction (even though doing contrary things, He remains without contamination by the material modes); viçvasya—of the universe; sarga—creation; sthiti—maintenance; saàyamän—and annihilation; guëaiù—by the material qualities; sva-lélayä—very easily; sandadhate—performs; avyaya-ätmane—whose personality never deteriorates.
Lord Brahmä prayed: My Lord, You are unlimited, and You possess unending potencies. No one can estimate or calculate Your prowess and wonderful influence, for Your actions are never polluted by the material energy. Through the material qualities, You very easily create the universe, maintain it and again annihilate it, yet You remain the same, without deterioration. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 41
çré-rudra uväca
kopa-kälo yugäntas te
hato 'yam asuro 'lpakaù
tat-sutaà pähy upasåtaà
bhaktaà te bhakta-vatsala
çré-rudraù uväca—Lord Çiva offered his prayer; kopa-kälaù—the right time for Your anger (for the purpose of annihilating the universe); yuga-antaù—the end of the millennium; te—by You; hataù—killed; ayam—this; asuraù—great demon; alpakaù—very insignificant; tat-sutam—his son (Prahläda Mahäräja); pähi—just protect; upasåtam—who is surrendered and standing nearby; bhaktam—devotee; te—of Your Lordship; bhakta-vatsala—O my Lord, who are so affectionate to Your devotee.
Lord Çiva said: The end of the millennium is the time for Your anger. Now that this insignificant demon Hiraëyakaçipu has been killed, O my Lord, who are naturally affectionate to Your devotee, kindly protect his son Prahläda Mahäräja, who is standing nearby as Your fully surrendered devotee.
TEXT 42
çré-indra uväca
pratyänétäù parama bhavatä träyatä naù sva-bhägä
daityäkräntaà hådaya-kamalaà tad-gåhaà pratyabodhi
käla-grastaà kiyad idam aho nätha çuçrüñatäà te
muktis teñäà na hi bahu-matä närasiàhäparaiù kim
çré-indraù uväca—Indra, the king of heaven, said; pratyänétäù—recovered; parama—O Supreme; bhavatä—by Your Lordship; träyatä—who are protecting; naù—us; sva-bhägäù—shares in the sacrifices; daitya-äkräntam—afflicted by the demon; hådaya-kamalam—the lotuslike cores of our hearts; tat-gåham—which is actually Your residence; pratyabodhi—it has been illuminated; käla-grastam—devoured by time; kiyat—insignificant; idam—this (world); aho—alas; nätha—O Lord; çuçrüñatäm—for those who are always engaged in the service; te—of You; muktiù—liberation from material bondage; teñäm—of them (the pure devotees); na—not; hi—indeed; bahu-matä—thought very important; nära-siàha—O Lord Nåsiàhadeva, half lion and half human being; aparaiù kim—then what is the use of other possessions.
King Indra said: O Supreme Lord, You are our deliverer and protector. Our shares of sacrifices, which are actually Yours, have been recovered from the demon by You. Because the demoniac king Hiraëyakaçipu was most fearsome, our hearts, which are Your permanent abode, were all overtaken by him. Now, by Your presence, the gloom and darkness in our hearts have been dissipated. O Lord, for those who always engage in Your service, which is more exalted than liberation, all material opulence is insignificant. They do not even care for liberation, not to speak of the benefits of käma, artha and dharma.
TEXT 43
çré-åñaya ücuù
tvaà nas tapaù paramam ättha yad ätma-tejo
yenedam ädi-puruñätma-gataà sasarktha
tad vipraluptam amunädya çaraëya-päla
rakñä-gåhéta-vapuñä punar anvamaàsthäù
çré-åñayaù ücuù—the great sages said; tvam—You; naù—our; tapaù—austerity; paramam—topmost; ättha—instructed; yat—which; ätma-tejaù—Your spiritual power; yena—by which; idam—this (material world); ädi-puruña—O supreme original Personality of Godhead; ätma-gatam—merged within Yourself; sasarktha—(You) created; tat—that process of austerity and penance; vipraluptam—stolen; amunä—by that demon (Hiraëyakaçipu); adya—now; çaraëya-päla—O supreme maintainer of those who need to be sheltered; rakñä-gåhéta-vapuñä—by Your body, which You accept to give protection; punaù—again; anvamaàsthäù—You have approved.
All the saintly persons present offered their prayers in this way: O Lord, O supreme maintainer of those sheltered at Your lotus feet, O original Personality of Godhead, the process of austerity and penance, in which You instructed us before, is the spiritual power of Your very self. It is by austerity that You create the material world, which lies dormant within You. This austerity was almost stopped by the activities of this demon, but now, by Yourself appearing in the form of Nåsiàhadeva, which is meant just to give us protection, and by killing this demon, You have again approved the process of austerity.
TEXT 44
çré-pitara ücuù
çräddhäni no 'dhibubhuje prasabhaà tanüjair
dattäni tértha-samaye 'py apibat tilämbu
tasyodarän nakha-vidérëa-vapäd ya ärcchat
tasmai namo nåharaye 'khila-dharma-goptre
çré-pitaraù ücuù—the inhabitants of Pitåloka said; çräddhäni—the performances of the çräddha ceremony (offering of food grains to dead forefathers by a particular process); naù—our; adhibubhuje—enjoyed; prasabham—by force; tanüjaiù—by our sons and grandsons; dattäni—offered; tértha-samaye—at the time of bathing in the holy places; api—even; apibat—drank; tila-ambu—offerings of water with sesame seeds; tasya—of the demon; udarät—from the abdomen; nakha-vidérëa—pierced by the nails of the hand; vapät—the skin of the intestines of which; yaù—He who (the Personality of Godhead); ärcchat—obtained; tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); namaù—respectful obeisances; nå-haraye—who has appeared as half lion and half man (Nåhari); akhila—universal; dharma—religious principles; goptre—who maintains.
The inhabitants of Pitåloka prayed: Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto Lord Nåsiàhadeva, the maintainer of the religious principles of the universe. He has killed Hiraëyakaçipu, the demon who by force enjoyed all the offerings of the çräddha ceremonies performed by our sons and grandsons on the anniversaries of our death and who drank the water with sesame seeds offered in holy places of pilgrimage. By killing this demon, O Lord, You have taken back all this stolen property from his abdomen by piercing it with Your nails. We therefore wish to offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 45
çré-siddhä ücuù
yo no gatià yoga-siddhäm asädhur
ahärñéd yoga-tapo-balena
nänä darpaà taà nakhair vidadära
tasmai tubhyaà praëatäù smo nåsiàha
çré-siddhäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Siddhaloka said; yaù—the person who; naù—our; gatim—perfection; yoga-siddhäm—achieved by mystic yoga; asädhuù—most uncivilized and dishonest; ahärñét—stole away; yoga—of mysticism; tapaù—and austerities; balena—by the power; nänä darpam—proud due to wealth, opulence and strength; tam—him; nakhaiù—by the nails; vidadära—pierced; tasmai—unto him; tubhyam—unto You; praëatäù—bowed down; smaù—we are; nåsiàha—O Lord Nåsiàhadeva.
The inhabitants of Siddhaloka prayed: O Lord Nåsiàhadeva, because we belong to Siddhaloka, we automatically achieve perfection in all eight kinds of mystic power. Yet Hiraëyakaçipu was so dishonest that by the strength of his power and austerity, he took away our powers. Thus he became very proud of his mystic strength. Now, because this rogue has been killed by Your nails, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 46
çré-vidyädharä ücuù
vidyäà påthag dhäraëayänuräddhäà
nyañedhad ajïo bala-vérya-dåptaù
sa yena saìkhye paçuvad dhatas taà
mäyä-nåsiàhaà praëatäù sma nityam
çré-vidyädharäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Vidyädhara-loka prayed; vidyäm—mystic formulas (by which one can appear and disappear); påthak—separately; dhäraëayä—by various meditations within the mind; anuräddhäm—attained; nyañedhat—stopped; ajïaù—this fool; bala-vérya-dåptaù—puffed up by bodily strength and his ability to conquer anyone; saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); yena—by whom; saìkhye—in battle; paçu-vat—exactly like an animal; hataù—killed; tam—unto Him; mäyä-nåsiàham—appearing as Lord Nåsiàhadeva by the influence of His own energy; praëatäù—fallen; sma—certainly; nityam—eternally.
The inhabitants of Vidyädhara-loka prayed: Our acquired power to appear and disappear in various ways according to varieties of meditation was banned by that foolish Hiraëyakaçipu because of his pride in his superior bodily strength and his ability to conquer others. Now the Supreme Personality of Godhead has killed him just as if the demon were an animal. Unto that supreme pastime form of Lord Nåsiàhadeva, we eternally offer our respectful obeisances.
TEXT 47
çré-nägä ücuù
yena päpena ratnäni
stré-ratnäni håtäni naù
tad-vakñaù-päöanenäsäà
dattänanda namo 'stu te
çré-nägäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Nägaloka, who look like serpents, said; yena—by which person; päpena—the most sinful (Hiraëyakaçipu); ratnäni—the jewels on our heads; stré-ratnäni—beautiful wives; håtäni—taken away; naù—our; tat—his; vakñaù-päöanena—by the piercing of the chest; äsäm—of all the women (who were kidnapped); datta-änanda—O Lord, You are the source of the pleasure; namaù—our respectful obeisances; astu—let there be; te—unto You.
The inhabitants of Nägaloka said: The most sinful Hiraëyakaçipu took away all the jewels on our hoods and all our beautiful wives. Now, since his chest has been pierced by Your nails, You are the source of all pleasure to our wives. Thus we together offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 48
çré-manava ücuù
manavo vayaà tava nideça-käriëo
ditijena deva paribhüta-setavaù
bhavatä khalaù sa upasaàhåtaù prabho
karaväma te kim anuçädhi kiìkarän
çré-manavaù ücuù—all the Manus offered their respectful obeisances by saying; manavaù—the leaders of the universal affairs (especially in connection with giving knowledge to humanity about how to live lawfully under the protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead); vayam—we; tava—of Your Lordship; nideça-käriëaù—the carriers of the orders; diti-jena—by Hiraëyakaçipu, the son of Diti; deva—O Lord; paribhüta—disregarded; setavaù—whose laws of morality concerning the varëäçrama system in human society; bhavatä—by Your Lordship; khalaù—the most envious rascal; saù—he; upasaàhåtaù—killed; prabho—O Lord; karaväma—shall we do; te—Your; kim—what; anuçädhi—please direct; kiìkarän—Your eternal servants.
All the Manus offered their prayers as follows: As Your order carriers, O Lord, we, the Manus, are the law-givers for human society, but because of the temporary supremacy of this great demon, Hiraëyakaçipu, our laws for maintaining varëäçrama-dharma were destroyed. O Lord, now that You have killed this great demon, we are in our normal condition. Kindly order us, Your eternal servants, what to do now.
TEXT 49
çré-prajäpataya ücuù
prajeçä vayaà te pareçäbhisåñöä
na yena prajä vai såjämo niñiddhäù
sa eña tvayä bhinna-vakñä nu çete
jagan-maìgalaà sattva-mürte 'vatäraù
çré-prajäpatayaù ücuù—the great personalities who created the various living beings offered their prayers by saying; prajä-éçäù—the prajäpatis created by Lord Brahmä, who have created generations of living entities; vayam—we; te—of You; para-éça—O Supreme Lord; abhisåñöäù—born; na—not; yena—by whom (Hiraëyakaçipu); prajäù—living entities; vai—indeed; såjämaù—we create; niñiddhäù—being forbidden; saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); eñaù—this; tvayä—by You; bhinna-vakñäù—whose chest has been split; nu—indeed; çete—lies down; jagat-maìgalam—for the auspiciousness of the whole world; sattva-mürte—in this transcendental form of pure goodness; avatäraù—this incarnation.
The prajäpatis offered their prayers as follows: O Supreme Lord, Lord of even Brahmä and Çiva, we, the prajäpatis, were created by You to execute Your orders, but we were forbidden by Hiraëyakaçipu to create any more good progeny. Now the demon is lying dead before us, his chest pierced by You. Let us therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto You, whose incarnation in this form of pure goodness is meant for the welfare of the entire universe.
TEXT 50
çré-gandharvä ücuù
vayaà vibho te naöa-näöya-gäyakä
yenätmasäd vérya-balaujasä kåtäù
sa eña néto bhavatä daçäm imäà
kim utpathasthaù kuçaläya kalpate
çré-gandharväù ücuù—the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka (who are usually engaged as musicians of the heavenly planets) said; vayam—we; vibho—O Lord; te—Your; naöa-näöya-gäyakäù—dancers and singers in dramatic performances; yena—by whom; ätmasät—under subjection; vérya—of his valor; bala—and bodily strength; ojasä—by the influence; kåtäù—made (brought); saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); eñaù—this; nétaù—brought; bhavatä—by Your Lordship; daçäm imäm—to this condition; kim—whether; utpathasthaù—anyone who is an upstart; kuçaläya—for auspiciousness; kalpate—is capable.
The inhabitants of Gandharvaloka prayed: Your Lordship, we ever engage in Your service by dancing and singing in dramatic performances, but this Hiraëyakaçipu, by the influence of his bodily strength and valor, brought us under his subjugation. Now he has been brought to this low condition by Your Lordship. What benefit can result from the activities of such an upstart as Hiraëyakaçipu?
TEXT 51
çré-cäraëä ücuù
hare taväìghri-paìkajaà
bhaväpavargam äçritäù
yad eña sädhu-håc-chayas
tvayäsuraù samäpitaù
çré-cäraëäù ücuù—the inhabitants of the Cäraëa planet said; hare—O Lord; tava—Your; aìghri-paìkajam—lotus feet; bhava-apavargam—the only shelter for becoming free from the contamination of material existence; äçritäù—sheltered at; yat—because; eñaù—this; sädhu-håt-çayaù—stake in the hearts of all honest persons; tvayä—by Your Lordship; asuraù—the demon (Hiraëyakaçipu); samäpitaù—finished.
The inhabitants of the Cäraëa planet said: O Lord, because You have destroyed the demon Hiraëyakaçipu, who was always a stake in the hearts of all honest men, we are now relieved, and we eternally take shelter of Your lotus feet, which award the conditioned soul liberation from materialistic contamination.
TEXT 52
çré-yakñä ücuù
vayam anucara-mukhyäù karmabhis te mano-jïais
ta iha diti-sutena präpitä vähakatvam
sa tu jana-paritäpaà tat-kåtaà jänatä te
narahara upanétaù païcatäà païca-viàça
çré-yakñäù ücuù—the inhabitants of the Yakña planet prayed; vayam—we; anucara-mukhyäù—the chief among Your many servants; karmabhiù—by services; te—unto You; mano-jïaiù—very pleasing; te—they; iha—at the present moment; diti-sutena—by Hiraëyakaçipu, the son of Diti; präpitäù—forced to engage as; vähakatvam—the palanquin carriers; saù—he; tu—but; jana-paritäpam—the miserable condition of everyone; tat-kåtam—caused by him; jänatä—knowing; te—by You; nara-hara—O Lord in the form of Nåsiàha; upanétaù—is put to; païcatäm—death; païca-viàça—O twenty-fifth principle (the controller of the other twenty-four elements).
The inhabitants of Yakñaloka prayed: O controller of the twenty-four elements, we are considered the best servants of Your Lordship because of rendering services pleasing to You, yet we engaged as palanquin carriers by the order of Hiraëyakaçipu, the son of Diti. O Lord in the form of Nåsiàhadeva, You know how this demon gave trouble to everyone, but now You have killed him, and his body is mixing with the five material elements.
TEXT 53
çré-kimpuruñä ücuù
vayaà kimpuruñäs tvaà tu
mahä-puruña éçvaraù
ayaà kupuruño nañöo
dhik-kåtaù sädhubhir yadä
çré-kimpuruñäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Kimpuruña-loka said; vayam—we; kimpuruñäù—the inhabitants of Kimpuruña-loka, or insignificant living entities; tvam—Your Lordship; tu—however; mahä-puruñaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; éçvaraù—the supreme controller; ayam—this; ku-puruñaù—most sinful person, Hiraëyakaçipu; nañöaù—slain; dhik-kåtaù—being condemned; sädhubhiù—by the saintly persons; yadä—when.
The inhabitants of Kimpuruña-loka said: We are insignificant living entities, and You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller. Therefore how can we offer suitable prayers unto You? When this demon was condemned by devotees because they were disgusted with him, he was then killed by You.
TEXT 54
çré-vaitälikä ücuù
sabhäsu satreñu tavämalaà yaço
gétvä saparyäà mahatéà labhämahe
yas täm anaiñéd vaçam eña durjano
dviñöyä hatas te bhagavan yathämayaù
çré-vaitälikäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Vaitälika-loka said; sabhäsu—in great assemblies; satreñu—in the arenas of sacrifice; tava—Your; amalam—without any spot of material contamination; yaçaù—reputation; gétvä—singing; saparyäm—respectful position; mahatém—great; labhämahe—we achieved; yaù—he who; täm—that (respectful position); anaiñét—brought under; vaçam—his control; eñaù—this; durjanaù—crooked person; dviñöyä—by great fortune; hataù—killed; te—by You; bhagavan—O Lord; yathä—exactly like; ämayaù—a disease.
The inhabitants of Vaitälika-loka said: Dear Lord, because of chanting Your spotless glories in great assemblies and arenas of sacrifice, we were accustomed to great respect from everyone. This demon, however, usurped that position. Now, to our great fortune, You have killed this great demon, exactly as one cures a chronic disease.
TEXT 55
çré-kinnarä ücuù
vayam éça kinnara-gaëäs tavänugä
ditijena viñöim amunänukäritäù
bhavatä hare sa våjino 'vasädito
narasiàha nätha vibhaväya no bhava
çré-kinnaräù ücuù—the inhabitants of the Kinnara planet said; vayam—we; éça—O Lord; kinnara-gaëäù—the inhabitants of the Kinnara planet; tava—Your; anugäù—faithful servants; diti-jena—by the son of Diti; viñöim—service without remuneration; amunä—by that; anukäritäù—caused to perform; bhavatä—by You; hare—O Lord; saù—he; våjinaù—most sinful; avasäditaù—destroyed; narasiàha—O Lord Nåsiàhadeva; nätha—O master; vibhaväya—for the happiness and opulence; naù—of us; bhava—You please be.
The Kinnaras said: O supreme controller, we are ever-existing servants of Your Lordship, but instead of rendering service to You, we were engaged by this demon in his service, constantly and without remuneration. This sinful man has now been killed by You. Therefore, O Lord Nåsiàhadeva, our master, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You. Please continue to be our patron.
TEXT 56
çré-viñëu-pärñadä ücuù
adyaitad dhari-nara-rüpam adbhutaà te
dåñöaà naù çaraëada sarva-loka-çarma
so 'yaà te vidhikara éça vipra-çaptas
tasyedaà nidhanam anugrahäya vidmaù
çré-viñëu-pärñadäù ücuù—the associates of Lord Viñëu in Vaikuëöhaloka said; adya—today; etat—this; hari-nara—of half lion and half human being; rüpam—form; adbhutam—very wonderful; te—Your; dåñöam—seen; naù—of us; çaraëa-da—the everlasting bestower of shelter; sarva-loka-çarma—which brings good fortune to all the various planets; saù—he; ayam—this; te—of Your Lordship; vidhikaraù—order carrier (servant); éça—O Lord; vipra-çaptaù—being cursed by the brähmaëas; tasya—of him; idam—this; nidhanam—killing; anugrahäya—for the special favor; vidmaù—we understand.
The associates of Lord Viñëu in Vaikuëöha offered this prayer: O Lord, our supreme giver of shelter, today we have seen Your wonderful form as Lord Nåsiàhadeva, meant for the good fortune of all the world. O Lord, we can understand that Hiraëyakaçipu was the same Jaya who engaged in Your service but was cursed by brähmaëas and who thus received the body of a demon. We understand that his having now been killed is Your special mercy upon him.
Song Offered by Prahlada Maharaja to Pacify Lord Nrsimha (SB 7.10.8-50)

TEXT 8
indriyäëi manaù präëa
ätmä dharmo dhåtir matiù
hréù çrés tejaù småtiù satyaà
yasya naçyanti janmanä
indriyäëi—the senses; manaù—the mind; präëaù—the life air; ätmä—the body; dharmaù—religion; dhåtiù—patience; matiù—intelligence; hréù—shyness; çréù—opulence; tejaù—strength; småtiù—memory; satyam—truthfulness; yasya—of which lusty desires; naçyanti—are vanquished; janmanä—from the very beginning of birth.
O my Lord, because of lusty desires from the very beginning of one's birth, the functions of one's senses, mind, life, body, religion, patience, intelligence, shyness, opulence, strength, memory and truthfulness are vanquished.
TEXT 9
vimuïcati yadä kämän
mänavo manasi sthitän
tarhy eva puëòarékäkña
bhagavattväya kalpate
vimuïcati—gives up; yadä—whenever; kämän—all material desires; mänavaù—human society; manasi—within the mind; sthitän—situated; tarhi—at that time only; eva—indeed; puëòaréka-akña—O lotus-eyed Lord; bhagavattväya—to be equally as opulent as the Lord; kalpate—becomes eligible.
O my Lord, when a human being is able to give up all the material desires in his mind, he becomes eligible to possess wealth and opulence like Yours.
TEXT 10
oà namo bhagavate tubhyaà
puruñäya mahätmane
haraye 'dbhuta-siàhäya
brahmaëe paramätmane
oà—O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Person; tubhyam—unto You; puruñäya—unto the Supreme Person; mahä-ätmane—unto the Supreme Soul, or the Supersoul; haraye—unto the Lord, who vanquishes all the miseries of devotees; adbhuta-siàhäya—unto Your wonderful lionlike form as Nåsiàhadeva; brahmaëe—unto the Supreme Brahman; parama-ätmane—unto the Supreme Soul.
O my Lord, full of six opulences, O Supreme Person! O Supreme Soul, killer of all miseries! O Supreme Person in the form of a wonderful lion and man, let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 11
çré-bhagavän uväca
naikäntino me mayi jätv ihäçiña
äçäsate 'mutra ca ye bhavad-vidhäù
tathäpi manvantaram etad atra
daityeçvaräëäm anubhuìkñva bhogän
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; na—not; ekäntinaù—unalloyed, without desires except for the one desire for devotional service; me—from Me; mayi—unto Me; jätu—any time; iha—within this material world; äçiñaù—benedictions; äçäsate—intent desire; amutra—in the next life; ca—and; ye—all such devotees who; bhavat-vidhäù—like you; tathäpi—still; manvantaram—the duration of time until the end of the life of one Manu; etat—this; atra—within this material world; daitya-éçvaräëäm—of the opulences of materialistic persons; anubhuìkñva—you can enjoy; bhogän—all material opulences.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahläda, a devotee like you never desires any kind of material opulences, either in this life or in the next. Nonetheless, I order you to enjoy the opulences of the demons in this material world, acting as their king until the end of the duration of time occupied by Manu.
TEXT 12
kathä madéyä juñamäëaù priyäs tvam
äveçya mäm ätmani santam ekam
sarveñu bhüteñv adhiyajïam éçaà
yajasva yogena ca karma hinvan
kathäù—messages or instructions; madéyäù—given by Me; juñamäëaù—always hearing or contemplating; priyäù—extremely pleasing; tvam—yourself; äveçya—being fully absorbed in; mäm—Me; ätmani—within the core of your heart; santam—existing; ekam—one (the same Supreme Soul); sarveñu—in all; bhüteñu—living entities; adhiyajïam—the enjoyer of all ritualistic ceremonies; éçam—the Supreme Lord; yajasva—worship; yogena—by bhakti-yoga, devotional service; ca—also; karma—fruitive activities; hinvan—giving up.
It does not matter that you are in the material world. You should always, continuously, hear the instructions and messages given by Me and always be absorbed in thought of Me, for I am the Supersoul existing in the core of everyone's heart. Therefore, give up fruitive activities and worship Me.
TEXT 13
bhogena puëyaà kuçalena päpaà
kalevaraà käla-javena hitvä
kértià viçuddhäà sura-loka-gétäà
vitäya mäm eñyasi mukta-bandhaù
bhogena—by feelings of material happiness; puëyam—pious activities or their results; kuçalena—by acting piously (devotional service is the best of all pious activities); päpam—all kinds of reactions to impious activities; kalevaram—the material body; käla-javena—by the most powerful time factor; hitvä—giving up; kértim—reputation; viçuddhäm—transcendental or fully purified; sura-loka-gétäm—praised even in the heavenly planets; vitäya—spreading all through the universe; mäm—unto Me; eñyasi—you will come back; mukta-bandhaù—being liberated from all bondage.
My dear Prahläda, while you are in this material world you will exhaust all the reactions of pious activity by feeling happiness, and by acting piously you will neutralize impious activity. Because of the powerful time factor, you will give up your body, but the glories of your activities will be sung in the upper planetary systems, and being fully freed from all bondage, you will return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 14
ya etat kértayen mahyaà
tvayä gétam idaà naraù
tväà ca mäà ca smaran käle
karma-bandhät pramucyate
yaù—anyone who; etat—this activity; kértayet—chants; mahyam—unto Me; tvayä—by you; gétam—prayers offered; idam—this; naraù—human being; tväm—you; ca—as well as; mäm ca—Me also; smaran—remembering; käle—in due course of time; karma-bandhät—from the bondage of material activities; pramucyate—becomes free.
One who always remembers your activities and My activities also, and who chants the prayers you have offered, becomes free, in due course of time, from the reactions of material activities.
TEXTS 15–17
çré-prahräda uväca
varaà varaya etat te
varadeçän maheçvara
yad anindat pitä me
tväm avidväàs teja aiçvaram
viddhämarñäçayaù säkñät
sarva-loka-guruà prabhum
bhrätå-heti måñä-dåñöis
tvad-bhakte mayi cäghavän
tasmät pitä me püyeta
durantäd dustaräd aghät
pütas te 'päìga-saàdåñöas
tadä kåpaëa-vatsala
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja said; varam—benediction; varaye—I pray; etat—this; te—from You; varada-éçät—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who offers benedictions even to such exalted demigods as Brahmä and Çiva; mahä-éçvara—O my Supreme Lord; yat—that; anindat—vilified; pitä—father; me—my; tväm—You; avidvän—without knowledge of; tejaù—strength; aiçvaram—supremacy; viddha—being polluted; amarña—with anger; äçayaù—within the heart; säkñät—directly; sarva-loka-gurum—unto the supreme spiritual master of all living beings; prabhum—unto the supreme master; bhrätå-hä—the killer of his brother; iti—thus; måñä-dåñöiù—falsely envious because of a false conception; tvat-bhakte—unto Your devotee; mayi—unto me; ca—and; agha-vän—who committed heavily sinful activities; tasmät—from that; pitä—father; me—my; püyeta—may be purified; durantät—very great; dustarät—difficult to pass over; aghät—from all sinful activities; pütaù—(although he was) purified; te—of You; apäìga—by the glance over him; saàdåñöaù—being looked at; tadä—at that time; kåpaëa-vatsala—O You who are merciful to the materialistic.
Prahläda Mahäräja said: O Supreme Lord, because You are so merciful to the fallen souls, I ask You for only one benediction. I know that my father, at the time of his death, had already been purified by Your glance upon him, but because of his ignorance of Your beautiful power and supremacy, he was unnecessarily angry at You, falsely thinking that You were the killer of his brother. Thus he directly blasphemed Your Lordship, the spiritual master of all living beings, and committed heavily sinful activities directed against me, Your devotee. I wish that he be excused for these sinful activities.
TEXT 18
çré-bhagavän uväca
triù-saptabhiù pitä pütaù
pitåbhiù saha te 'nagha
yat sädho 'sya kule jäto
bhavän vai kula-pävanaù
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; triù-saptabhiù—seven multiplied by three (that is to say, twenty-one); pitä—father; pütaù—purified; pitåbhiù—with your forefathers; saha—all together; te—your; anagha—O most sinless personality (Prahläda Mahäräja); yat—because; sädho—O great saintly person; asya—of this person; kule—in the dynasty; jätaù—took birth; bhavän—you; vai—indeed; kula-pävanaù—the purifier of the whole dynasty.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahläda, O most pure, O great saintly person, your father has been purified, along with twenty-one forefathers in your family. Because you were born in this family, the entire dynasty has been purified.
TEXT 19
yatra yatra ca mad-bhaktäù
praçäntäù sama-darçinaù
sädhavaù samudäcäräs
te püyante 'pi kékaöäù
yatra yatra—wherever and whenever; ca—also; mat-bhaktäù—My devotees; praçäntäù—extremely peaceful; sama-darçinaù—equipoised; sädhavaù—decorated with all good qualities; samudäcäräù—equally magnanimous; te—all of them; püyante—are purified; api—even; kékaöäù—a degraded country or the inhabitants of such a place.
Whenever and wherever there are peaceful, equipoised devotees who are well behaved and decorated with all good qualities, that place and the dynasties there, even if condemned, are purified.
TEXT 20
sarvätmanä na hiàsanti
bhüta-grämeñu kiïcana
uccävaceñu daityendra
mad-bhäva-vigata-spåhäù
sarva-ätmanä—in all respects, even in the modes of anger and jealousy; na—never; hiàsanti—they are envious; bhüta-grämeñu—among all species of life; kiïcana—toward any one of them; ucca-avaceñu—the lower and higher living entities; daitya-indra—O my dear Prahläda, King of the Daityas; mat-bhäva—because of devotional service unto Me; vigata—given up; spåhäù—all material modes of anger and greed.
My dear Prahläda, King of the Daityas, because of being attached to devotional service to Me, My devotee does not distinguish between lower and higher living entities. In all respects, he is never jealous of anyone.
TEXT 21
bhavanti puruñä loke
mad-bhaktäs tväm anuvratäù
bhavän me khalu bhaktänäà
sarveñäà pratirüpa-dhåk
bhavanti—become; puruñäù—persons; loke—in this world; mat-bhaktäù—My pure devotees; tväm—you; anuvratäù—following in your footsteps; bhavän—you; me—My; khalu—indeed; bhaktänäm—of all devotees; sarveñäm—in different mellows; pratirüpa-dhåk—tangible example.
Those who follow your example will naturally become My pure devotees. You are the best example of My devotee, and others should follow in your footsteps.
TEXT 22
kuru tvaà preta-kåtyäni
pituù pütasya sarvaçaù
mad-aìga-sparçanenäìga
lokän yäsyati suprajäù
kuru—perform; tvam—you; preta-kåtyäni—the ritualistic ceremony performed after death; pituù—of your father; pütasya—already purified; sarvaçaù—in all respects; mat-aìga—My body; sparçanena—by touching; aìga—My dear child; lokän—to planets; yäsyati—he will be elevated; su-prajäù—to become a devotee-citizen.
My dear child, your father has already been purified just by the touch of My body at the time of his death. Nonetheless, the duty of a son is to perform the çräddha ritualistic ceremony after his father's death so that his father may be promoted to a planetary system where he may become a good citizen and devotee.
TEXT 23
pitryaà ca sthänam ätiñöha
yathoktaà brahmavädibhiù
mayy äveçya manas täta
kuru karmäëi mat-paraù
pitryam—paternal; ca—also; sthänam—place, throne; ätiñöha—sit upon; yathä-uktam—as described; brahmavädibhiù—by the followers of Vedic civilization; mayi—unto Me; äveçya—being fully absorbed; manaù—the mind; täta—My dear boy; kuru—just execute; karmäëi—the regulative duties; mat-paraù—just for the sake of My work.
After performing the ritualistic ceremonies, take charge of your father's kingdom. Sit upon the throne and do not be disturbed by materialistic activities. Please keep your mind fixed upon Me. Without transgressing the injunctions of the Vedas, as a matter of formality you may perform your particular duties.
TEXT 24
çré-närada uväca
prahrädo 'pi tathä cakre
pitur yat sämparäyikam
yathäha bhagavän räjann
abhiñikto dvijätibhiù
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; prahrädaù—Prahläda Mahäräja; api—also; tathä—in that way; cakre—executed; pituù—of his father; yat—whatever; sämparäyikam—ritualistic ceremonies performed after death; yathä—even as; äha—order; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; räjan—O King Yudhiñöhira; abhiñiktaù—he was enthroned in the kingdom; dvi-jätibhiù—by the brähmaëas present.
Çré Närada Muni continued: Thus, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead ordered, Prahläda Mahäräja performed the ritualistic ceremonies for his father. O King Yudhiñöhira, he was then enthroned in the kingdom of Hiraëyakaçipu, as directed by the brähmaëas.
TEXT 25
prasäda-sumukhaà dåñövä
brahmä naraharià harim
stutvä vägbhiù paviträbhiù
präha devädibhir våtaù
prasäda-sumukham—whose face was bright because the Supreme Lord was pleased; dåñövä—seeing this situation; brahmä—Lord Brahmä; nara-harim—unto Lord Nåsiàhadeva; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; stutvä—offering prayers; vägbhiù—by transcendental words; paviträbhiù—without any material contamination; präha—addressed (the Lord); deva-ädibhiù—by other demigods; våtaù—surrounded.
Lord Brahmä, surrounded by the other demigods, was bright-faced because the Lord was pleased. Thus he offered prayers to the Lord with transcendental words.
TEXT 26
çré-brahmoväca
deva-deväkhilädhyakña
bhüta-bhävana pürvaja
diñöyä te nihataù päpo
loka-santäpano 'suraù
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; deva-deva—O my Lord, Lord of all the demigods; akhila-adhyakña—owner of the whole universe; bhüta-bhävana—O cause of all living entities; pürva-ja—O original Personality of Godhead; diñöyä—by Your example or because of our good fortune; te—by You; nihataù—killed; päpaù—most sinful; loka-santäpanaù—giving trouble to the entire universe; asuraù—the demon Hiraëyakaçipu.
Lord Brahmä said: O Supreme Lord of all lords, proprietor of the entire universe, O benedictor of all living entities, O original person [Ädi-puruña], because of our good fortune You have now killed this sinful demon, who was giving trouble to the entire universe.
TEXT 27
yo 'sau labdha-varo matto
na vadhyo mama såñöibhiù
tapo-yoga-balonnaddhaù
samasta-nigamän ahan
yaù—the person who; asau—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); labdha-varaù—being given the extraordinary benediction; mattaù—from me; na vadhyaù—not to be killed; mama såñöibhiù—by any living being created by me; tapaù-yoga-bala—by austerity, mystic power and strength; unnaddhaù—thus being very proud; samasta—all; nigamän—Vedic injunctions; ahan—disregarded, transgressed.
This demon, Hiraëyakaçipu, received from me the benediction that he would not be killed by any living being within my creation. With this assurance and with strength derived from austerities and mystic power, he became excessively proud and transgressed all the Vedic injunctions.
TEXT 28
diñöyä tat-tanayaù sädhur
mahä-bhägavato 'rbhakaù
tvayä vimocito måtyor
diñöyä tväà samito 'dhunä
diñöyä—by fortune; tat-tanayaù—his son; sädhuù—who is a great saintly person; mahä-bhägavataù—a great and exalted devotee; arbhakaù—although a child; tvayä—by Your Lordship; vimocitaù—released; måtyoù—from the clutches of death; diñöyä—also by great fortune; tväm samitaù—perfectly under Your shelter; adhunä—now.
By great fortune, Hiraëyakaçipu's son Prahläda Mahäräja has now been released from death, for although he is a child, he is an exalted devotee. Now he is fully under the protection of Your lotus feet.
TEXT 29
etad vapus te bhagavan
dhyäyataù paramätmanaù
sarvato goptå santräsän
måtyor api jighäàsataù
etat—this; vapuù—body; te—Your; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; dhyäyataù—those who meditate upon; parama-ätmanaù—of the Supreme Person; sarvataù—from everywhere; goptå—the protector; santräsät—from all kinds of fear; måtyoù api—even from fear of death; jighäàsataù—if one is envied by an enemy.
My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are the Supreme Soul. If one meditates upon Your transcendental body, You naturally protect him from all sources of fear, even the imminent danger of death.
TEXT 30
çré-bhagavän uväca
maivaà vibho 'suräëäà te
pradeyaù padma-sambhava
varaù krüra-nisargäëäm
ahénäm amåtaà yathä
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead replied (to Brahmä); mä—do not; evam—thus; vibho—O great person; asuräëäm—unto the demons; te—by you; pradeyaù—bestow benedictions; padma-sambhava—O Lord Brahmä, born from the lotus flower; varaù—benediction; krüra-nisargäëäm—persons who are by nature very cruel and jealous; ahénäm—to snakes; amåtam—nectar or milk; yathä—just as.
The Personality of Godhead replied: My dear Lord Brahmä, O great lord born from the lotus flower, just as it is dangerous to feed milk to a snake, so it is dangerous to give benedictions to demons, who are by nature ferocious and jealous. I warn you not to give such benedictions to any demon again.
TEXT 31
çré-närada uväca
ity uktvä bhagavän räjaàs
tataç cäntardadhe hariù
adåçyaù sarva-bhütänäà
püjitaù parameñöhinä
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; iti uktvä—saying this; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; räjan—O King Yudhiñöhira; tataù—from that place; ca—also; antardadhe—disappeared; hariù—the Lord; adåçyaù—without being visible; sarva-bhütänäm—by all kinds of living entities; püjitaù—being worshiped; parameñöhinä—by Lord Brahmä.
Närada Muni continued: O King Yudhiñöhira, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is not visible to an ordinary human being, spoke in this way, instructing Lord Brahmä. Then, being worshiped by Brahmä, the Lord disappeared from that place.
TEXT 32
tataù sampüjya çirasä
vavande parameñöhinam
bhavaà prajäpatén devän
prahrädo bhagavat-kaläù
tataù—thereafter; sampüjya—worshiping; çirasä—by bowing the head; vavande—offered prayers; parameñöhinam—to Lord Brahmä; bhavam—to Lord Çiva; prajäpatén—to the great demigods entrusted with increasing the population; devän—to all the great demigods; prahrädaù—Prahläda Mahäräja; bhagavat-kaläù—influential parts of the Lord.
Prahläda Mahäräja then worshiped and offered prayers to all the demigods, such as Brahmä, Çiva and the Prajäpatis, who are all parts of the Lord.
TEXT 33
tataù kävyädibhiù särdhaà
munibhiù kamaläsanaù
daityänäà dänavänäà ca
prahrädam akarot patim
tataù—thereafter; kävya-ädibhiù—with Çukräcärya and others; särdham—and with; munibhiù—great saintly persons; kamala-äsanaù—Lord Brahmä; daityänäm—of all the demons; dänavänäm—of all the giants; ca—and; prahrädam—Prahläda Mahäräja; akarot—created; patim—the master or king.
Thereafter, along with Çukräcärya and other great saints, Lord Brahmä, whose seat is on the lotus flower, made Prahläda the king of all the demons and giants in the universe.
TEXT 34
pratinandya tato deväù
prayujya paramäçiñaù
sva-dhämäni yayü räjan
brahmädyäù pratipüjitäù
pratinandya—congratulating; tataù—thereafter; deväù—all the demigods; prayujya—having offered; parama-äçiñaù—exalted benedictions; sva-dhämäni—to their respective abodes; yayuù—returned; räjan—O King Yudhiñöhira; brahma-ädyäù—all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä; pratipüjitäù—being thoroughly worshiped (by Prahläda Mahäräja).
O King Yudhiñöhira, after all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä, were properly worshiped by Prahläda Mahäräja, they offered Prahläda their utmost benedictions and then returned to their respective abodes.
TEXT 35
evaà ca pärñadau viñëoù
putratvaà präpitau diteù
hådi sthitena hariëä
vaira-bhävena tau hatau
evam—in this way; ca—also; pärñadau—the two personal associates; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; putratvam—becoming the sons; präpitau—having gotten; diteù—of Diti; hådi—within the core of the heart; sthitena—being situated; hariëä—by the Supreme Lord; vaira-bhävena—by conceiving as an enemy; tau—both of them; hatau—were killed.
Thus the two associates of Lord Viñëu who had become Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu, the sons of Diti, were both killed. By illusion they had thought that the Supreme Lord, who is situated in everyone's heart, was their enemy.
TEXT 36
punaç ca vipra-çäpena
räkñasau tau babhüvatuù
kumbhakarëa-daça-grévau
hatau tau räma-vikramaiù
punaù—again; ca—also; vipra-çäpena—being cursed by the brähmaëas; räkñasau—the two Räkñasas; tau—both of them; babhüvatuù—incarnated as; kumbhakarëa-daça-grévau—known as Kumbhakarëa and the ten-headed Rävaëa (in their next birth); hatau—they also were killed; tau—both of them; räma-vikramaiù—by the extraordinary strength of Lord Rämacandra.
Being cursed by the brähmaëas, the same two associates took birth again as Kumbhakarëa and the ten-headed Rävaëa. These two Räkñasas were killed by Lord Rämacandra's extraordinary power.
TEXT 37
çayänau yudhi nirbhinna-
hådayau räma-çäyakaiù
tac-cittau jahatur dehaà
yathä präktana-janmani
çayänau—being laid down; yudhi—on the battlefield; nirbhinna—being pierced; hådayau—in the core of the heart; räma-çäyakaiù—by the arrows of Lord Rämacandra; tat-cittau—thinking or being conscious of Lord Rämacandra; jahatuù—gave up; deham—body; yathä—even as; präktana-janmani—in their previous births.
Pierced by the arrows of Lord Rämacandra, both Kumbhakarëa and Rävaëa lay on the ground and left their bodies, fully absorbed in thought of the Lord, just as they had in their previous births as Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 38
täv ihätha punar jätau
çiçupäla-karüña-jau
harau vairänubandhena
paçyatas te saméyatuù
tau—both of them; iha—in this human society; atha—in this way; punaù—again; jätau—took their births; çiçupäla—Çiçupäla; karüña-jau—Dantavakra; harau—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vaira-anubandhena—by the bondage of considering the Lord an enemy; paçyataù—were looking on; te—while you; saméyatuù—merged or went into the lotus feet of the Lord.
They both took birth again in human society as Çiçupäla and Dantavakra and continued in the same enmity toward the Lord. It is they who merged into the body of the Lord in your presence.
TEXT 39
enaù pürva-kåtaà yat tad
räjänaù kåñëa-vairiëaù
jahus te 'nte tad-ätmänaù
kéöaù peçaskåto yathä
enaù—this sinful activity (of blaspheming the Supreme Lord); pürva-kåtam—executed in previous births; yat—which; tat—that; räjänaù—kings; kåñëa-vairiëaù—always acting as enemies of Kåñëa; jahuù—gave up; te—all of them; ante—at the time of death; tat-ätmänaù—attaining the same spiritual body and form; kéöaù—a worm; peçaskåtaù—(captured by) a black drone; yathä—just like.
Not only Çiçupäla and Dantavakra but also many, many other kings who acted as enemies of Kåñëa attained salvation at the time of death. Because they thought of the Lord, they received spiritual bodies and forms the same as His, just as worms captured by a black drone obtain the same type of body as the drone.
TEXT 40
yathä yathä bhagavato
bhaktyä paramayäbhidä
nåpäç caidyädayaù sätmyaà
hares tac-cintayä yayuù
yathä yathä—just as; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktyä—by devotional service; paramayä—supreme; abhidä—incessantly thinking of such activities; nåpäù—kings; caidya-ädayaù—Çiçupäla, Dantavakra and others; sätmyam—the same form; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-cintayä—by constantly thinking of Him; yayuù—returned home, back to Godhead.
By devotional service, pure devotees who incessantly think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead receive bodies similar to His. This is known as särüpya-mukti. Although Çiçupäla, Dantavakra and other kings thought of Kåñëa as an enemy, they also achieved the same result.
TEXT 41
äkhyätaà sarvam etat te
yan mäà tvaà paripåñöavän
damaghoña-sutädénäà
hareù sätmyam api dviñäm
äkhyätam—described; sarvam—everything; etat—this; te—unto you; yat—whatever; mäm—unto me; tvam—you; paripåñöavän—inquired; damaghoña-suta-ädénäm—of the son of Damaghoña (Çiçupäla) and others; hareù—of the Lord; sätmyam—equal bodily features; api—even; dviñäm—although they were inimical.
Everything you asked me about how Çiçupäla and others attained salvation although they were inimical has now been explained to you by me.
TEXT 42
eñä brahmaëya-devasya
kåñëasya ca mahätmanaù
avatära-kathä puëyä
vadho yaträdi-daityayoù
eñä—all this; brahmaëya-devasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is worshiped by all brähmaëas; kåñëasya—of Kåñëa, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca—also; mahä-ätmanaù—the Supersoul; avatära-kathä—narrations about His incarnations; puëyä—pious, purifying; vadhaù—killing; yatra—wherein; ädi—in the beginning of the millennium; daityayoù—of the demons (Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu).
In this narration about Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, various expansions or incarnations of the Lord have been described, and the killing of the two demons Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu has also been described.
TEXTS 43–44
prahrädasyänucaritaà
mahä-bhägavatasya ca
bhaktir jïänaà viraktiç ca
yäthärthyaà cäsya vai hareù
sarga-sthity-apyayeçasya
guëa-karmänuvarëanam
parävareñäà sthänänäà
kälena vyatyayo mahän
prahrädasya—of Prahläda Mahäräja; anucaritam—characteristics (understood by reading or describing his activities); mahä-bhägavatasya—of the great and exalted devotee; ca—also; bhaktiù—devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jïänam—complete knowledge of the Transcendence (Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän); viraktiù—renunciation of material existence; ca—also; yäthärthyam—just to understand each of them perfectly; ca—and; asya—of this; vai—indeed; hareù—always in reference to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarga—of creation; sthiti—maintenance; apyaya—and annihilation; éçasya—of the master (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); guëa—of the transcendental qualities and opulences; karma—and activities;  anuvarëanam—description within the disciplic succession; para-avareñäm—of different types of living entities known as demigods and demons; sthänänäm—of the various planets or places to live; kälena—in due course of time; vyatyayaù—the annihilation of everything; mahän—although very great.
This narration describes the characteristics of the great and exalted devotee Prahläda Mahäräja, his staunch devotional service, his perfect knowledge, and his perfect detachment from material contamination. It also describes the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the cause of creation, maintenance and annihilation. Prahläda Mahäräja, in his prayers, has described the transcendental qualities of the Lord and has also described how the various abodes of the demigods and demons, regardless of how materially opulent, are destroyed by the mere direction of the Lord.
TEXT 45
dharmo bhägavatänäà ca
bhagavän yena gamyate
äkhyäne 'smin samämnätam
ädhyätmikam açeñataù
dharmaù—religious principles; bhägavatänäm—of the devotees; ca—and; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yena—by which; gamyate—one can understand; äkhyäne—in the narration; asmin—this; samämnätam—is perfectly described; ädhyätmikam—transcendence; açeñataù—without reservations.
The principles of religion by which one can actually understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are called bhägavata-dharma. In this narration, therefore, which deals with these principles, actual transcendence is properly described.
TEXT 46
ya etat puëyam äkhyänaà
viñëor véryopabåàhitam
kértayec chraddhayä çrutvä
karma-päçair vimucyate
yaù—anyone who; etat—this; puëyam—pious; äkhyänam—narration; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; vérya—the supreme power; upabåàhitam—in which is described; kértayet—chants or repeats; çraddhayä—with great faith; çrutvä—after properly hearing (from the right source); karma-päçaiù—from the bondage of fruitive activities; vimucyate—becomes liberated.
One who hears and chants this narration about the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, is certainly liberated from material bondage without fail.
TEXT 47
etad ya ädi-puruñasya mågendra-léläà
daityendra-yütha-pa-vadhaà prayataù paöheta
daityätmajasya ca satäà pravarasya puëyaà
çrutvänubhävam akuto-bhayam eti lokam
etat—this narration; yaù—anyone who; ädi-puruñasya—of the original Personality of Godhead; måga-indra-léläm—pastimes as a lion and human being combined; daitya-indra—of the king of the demons; yütha-pa—as strong as an elephant; vadham—the killing; prayataù—with great attention; paöheta—reads; daitya-ätma-jasya—of Prahläda Mahäräja, the son of the demon; ca—also; satäm—among elevated devotees; pravarasya—the best; puëyam—pious; çrutvä—hearing; anubhävam—the activities; akutaù-bhayam—where there is no fear anywhere or at any time; eti—reaches; lokam—the spiritual world.
Prahläda Mahäräja was the best among exalted devotees. Anyone who with great attention hears this narration concerning the activities of Prahläda Mahäräja, the killing of Hiraëyakaçipu, and the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nåsiàhadeva, surely reaches the spiritual world, where there is no anxiety.
TEXT 48
yüyaà nå-loke bata bhüri-bhägä
lokaà punänä munayo 'bhiyanti
yeñäà gåhän ävasatéti säkñäd
güòhaà paraà brahma manuñya-liìgam
yüyam—all of you (the Päëòavas); nå-loke—within this material world; bata—however; bhüri-bhägäù—extremely fortunate; lokam—all the planets; punänäù—who can purify; munayaù—great saintly persons; abhiyanti—almost always come to visit; yeñäm—of whom; gåhän—the house; ävasati—resides in; iti—thus; säkñät—directly; güòham—very confidential; param brahma—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; manuñya-liìgam—appearing just like a human being.
Närada Muni continued: My dear Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, all of you [the Päëòavas] are extremely fortunate, for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, lives in your palace just like a human being. Great saintly persons know this very well, and therefore they constantly visit this house.
TEXT 49
sa vä ayaà brahma mahad-vimågya-
kaivalya-nirväëa-sukhänubhütiù
priyaù suhåd vaù khalu mätuleya
ätmärhaëéyo vidhi-kåd guruç ca
saù—that (Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa); vä—also; ayam—this; brahma—the impersonal Brahman (which is an emanation from Kåñëa); mahat—by great personalities; vimågya—searched for; kaivalya—oneness; nirväëa-sukha—of transcendental happiness; anubhütiù—the source of practical experience; priyaù—very, very dear; suhåt—well-wisher; vaù—of you; khalu—indeed; mätuleyaù—the son of a maternal uncle; ätmä—exactly like body and soul together; arhaëéyaù—worshipable (because He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead); vidhi-kåt—(yet He serves you as) an order carrier; guruù—your supreme advisor; ca—as well.
The impersonal Brahman is Kåñëa Himself because Kåñëa is the source of the impersonal Brahman. He is the origin of the transcendental bliss sought by great saintly persons, yet He, the Supreme Person, is your most dear friend and constant well-wisher and is intimately related to you as the son of your maternal uncle. Indeed, He is always like your body and soul. He is worshipable, yet He acts as your servant and sometimes as your spiritual master.
TEXT 50
na yasya säkñäd bhava-padmajädibhé
rüpaà dhiyä vastutayopavarëitam
maunena bhaktyopaçamena püjitaù
prasédatäm eña sa sätvatäà patiù
na—not; yasya—of whom; säkñät—directly; bhava—Lord Çiva; padma-ja—Lord Brahmä (born from the lotus); ädibhiù—by them and others also; rüpam—the form; dhiyä—even by meditation; vastutayä—fundamentally; upavarëitam—described and perceived; maunena—by samädhi, deep meditation; bhaktyä—by devotional service; upaçamena—by renunciation; püjitaù—worshiped; prasédatäm—may He be pleased; eñaù—this; saù—He; sätvatäm—of the great devotees; patiù—the master.
Exalted persons like Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä could not properly describe the truth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. May the Lord, who is always worshiped as the protector of all devotees by great saints who observe vows of silence, meditation, devotional service and renunciation, be pleased with us.
