
Song 1

Text 1
āmi tomār duḥkher duḥkhī sukher sukhī,
tāi tomāre boli bhāi re
nitāi-er hāṭe giye (ore o bhāi)
nām enechi tomār tore
Text 1 I am your ever well-wisher-I become sad when you are sad, and I become happy when you are happy. This I sincerely proclaim to you, dear brothers! Having gone shopping at Lord Nityānanda's Marketplace, O brothers, I have brought back the holy names of the Lord just for your benefit.
Text 2
gaura-candra-mārkā korā, e hari-nām rase bhorā i,
nāme nāmīii paḍche dhorā, lao yadi vadana bhore'
Text 2 Being marked with the symbol of Lord Gaura-chandra, this Hari-nāma is succulent with divine mellows. If you would please take the holy name and always fill your mouths with it, then you shall realize that the name fully contains the Lord who is named.
Text 3
pāpa tāpa saba dūre jā'be, sāra-moy saṁsāra ha'be,
ār kono bhoy nāhi rabe, ḍubbe sukher pāthāre
Text 3 By chanting the holy name all your sinful reactions and material miseries will be cast far away. This world will become full of wonderful meaning for you, there will be no more fear, and you will be immersed in the ocean of pure joy.iii
Text 4
āmi kāṅgāl artha-hīna, nām enechi kore' ṛṇa,
dekhe āmāya ati dīna, śraddhā-mūlye deo dhore'
Text 4 I myself am now quite wretched and indeed destitute, for by arranging to bring the Lord's holy name here I have have fallen into great debt. Seeing me as a soul stricken with extreme poverty, please hand over to me the price of your faith.
Text 5
mūlya lo'ye tomār ṭhāi, mahā-janake dibo, bhāi,
je kichu tāy lābha pāi, rākhbo nijer bhāṇḍāre
Text 5 Taking your payment, O brothers, I will pass it along to the Mahājana (the proprietor, Lord Nityānanda.) Whatever small commission I may earn by conducting this transaction will be kept in my own storeroom.
Text 6
nadīyā-godrume thāki, cāṅda-bāul boliche ḍāki',
nām vinā ār sakala phāṅki, chāyābājī e saṁsāre"
Text 6 Living on the island of Godrum in the district of Nadīyā, this person named Chāṅd Bāul shouts and exclaims, "Other than the holy name of the Lord, all else in this world is simply false, like the illusions of a shadow-theater!"
Song 2

Text 1
dharma-pathe thāki' koro jīvana jāpana, bhāi
hari-nām koro sadā (ore o bhāi) hari vinā bandhu nāi
Text 1 O my dear brothers! Just pass your lives by adhering to the proper path of religiosity. Constantly chant Hari-nāma, O brothers, for other than Lord Hari you have no friend.
Text 2
je kono vyavasā dhori', jīvana nirvāha kori',
bolo mukhe hari hari, ei mātra bhikṣā cāi
Text 2 Accepting whatever livelihood that suits you, just live your life honestly. Fill your mouths with the constant chanting of "Hari! Hari!"-this is the only alms I beg of you.
Text 3
gaurāṅga-caraṇe majo, anya abhilāṣa-tyajo,
brajendra-nandane bhajo, tabe boḍo sukha pāi
Text 3 Remain absorbed in the lotus feet of Lord Gaurāṅga, renounce all other ambitions, and worship Vrajendra-Nandan.iv If you would do this much, then I will experience great pleasure.
Text 4
āmi cāṅda-bāul-dās, kori tava kṛpā āśa,
jānāiyā abhilāṣa, nityānanda-ājñā gāi
Text 4 I am Chāṅd Bāul Dās, and I wish only to receive your mercy. I have informed you of my desires, for I sing as I have been personally ordered by Lord Nityānanda.
Song 3

Text 1
āsalo kathā bolte ki
tomār kenthā-dhorā, kapni-āṅṭā-saba phāṅki
Text 1 O you have so much to say about being genuine! You are seen to be wrapped in an old tattered blanket and wearing a simple loincloth, just like a renounced ascetic-but in actuality all of this is simply pretentious.
Text 2
dharma-patnī tyaji' ghare, para-nārī-saṅga kore,
artha-lobhe dvāre dvāre phire, rākhle ki bākī
Text 2 Leaving your legally married wife at home, you go off and keep the company of the wives of others. In your greed for acquiring more and more wealth, you wander like a poor beggar from door to door, and you secretly keep so much surplus stored away.
Text 3
tumi guru bolcho vaṭe, sādhu-guru niṣkapaṭe,
kṛṣṇa-nām deno karṇa-puṭe, se ki emon hoy meki?
Text 3 You are quite confident in presenting yourself as a saintly spiritual master, and thus you are busily engaged in initiating innocent people by reciting Krishna-nāma into their ear-is this behavior not a great charade?
Text 4
jebā anya śikṣā dey, tā'ke ki 'guru' bolte hoy?
dudher phal to' ghole noy, bheve' citte dekho dekhi
Text 4 Can anyone be called a "guru" simply because he gives advice to others? A cook can never use whey in a recipe that calls for milk. Now think about this and just see what I see.
Text 5
śama-dama-titikṣā-bale, uparati, śraddhā ho'le,
tabe bheko cāṅda-bāul, bole, eṅcaḍe peke habe ki?
Text 5 On the strength of the true qualities of peacefulness, sense control, and tolerance, one's mundane desires are renounced as true spiritual faith arises. That being the case, the renunciant Chāṅd Bāul says, "What will become of your premature imitation of spiritual perfection?"
Song 4

Text 1
'bāul bāul' bolche sabe, hocche bāul kon janā
dāḍi-cūḍā dekhiye (o bhāi) korche jīvake vañcanā
Text 1 Everyone keeps using the word "Bāul, Bāul" as a cheap label, but who has actually become a Bāul (a pure devotee gone mad in genuine ecstatic love of God)? By merely exhibiting a long beard and a topknot upon your head, O brothers, you thus cheat many people.
Text 2
deha-tattva-jaḍer tattva,
tā'te ki chāḍāy māyār gartta,
cidānanda paramārtha, jānte to tāy pārbe nā
Text 2 Your philosophy of deha-tattvav-that the material body is supposedly divine-is simply a philosophy of dull matter (jaḍa-tattva). By maintaining such a doctrine is it possible to become freed from the womb of Māyā? The supreme goal of life is the attainment of eternally conscious bliss (chidānanda)-although you understand this well you will still be unable to enter transcendence.
Text 3
jadi bāul cāo re ho'te, tabe calo dharma-pathe,
yoṣit-saṅga sarva-mate chāḍo re maner vāsanā
Text 3 O! If you really want to become a genuine Bāul (a transcendental madman), then please proceed on the path of religiosity. O! Just abandon in all ways the mind's craving for the inappropriate company of women.
Text 4
veśa-bhūṣā-raṅga jata, chāḍi' nāme hao re rata,
nitāi-cāṅder anugata, hao chāḍi' sab durvāsanā
Text 4 O! Abandoning the performance of adorning yourself with dramatic clothing and ornaments in imitation of Lord Krishna, may you become attached to chanting His pure holy names. May you become the loyal follower of Nitāi Chāṅda, thereby renouncing all evil obsessions.
Text 5
mukhe 'hare kṛṣṇa' bolo, chāḍo re bhāi kathār chala,
nām vinā to' su-sambala, cāṅda-bāul ār dekhe nā
Text 5 O my dear brothers! Completely giving up your clever manipulative speech, just fill your mouths with the chanting of "Hare Krishna!" Chāṅd Bāul sees no means of support other than the abundant resource of the Lord's holy name.
Song 5

Text 1
mānuṣa-bhajan korcho, o bhāi, bhāver gān dhore'
gupta kore' rākhcho bhālo vyakta ha'be yamer ghare
Text 1 O my dear brothers! You devotedly engage in the worship of the material bodies of human beings, and yet you dare to sing songs about ecstatic spiritual emotions (bhāva). You expertly conceal your own secret activities, but all of them will be fully exposed in Yamarāja's court.
Text 2
meye hijḍe, puruṣa khojā, tabe to' hoy karttā-bhajā,
ei chale korcho majā, maner prati cokha ṭhere'
Text 2 Considering women to be hermaphrodites and men to be eunuchs makes one a member of the Karttā-bhajā sect. On the pretext of this deviant thinking you engage in mundane sense gratification, thus deluding even your own minds.
Text 3
'guru satya' bolcho mukhe, ācho to, bhāi, jaḍer sukhe,
saṅga tomār bahirmukhe, śuddha ha'be kemon kore?
Text 3 Although your mouths proclaim "the guru is reality," O brothers, you revel in mundane sense pleasures.vi You freely associate with envious non-devotees-how then will you ever become purified?
Text 4
yoṣit-saṅga-artha-lobhe, maje to' jīva citta-kṣobhe,
bāule ki se-sab śobhe, āguna dekhe' phaḍiṁ mare
Text 4 The heart of the jīva becomes greatly agitated by absorption in the association of materialistic women as well as greed for wealth-does a true Bāul become attracted by the glitter of these worldly things?vii A cricket is attracted by a flame and jumps straight into it, thereby meeting death.
Text 5
cāṅda-bāul minati kori' bole,-o-sab parihari',
śuddha-bhāve bolo 'hari', jā'be bhava-sāgara-pāre
Text 5 Chāṅd Bāul very humbly suggests, "Giving up all these degrading things, please chant the name of Hari in a purified manner. Then you will surely cross beyond the ocean of material suffering."
Song 6

Text 1
eo to' eka kalir celā
māthā neḍā kapni parā, tilak nāke, galāy mālā
Text 1 Here is just another disciple of Kali-yuga. He keeps his head shaved, wears a loincloth, tilak on his nose and tulasī beads around his neck.
Text 2
dekhte vaiṣṇaver mata, āsalo śākta kājer belā
sahaja-bhajan korchena māmu,
saṅge lo'ye parer bālā
Text 2 By looks he appears to be a Vaiṣṇava, but in actuality his conduct is that of a śākta, one who worships the principle of material energy in order to enjoy her. He engages in sahaja-bhajan (so-called "natural worship"), but does so by posing as "uncle" to the children of others, and then stealthily taking the illicit association of their daughters.
Text 3
sakhī-bhāve bhajchena tā're, nije ho'ye nanda-lālā
kṛṣṇa-dāser kathār chale mahā-janake dicchena śalā
Text 3 Accepting these young girls as sakhīs (Rādhā's gopī friends), he fancies himself to be the Son of Nanda. By the deceptive lecturing about how everyone should become Kṛṣṇa-dāsa (the servant of himself as "Kṛṣṇa"), this disciple of Kali-yuga thus hurls a sharp spear at the true devotees of the Lord.viii
Text 4
nava-rasika āpane māni' khācchena ābār mana-kolā
bāul bole dohāi, o bhāi, dūra koro e līlā-khelā
Text 4 Giving artificial recognition to nava-rasika (the nine relishers), he thus eats and enjoys the bananas of his own mental fabrications. Chāṅd Bāul says, "O my dear brothers! Desist from this bogus imitation of the Lord's amorous sports."ix
Song 7

Text 1
(mana āmār) huṅsā'r theko, bhūlo' nāko,
śuddha sahaja tattva-dhane
noile māyār vaśe, avaśeṣe, kāṅdte ha'be ciro-dine
Text 1 O my dear mind! Please be alert and cautious-do not forget the treasure that is the principle of śuddha sahaja tattva (pure natural truth as opposed to bogus sahajiyā tendency). Otherwise ultimately in the grip of Māyā you will perpetually weep.
Text 2
śuddha-jīve jaḍa nāi bhāi, ṭhika bujho tāi,
nije sakhī (se) vṛndāvane
se jakhan kṛṣṇa-candre bhaje, sukhete maje,
madhura-rase anukṣaṇe
Text 2 The pure spirit soul is not material, O brother-understand this correctly-but is actually a female sakhī living in Vṛndāvana. When the soul worships her Lord Kṛṣṇa-candra in this mood, then she becomes immersed in pure happiness, incessantly tasting the sweetness of the madhura-rasa.
Text 3
jada-dehe tā'r sādhana-bhakti, jñāna-virakti,
deher yātrā dharma-bhāve
se gṛhe thāke, bane bā thāke, majiye ḍāke,
('kṛṣṇa') bole' eka-mane
Text 3 While still living within the material body, she engages in sādhana-bhakti (regulated devotional service), developing detachment through the cultivation of jñāna (transcendental knowledge), and thus passes life in accordance with religious principles. Such a devotee lives either at home or in the forest, and remains engrossed in calling out the name "Kṛṣṇa!" with single-minded diligence.
Text 4
eke-i to' boli sahaja-bhajan, śuddha-mana,
kṛṣṇa pā'bār eka upāya
ihā chāḍi' je āropa kore, sei to' mare,
tā'r to' nāhi bhajan hoy
Text 4 Verily this is called sahaja-bhajan, or natural worship. It is conducted with a purified mind, and is the one and only means for attaining Kṛṣṇa. Whoever deviates from this process by imposing their own concocted philosophy indeed perishes their activities are not bhajan.
Text 5
cāṅda-bāuler e viśvās, choṭa haridās,
ekaṭu kevala vipathe cale'
śacī-suter kṛpāy, dūra ho'ye, hāy,
nā pāy ār gaura-caraṇe
Text 5 This is the conviction of Chāṅd Bāul. The devotee of Lord Chaitanya named Choṭa Haridāsa somehow embarked on an improper path by the mercy of the Son of Mother Śacī, he was cast away, alas, and did not again attain the lotus feet of Gaurāṅga.x
Song 8

Text 1
maner mālā japbi jakhan, mana,
keno korbi bāhya visarjana
mane mane bhajan jakhan hoy,
prema uthle paḍe' bāhya-dehe vyāpta ho'ye roy
ābār dehe care, japāy kore, dharāy mālā anukṣaṇa
Text 1 My dear mind, when you chant japa on the mālā within your mind, why do you cease the actions of chanting japa externally? When one performs bhajan within the mind, and prema factually arises internally, then the external body also becomes pervaded by those symptoms. Therefore the body rocks and sways, while one incessantly turns their beads in chanting japa.
Text 2
je vyāṭā bhaṇḍa-tāpasa hoy,
baka-biḍāla dekhā'ye bāhya ninde atiśoy
nije juta pe'le kāminī-kanaka kore sadā saṁghaṭana
Text 2 This improper form of mental chanting is the tendency of the pretentious so-called renunciants. As displayed in the fables of the crane and cat, such renunciation is extremely contemptible.xi Although such a trait is shown externally, whenever one gains an opportunity to enjoy women and wealth he continually indulges.
Text 3
 se vyāṭār bhitora phakkākār,
bāhya-sādhana-nindā boi ār āche kibā tā'r
(nijer) mana bhālo dekhā-te giye ninde sādhu-ācaraṇa
Text 3 Inside such a man is merely an empty cavity of deceit. What does he have to express other than direct blasphemy of the process of executing external sādhana-bhakti? He thus makes a show of his own mental concoctions as being supposedly "superior" while he openly condemns the activities of the true sādhus.
Text 4
śuddha kori' bhitora bāhira, bhāi,
hari-nām korte thāko, tarke kāj nāi,
(śuṣka) tomār tarka korte jīvana jā'be
cāṅda-bāul tāy duḥkhī ho'no
Text 4 O dear brother! Purify yourself both internally and externally. Stay engaged in chanting Hari-nāma, instead of simply babbling stubbornly with controversial attitudes. When you pass your life consumed with dry arguments, then Chāṅd Bāul becomes very sad.
Song 9

Text 1
ghare bose' bāul hao re mana,
keno korbi duṣṭa ācaraṇa
Text 1 O my dear mind! May you become a transcendentally maddened Bāul while remaining at home. Why do you engage in wicked activities?
Text 2
mane mane rākhbi bāul-bhāva,
saṅga chāḍi' dharma-bhāve korbi viṣaya lābha
jīvana jāpana korbi, hari-nāmānande sarva-kṣaṇa
Text 2 You may keep the mood of a Bāul within your mind, and giving up improper association you will automatically obtain sense pleasures in accordance with religious principles. Thus you will pass your life while every moment experiencing the bliss of Hari-nāma.
Text 3
jata-dina hṛdoy-śodhana noy,
ghara chāḍle pare 'markaṭa-vairāgī' tā're koy
hṛdoy-doṣe ripur bośe, pade pade tā'r patana
Text 3 One who renounces his home while his heart is not yet purified is called a markaṭa-vairāgī ("monkey-like renunciant").xii By the heart being full of offenses, acting under the control of the enemy, one sinks lower and lower at every step.
Text 4
eṅcaḍe-pākā vairāgī je hoy,
parer nārī lo'ye pāler godā ho'ye roy
(ābār) artha-lobhe dvāre dvāre kore nīcer ārādhana
Text 4 A renunciant immature in renunciation is one who swindles the wives of others and thus remains just like a fat monkey in charge of a harem of female monkeys. Furthermore, such a person goes from door to door out of greed to receive monetary donations. Thus he engages in the so-called worship of even fallen and degraded souls.
Text 5
ghare bose' pākāo nijer mana,
ār sakala-dina koro harir nām-saṅkīrtana
tabe cāṅd bāuler saṅge śeṣe korbi saṁsāra visarjana
Text 5 May your own mind become ripened with maturity while remaining at home. And just perform Hari-nāma saṅkīrtan each and every day. Then, in Chāṅd Bāul's company, you shall utterly renounce the material world.
Song 10

Text 1
balavān vairāgī ṭhākur, kintu gṛhīr madhye bāhādur
ābār kapni pore', mālā dhore',
bahena sevā-dāsīr dhūr
Text 1 You call yourself a very great and venerable renunciant, but factually you are even more of a sense-gratifier than those who are still householders. Furthermore, you wear a loincloth for show, and carry tulasī  beads in your hand-but like a beast of burden, you bear the load of trying to seduce various women into rendering your own service as sevā-dāsīs.xiii
Text 2
acyuta-gotra-abhimāne, bhikṣā korena sarva-sthāne,
ṭākā-payasā gaṇi' dhyāne dhāraṇā pracur
kori' cuṭkī bhikṣā, korena śikṣā, vaṇig-vṛtti piṇḍīśūr
Text 2 You beg alms everywhere you go, proudly advertising yourself as belonging to the disciplic lineage of the infallible Lord Krishna (acyuta-gotra)xiv-but in your show of deep meditation you simply concentrate on repeatedly calculating the total amount of your acquired rupees and milk. You are expert at begging on behalf of your belly, and you make a hoax of giving spiritual instructions to others, ultimately exhibiting the behavior of a businessman. You are a voracious glutton, accustomed to consuming huge quantities of food.
Text 3
bole tā're bāul-cāṅda, eṭā tomār galār phāṅda,
jīver ei aparādha śīghra koro dūr
yaji' gṛhīr dharma, su-svadharma,
śuddha koro antaḥpur
Text 3 Unto those of such nature, Chāṅd Bāul advises-this is the noose about your neck. Quickly cast afar these offenses unto other souls. Worship the Lord in the honest role of a householder, executing your proper occupational duty according to your own ability, and thus purify yourself internally.
Text 4
nyāsī-māna-āśā tyaji', dīna-bhāve kṛṣṇa bhaji',
svabhāva-gata dharma yaji', nāś' doṣāṅkur
tabe kṛṣṇa pā'be, duḥkha jā'be ha'be tumi su-catur
Text 4 Giving up your desire for being honored as a sannyāsī, just worship Kṛṣṇa in a humble state of mind. By performing your religious occupational duties according to your own natural propensity, the seedlings of your vices will be destroyed. Then you will attain Krishna, your unhappiness will go away, and you will become very intelligent.
Song 11

Text 1
keno bheker prayās?
hoy akāla-bheke sarva-nāś
ho'le citta-śuddhi, tattva-buddhi,
bheka āpani ese' hoy prakāś
Text 1 Why do you have so much desire for changing clothes? By prematurely changing clothes from those of a householder to those of a renunciant, all is destroyed.xv Only when one's consciousness is first purified, then the intelligence perceives transcendental truth, and finally the change of clothes will automatically come and be manifest in its time.
Text 2
bheka dhori' ceṣṭā kore, bheker jvālāya śeṣe mare,
neḍāneḍī chaḍāchaḍi, ākhaḍā beṅdhe' vās
akāla-kuṣmāṇḍa, jata bhaṇḍa, korche jīver sarva-nāś
Text 2 But when one makes an artificial endeavor to put on the clothes of an ascetic, then ultimately one perishes in the fever of that improper dress. Thus one becomes known as a member of the sect called Neḍā-Neḍī, going about the town begging alms, and living at the meeting place called ākharā.xvi Such a worthless person, just like a pumpkin grown uselessly at an unsuitable time of year, finally destroys everything that would be good for their own soul.xvii
Text 3
śuka, nārada, catuḥsana, bheker adhikārī ha'na,
tāṅ'der samān pārle ho'te bheke korbe āś
bolo temana buddhi, citta-śuddhi
ka'jana dharāya korche vās?
Text 3 The great sages Śukadeva Goswāmī, Nārada Muni, and the four Kumāras are truly qualified to wear the dress of renunciants. One may desire to wear a dress similar to theirs as soon as one becomes as renounced as they are. Tell me-who can develop the intelligence and purified heart of these great sages merely by wearing a particular garment?
Text 4
ātmānātma-suviveke, prema-latāya citta-bheke,
bhajana-sādhana-vāriseke koroha ullās
cāṅda-bāul bole, emana ho'le, ho'te pārbe kṛṣṇa-dās
Text 4 In full knowledge of what is the soul and what is not of the soul, wearing the dress of a renunciant within your heart, just make your creeper of prema bloom by sprinkling it with the rainfall of bhajan-sādhana. Chāṅd Bāul says, when this occurs, then you will actually become Lord Kṛṣṇa's servant.
Song 12

Text 1
ho'ye viṣaye āveśa, pe'le, mana, jātanā aśeṣa
chāḍi' rādhā-śyāme braja-dhāme,
bhugcho hethā nānā-kleśa
Text 1 My dear mind, you have brought unending trouble upon yourself under the sway of material sense gratification. Leaving the company of Rādhā-Śyāma in Vraja-dhāma, you have come to this material world and suffered a host of painful miseries.
Text 2
māyā-devīr kārāgāre, nijer karma-anusāre,
bhūter vegāra khāṭ-te khāṭ-te jīvana korcho śeṣa
kori' 'āmi-āmār', dehe ābār, korcho jaḍa rāga-dveṣa
Text 2 Trapped within the prison-house of Māyā-Devī, and tossed helplessly according to the urges of your past karma, your life has come to an end after slaving and slaving away at very difficult and mundane labor. Absorbed in the material body, thinking in terms of "I" and "mine," you experience only attraction and repulsion for dull material things.
Text 3
tumi śuddha cidānanda, kṛṣṇa-sevā tā'r ānanda,
pañca-bhūter hāte poḍe' hāy, ācho ekaṭī meṣa
ekhona sādhu-saṅge, cit-prasaṅge,
tomār upāya avaśeṣa
Text 3 You are actually composed of spiritually conscious bliss, whose only happiness is found in Kṛṣṇa-sevā. Alas, you have fallen into the hands of the five material elements (earth, water, fire, air, and ether), and have thus become just like an ignorant sheep who is helpless within their firm grip. But now your ultimate means of deliverance is to be found in the company of sādhus, discussing topics of the eternally conscious nature.
Text 4
kanaka-kāminī-saṅga, chāḍi' o bhāi miche raṅga,
grahaṇa koro bāul cāṅder śuddha upadeśa
tyaji' lukocuri, bāul-giri, śuddha-rase koro praveśa
Text 4 The association of materialistic women, as well as endeavors for accumulating wealth for the purpose of sense gratification-O my dear brother! Give up such insignificant play! Please accept the pure advice of Chāṅd Bāul: Rejecting all deceptive tendencies that are associated with the sects of impure Bāuls, just enter the flow of pure, spiritual mellows of devotion.
Thus ends Bāul Saṅgīt by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.
