Folio Archives
Gita-mala


Part 1 Yāmunācārya's Ecstasies of Love

Song 1
Text 1

hari he 
ohe prabhu doyāmoya        tomāra caraṇa-dwoya
śruti-śiropari śobhā pāya
guru-jana-śire puna      śobhā pāya śata guṇa
dekhi āmāra parāṇa juḍāya

     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; ohe - O; prabhu - Lord;doyāmoya    - merciful;  tomāra - of You; caraṇa-dwoya - feet; śruti - Vedas; śira - head; upari - above; śobhā - beauty;pāya - attaining; guru-jana-śire - the heads of the gurus; puna  - again; śobhā - beauty; pāya - attaining; śata - hundred; guṇa  - times; dekhi - I see; āmāra – of me; parāṇa - life; juḍāya - cooling.

     O merciful Lord Kṛṣṇa, Your feet are very beautiful as they rest on the heads of all the Vedas. They are a hundred times more beautiful as they rest on the heads of the spiritual masters. Seeing all this, I feel the fever of my life become cool.


Text 2 

jība manoratha-patha          taṅhi saba anugata
jība-bañcha-kalpa-taru jathā
jībera se kula dhana          ati-pūjya sanātana
jībera carama gati tathā

     jība - of the individual souls; manoratha-patha      - the path of desires; taṅhi - in Him; saba - all;anugata - following; jība - of the souls; bancha-kalpa-taru - kalpa-vrksa tree; jathā - as; jībera - of the souls; se - that; kula - family; dhana      - wealth; atipujya - worshipable; sanātana  - eternal; jībera - of the soul;carama - final; gati - goal; tathā - so.

     The chariot of the soul's desires travels on the pathway of Your feet. All follow Your feet. Your feet are a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree that fulfills the soul's desires. Your feet are the soul's family and terasure. They are the soul's eternal object of worship. They are the soul's final goal.


Text 3 

kamalākha-pada-dwoya          parama ānanda-moya
nikhapaṭa e sebiyā satata
e bhaktibinoda cāya      satata tuṣite tāya
bhakta-janera ho'ye anugata

     kamala - lotus; akha - eyes; pada-dwoya - feet; parama - supreme; ānanda-moya - blissful; nikhapaṭa - sincere;e - this; sebiyā - serving; satata - always; e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; cāya  - desires; satata - always; tuṣite - pleased; tāya  - of them; bhakta-janera - of the devotees; ho'ye - is;anugata - follower.

     Sincerely serving Your feet, O lotus-eyed Lord, Bhaktivinoda yearns to please You. He has become a follower of Your devotees. 



Song 2


Text 1

hari he 
tomāra īkhana hoya         sakala utpatti loya
caturdaśa bhubanete jata
joḍa jība ādi kori'      tomāra kṛpāya hori
labhe janma āra ko'bo kota


     hari - Lord Kṛṣṇa; he - O; tomāra - of You;īkhana - glance; hoya - is; sakala - all; utpatti - creation; loya - rests; caturdaśa - 14; bhubanete - worlds; jata - which;joḍa - material; jība - soul; ādi - beginning; kori' - does; tomāra - of  You; kṛpāya - by the mercy; hori - O Kṛṣṇa; labhe - attains; janma - birth; āra - and; ko'baḥ - will do; kota - how many?.

     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, by Your glance the fourteen worlds take birth. You kindly create the spirit souls and the material world. How many souls were born from You?

Text 2 

tāhādera bṛtti jata      tomāra īkhaṇe swataḥ
janme prabhu tumi sarbeśwara
sakala jantura tumi      swabhābika nitya-swāmī
suhṛn mitra prāṇera īśwara

     tāhādera - of that; bṛtti - action; jata - which; tomāra - of You; īkhaṇe - by the glance; swataḥ - personally;janme - birth; prabhu - Lord; tumi - You; sarbeśwara - the masterof all; sakala - all; jantura - beings; tumi - You;swabhābika - own nature; nitya - eternal; swāmī - master; suhṛn - wellwishing; mitra - friend; prāṇera - of life; īśwara - the master.

     By Your glance, O Lord, everything is born. You are the master of all. Of all living beings You are the eternal master and the well-wishing friend. You are the Lord of everyone's life.


Text 3 

e bhaktibinoda koya      śuno prabhu doyāmoya
bhakti prati bātsalya tomāra
naisargika dharma hoya        aupādhika kabhu noya
dāse doyā hoiyā udāra

     e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; koya - says; śunaḥ - please hear; prabhu - O Lord; doyāmoya - merciful; bhakti - devotion; prati - to; bātsalya - a father's love;tomāra - of You; naisargika - natural; dharma - nature; hoya - is; aupādhika - temporary; kabhu - when; noya - not;dāse - servant; doyā - mercy; hoiyā - being; udāra - generous.

     Bhaktivinoda says: Please hear, O merciful Lord. The father's love You feel for Your devotees is part of Your true nature. It is not temporary or false. You are naturally kind and generous to Your servants.



Song 3


Text 1

hari he
para-tattwa bicakhaṇa      byāsa ādi muni-gaṇa
śāstra bicāriyā bāra bāra
prabhu taba nitya-rūpa        guṇa-śīla anurūpa
tomāra caritra sudhā-sāra

     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; para-tattwa - Supreme Truth;bicakhaṇa - wise; byāsa - Vyāsa; ādi - beginning; muni-gaṇa - sages; śāstra - scriptures; bicāriyā - considering; bāra - again; bāra - and again; prabhu - O Lord; taba - of You; nityarūpa - eternal form; guṇa - qualities; śīla - character; anurūpa - following; tomāra - of You; caritra - actions;sudhā-sāra - the sweetest nectar.

     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, O Supreme Truth, writing in the scriptures, Vyāsa and the sages again and again glorify Your eternal form, qualities, character, and pastimes like the sweetest nectar.

Text 2 

śuddha-sattwa-moyī līlā       mukhya-śāstre prokāśila
jībera kuśala su-bidhāna
rajas-tamo-guṇa-andha         asura-prakṛti-manda-
jane tāhā bujhita nā jāne

     śuddha-sattwa-moyī - made of pure goodness; līlā - pastimes;mukhya - primary; śāstre - scriptures; prokāśila - manifested; jībera - of the souls; kuśala - welfare; subidhāna - establishment; rajas-tamo-guṇa - by the modes of passion and ignorance;andha - blinded; asura - demons;-prakṛti - nature; manda - slow and foolish; jane - people; tāhā - that; bujhita - to understand; nā - not; jāne - know.

     To bless the conditioned souls the best scriptures describe Your spiritual pastimes, pastimes the foolish demons, blinded by passion and ignorance, have no power to understand.


Text 3 

nāhi māne nitya-rūpa          bhajiyā maṇḍūka-kūpa
rahe tāhe udāsīna prāya
e bhaktibinoda gāya      ki durdaiba haya hāya
hari-dāsa nāhi hari pāya

     nāhi - not; māne - think; nitya-rūpa - eternal form; bhajiyā - worshiping; mandūka - frog; kūpa - well;rahe - stay; tāhe - stay; udāsīna - indifferent; prāya - almost;e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; gāya - sings; ki - what?;durdaiba - a calamity; haya - alas; hāya - alas; hari-dāsa - Lord Kṛṣṇa's servants; nāhi - not; hari - Lord Kṛṣṇa; pāya - attaining.

     The people of this world will not worship You and meditate on Your eternal form. Staying in their frog's well, they do not care about You. Bhaktivinoda sings: Alas! Alas! What a calamity 
has fallen on the world! They who are by nature Lord Kṛṣṇa's servants will not even approach Lord Kṛṣṇa.



Song 4

Text 1

hari he
jagatera bastu jata        baddha saba swabhābata
deśa kāla bastu simāśroya
tumi prabhu sarbeśwara        naha sīmā-bidhi-para
bidhi saba kampe taba bhoya 

     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; jagatera - of the universe;bastu - thing; jata - which; baddha - an enclosed prison; saba - all; swabhābata - by nature; deśa - place; kāla - time;bastu - thing; 
sīmā - limit; āśroya - shelter; tumi - You; prabhu - OLord; sarbeśwara - the master of all; naha - not; sīmā-bidhi-para - with limit; bidhi - rule; saba - all; kampe - tremble; taba - of You; bhoya - fear.

     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, this material world is a prison bounded by time and space. O Lord, You are the master of all. The laws and boundaries of this world do not touch You. The laws of this world tremble in fear of You.


Text 2 

sama bā adhika taba      swabhābataḥ asambhāba
bidhi laṅghi' taba abasthāna
swatantra swabhāba dharo      āpane gopana koro
māyā-bale kori' adhiṣṭhāna

     sama - equal; bā - or; adhika - superior; taba - of You; swabhābataḥ - by nature; asambhāba - impossible; bidhi - laws;laṅghi' - jumping over; taba - of You; abasthāna - nature; swatantra - independent; swabhāba - nature; dharaḥ - holding; āpane - self; gopana - hiding; koraḥ - do; māyā-bale - by the power of maya; kori' - doing; adhiṣṭhāna - residence.

     No one is equal or greater than You. You transgress all laws. You are supremely independent. Employing Your Māyā potency, You hide from the conditioned souls.


Text 3 

tathāpi ananya-bhakta         tomāre dekhite śakta
sadā dekhe swarūpa tomāra
e bhaktibinoda dina      ananya bhajana hīna
bhakta-pada-reṇu-mātra sāra

     tathāpi - nevertheless; ananya-bhakta - pure devotee; tomāre - of You; dekhite - to see; śakta - able;sadā - always; dekhe - see; swarūpa - own form; tomāra - of You; e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; dina - poor; ananya - without beingdiverted to anything else; bhajana - devotional service; hīna - devoid of; bhakta - of the devotees; pada - of the feet;reṇu - dust; mātra - only; sāra - the best.

     Even so, Your pure devotees have the power to see You. Indeed, they see Your form always. Poor Bhaktivinoda never engages in Your pure devotional service. For him the dust of Your 
devotees' feet is the best thing in this world.



Song 5

Text 1

heri he 
tumi sarba-guṇa-juta       śakti taba baśī-bhūta
badānya sarala śuci dhīra
doyālu madhura sama      kṛtī sthira sarbottama
kṛtajña-lakhaṇe punaḥ bīra

     heri - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; tumi - You; sarba-guṇa-juta - withall transcendental qualities; śakti - power; taba - of You;baśī-bhūta - under the control; badānya - generous; sarala - honest; śuci - pure; dhīra - peaceful; doyālu - merciful;madhura - sweet; sama - equal; kṛtī - pious; sthira - steady; sarbottama - the best of all; kṛtajña - grateful; lakhaṇe - quality; punaḥ - again; bīra - heroic.

     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, You have all virtues. You are the master of all powers. You are generous, honest, pure, gentle, kind, sweet, equal to all, pious, peaceful, grateful, and heroic. You are the 
best of all.


Text 2 

samasta kalyāṇa-guṇa          guṇāmṛta sambhābana
samudra-swarūpa bhagabān
bindu bindu guṇa taba         sarba-jība-subaibhaba
tumi pūrṇa sarba-śaktimān

     samasta - all; kalyāṇa - auspicious; guṇa - qualities; guṇavirtues; amṛta - nectar; sambhābana - creation;samudra - ocean; swarūpa - form; bhagabān - the Supreme Personality of Godhead; 
bindu - drop; bindu - drop; guṇa - qualities; taba - of You; sarba-jība - all souls; subaibhaba - glories; tumi - You; pūrṇa - full; sarba-śaktimān - the master of all powers.

     You possess all auspicious virtues. You are a nectar ocean of virtues. The individual souls possess only some few drops of the virtues You, the master of all powers, possess in full perfection. 


Text 3 

e bhaktibinoda chāra          kṛtāñjali bāra bāra
kore citta-kathā bijñāpana
taba dāsa-gaṇa-saṅge          taba līlā-kathā-raṅge
jāya jena āmāra jībana

     e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; chāra - a pile of ashes; kṛtāñjali - folded hands; bāra - again; bāra - and again; kore - does; citta - of the heart; kathā - words;bijnāpana - appeal; taba - of You; dāsa - servants;gaṇa - multitude; saṅge - association; taba - of You; līlā - pastimes; kathā - words; raṅge - joy; jāya - goes; jena - like this; āmāra - my;jībana - life.

     Bhaktivinoda, who is worthless like a pile of ashes, folds his hands and speaks words from his heart. Again and again he begs: O Lord, may I pass this life in the company of Your 
servants, servants who find their pleasure in describing Your pastimes.



Song 6


Text 1

hari he
tomāra gambhīra mana       nāhi bujhe anya jana
sei mana anusāri saba
jagata-udbhāba-sthiti         pralaya-soṁsāra-gati
mukti ādi śaktira baibhaba

     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; tomāra - of You;gambhīra - deep; mana - heart; nāhi - not; bujhe - nows; anya - other; jana - people; sei - this; mana - heart; anusāri - following; saba - all;jagata - worlds; 
udbhāba - creation; sthiti - maintenance; pralaya - destruction;soṁsāra - of the world of birth and death; gati - the ways; mukti - freedom; ādi - beginning; śaktira - potency;baibhaba - glory.

     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, no one knows Your deep heart. Still, everyone follows the desires of Your heart. The creation, maintenance, and destructions of the worlds, all the ways of the world of birth and death, liberation from the world, and everything else are all manifested from Your powers and glories.


Text 2 

e saba baidika līlā      icchā-mātra prokāśilā
jībera bāsanā anusāre
tomāte bimukha ho'ye          mājila abidyā lo'ye
sei jība karma-pārābāre

     e - this; saba - all; baidika - Vedic; līlā - pastimes; icchā - desire; mātra - only; prokāśilā - manifest;jībera - of the individual souls; bāsanā - desire; anusāre - following; tomāte - from You; 
bimukha - turning the face; ho'ye - are; mājila - plunged; abidyā - ignorance; lo'ye - attain; sei - these; jība - souls; karma - of karma; pārābāre - in a sea.

     Following the wishes of some souls, simply by willing You create the material worlds. Turning their faces from You, some bewildered souls then dive into a sea of karma. The Vedas 
describe all these pastimes.


Text 3 

punaḥ jadi bhakti kori'       bhaje bhakta-saṅga dhori'
tabe pāya tomāra caraṇa
antaraṅga-līlā-rase      bhase māyā nā paraśe
bhaktibinodera phire mana

     punaḥ - again; jadi - if; bhakti - devotional service;kori' - doing; bhaje - worship; bhakta-aṅga - in association of devotees; dhori' - holding; tabe - then; pāya - attaining;tomāra - Your; caraṇa - feet; antaraṅga - confidential; līlā - pastimes; rase - nectar; bhāse - float; māyā - Maya; nā - not; paraśe - touches; bhaktibinodera - of Bhaktivinoda; phire - turned around; mana - heart.

     However, if a rebellious soul stays with Your devotees, engages in devotional service, and worships You, then he will attain Your feet. He will float in the nectar of Your confidential pastimes. Then Māyā  will not touch him. Bhaktivinoda has decided to turn his heart toward You in this way.



Song 7

Text 1

hari he
māyā-baddha jata khaṇa          thāke to' jībera mana
joḍa mājhe kore bicāraṇa
parabyoma jñāna-moya          tāhe taba sthiti hoya
mana nāhi pāya daraśana

     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; māyā - by Maya;baddha - imprisoned; jata - as long; khaṇa - moments; thāke - stays; to' - indeed; jībera - of the soul; mana - heart; joḍa - material; mājhe - inthe 
midst; kore - does; bicāraṇa - thinking; parabyoma - thespiritual sky; jñāna-moya - consisting of knowledge; tāhe - in that; taba - of You; sthiti - situation; hoya - is; mana - heart;nāhi - not; pāya - attaining; daraśana - sight.

     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, as long as they stay in Māyā's prison, the rebellious souls plunge their hearts into material things. They think only of matter. Their hearts cannot see the spiritual world 
filled with knowledge, the world where You stay.

Text 2 

bhakti-kṛpā-khar6gāghāte       joḍa-bandha cheda tā'te
jaya mana prakṛtira pāra
tomāra sundara rūpa      here' taba aparūpa
joḍa-bastu koroye dhik-kāra

     bhakti - of devotional service; kṛpā - of mercy; khar6gāghāte - with the sword; joḍa - of matter; bandha - the bonds; cheda - cuts; tā'te - that; jaya - goes;mana - heart; prakṛtira - matter; pāra - beyond; tomāra - of You;sundara - handsome; rūpa - form; here' - sees; taba - Your; aparūpa - wonderful; joḍa-bastu - matter; koroye - does; dhik-kāra - mocking.

     Grasping the sword of devotional service and mercy, the heart may cut the ropes of matter that bind it. Then the heart may leave the world of matter and gaze at Your wonderful handsome form, a form that mocks everything made of matter.


Text 3 

ananta bibhūti jāṅra         jini doyā pārābāra
sei prabhu jībera īśwara
e bhaktibinoda dīna      sadā śuddha-bhakti-hīna
śuddha-bhakti māge nirantara

     ananta - endless; bibhūti - opulences; jāṅra - of whom; jini - in whom; doyā - mercy; pārābāra - ocean; sei - this; prabhu - master; jībera - of the souls; īśwara - the master;e - this; 
bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; dīna - poor; sadā - always; śuddha-bhakti - pure devotional service; hīna - without; śuddha-bhakti - pure devotional service; māge - begs; nirantara - always.

     O Lord, Your glories and opulences have no end. You are an ocean of mercy. You are the master of all souls. Poor Bhaktivinoda, who has no pure devotional service, again and again 
begs for pure devotion to You.




Song 8


Text 1

hari he
dharma-niṣṭhā nāhi mora        ātma-bodha bā sundora
bhakti nāhi tomāra caraṇe
ata eba akiñcana         gati-hīna duṣṭa-jana
rata sadā āpana bañcane

     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; dharma - in piety;niṣṭhā - faith; nāhi - not; mora - of me; ātma - of the self; bodha - knowledge; bā - or; sundora - beautiful; bhakti - devotion; nāhi - not; tomāra - ofYou; caraṇe - at the feet; ata eba - therefore; akiñcana - a poor man who has nothing; gati - a good future; hīna - without; duṣṭa-jana - wicked people; rata - enjoying; sadā - always; āpana - own; bañcane - cheating.

     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, I have no faith in the path of religion, nor have I spiritual knowledge, nor have I beautiful devotion to Your feet. I have nothing of any value, nor does a good future await 
me. I am a wicked hedonist. I am a thief who again and again robs his own self.


Text 2 

patita-pābana tumi      patita adhama āmi
tumi mora eka-mātra gati
taba pada-mūle painu          tomāra śaraṇa lainu
āmi dāsa tumi mora pati

     patita - of the fallen; pābana - the purifier; tumi - You;patita - fallen; adhama - lowest; āmi - I; tumi - You;mora - my; eka-mātra - only one; gati - shelter; taba - of You; pada-mūle - atthe 
soles of the feet; painu - attain; tomāra - of You; śaraṇa - shelter; lainu - I attain; āmi - I; dāsa - theservant; tumi - You; mora - my; pati - master.

     You are the purifier of the fallen, and I am very fallen. You are my only shelter. I place myself before Your feet. I take shelter of You. I am the servant, and You are my master.


Text 3 


e bhaktibinoda kānde          hṛde dhairja nāhi bāndhe
bhūmi poḍi bole ataḥ-para
ahaitukī kṛpā kori'      ei duṣṭa-jane hori
deho pada-chāyā nirantara


     e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; kānde - weeps; hṛde - in the heart; dhairja - peace; nāhi - not;bāndhe - holds; bhūmi - to the ground; poḍi - I fall; bole - say; ataḥpara - then; ahaitukī - causeless; kṛpā - mercy; kori' - doing; ei - this; duṣṭa - wicked; jane - person; hori - O Kṛṣṇa; dehaḥ - pleasegive; pada - of the feet; chāyā - the shade;nirantara - always.

     Bhaktivinoda weeps. There is no peace in his heart. Falling to the ground, he says: O Lord Kṛṣṇa, please be merciful to this wicked person. Please give him the shade of Your feet forever.




Song 9


Text 1

hari he
heno duṣṭa karma nāi       jaha āmi kori nāi
sahasra sahasra-bāra hori
sei saba-karma-phala          peye abasara bala
āmāya piśiche jantropori

     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; henaḥ - like this;duṣṭa - wicked; karma - deeds; nāi - not; jaha - when; āmi - I;kori - do; nāi - not; sahasra sahasra-bāra - thousands and thousands of times;hori - Kṛṣṇa; sei - this; saba-karma-phala - the results of all karma; peye - attain; abasara - absent; bala - strength; āmāya - I; piśiche - suffer; jantra - machine; upori - upon.

     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, there is no sin I did not commit thousands and thousands of times. Now I have the fruit of of my past karma. Powerless, I suffer, riding on a machine.


Text 2 

gati nāhi dekhi āra      kānde hari anibāra
tomāra agrete ebe āmi
ja' tomāra hoya mane          daṇḍa deo akiñcane
tumi mora daṇḍa-dhara swāmī

     gati - shelter; nāhi - not; dekhi - see; āra - other;kānde - weep; hari - O Kṛṣṇa; anibāra - always;tomāra - You; agrete - before; ebe - now; āmi - I; ja' - which;tomāra - of You; hoya - is; mane - in the heart; daṇḍa - punishment; deaḥ - give; akiñcane - poor; tumi - You; mora - of me; daṇḍa-dhara - the punisher; swāmī - the master.

     I see no other shelter. Again and again I weep. Now I stand  before You. Please give the punishment Your heart thinks right.  You are my master. You have the right to punish me.
 

Text 3 
 
kleśa-bhoga bhāgye jata       bhoga mora hao tata
kintu eka mama nibedana
je je daśā bhoga āmi          āmāke nā chāḍo swāmī
bhaktibinodera prāṇa-dhana
 
     kleśa-bhoga - suffering; bhāgye - good fortune; jata - which; bhoga - enjoyment; mora - of me; haaḥ - is; tata - then;  kintu - however; eka - one; mama - my; nibedana - request;je  je - whatever; daśā - condition of life; bhoga - I experience;āmi - I; āmāke - me; nā - not; chāḍaḥ   abandon; swāmī - master;  bhaktibinodera - of Bhaktivinoda; prāṇa - of the life;  dhana - treasure.
 
     I may suffer or enjoy. I have only one request. In whatever  condition of life I am placed, please not not abandon me, O  master, O life's treasure of Bhaktivinoda.

 
 
Song 10
 

Text 1
 
hari he
nija-karma-doṣa-phale      poḍi' bhabārṇaba-jale
hābuḍubu khāi kota kāla
sāntāri' sāntāri' jāi         sindhu-anta nāhi pāi
bhaba-sindhu ananta biśāla
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; nija - own; karma - karma;doṣa - fault;  phale - result; poḍi' - I have fallen; bhaba - of the materialworld;  arṇaba - of the ocean; jale - in the water; hābuḍubu - a struggle to stay above the water; khāi - I do; kota - for how long?;kāla - time;  sāntāri' - swiming; sāntāri' - and swiming; jāi - I go;  sindhu - of the ocean; anta - the end; nāhi - not; pāi - Iattain;  bhaba - of the material world; sindhu - the ocean;ananta - limitless;  biśāla - large. 

     By the fault of my own karma I have fallen into the ocean of  birth and death. How long must I struggle to keep from drowning?  Swimming and swimming, I cannot find the end of this ocean. The  huge ocean of birth and death has no end.
 

Text 2 
 
nimagna hoinu jabe       ḍākinu kātara rabe
keho more koroho uddhāra
sei kāle āile tumi       tomā jāni' kūla-bhūmi
āśā-bīja hoilo āmāra

      nimagna - plunged; hoinu - am; jabe - in the water;  ḍākinu - I call out; kātara - distressed; rabe - sound;  kehaḥ - someone; more - me; korohaḥ - please do;uddhāra - rescue;  sei - this; kāle - time; āile - come; tumi - You; tomā - tome;  jāni' - knowing; kūla-bhūmi - the shore; āśā - of hope;  bīja - seed; hoilaḥ - is; āmāra - of me.

      Drowning, I screamed, "Someone save me!" At that  moment You came. I knew You could take me to the shore. The seed  of hope was planted within me.
 

Text 3 
 
tumi hari doyāmoya       pāile more su-niścoya
sarbottama doyāra biṣoya
tomāke nā chāḍi' āra          e bhaktibinoda chāra
doyā-pātre pāile doyāmoya
 
     tumi - You; hari - Kṛṣṇa; doyāmoya - merciful;  pāile - attained; more - me; su-niścoya - certainly;sarbottama - the  best of all; doyāra - of mercy; biṣoya - the realm;tomāke - to You; nā - not; chāḍi' - abandoning; āra - another;e - this;  bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; chāra - pile of ashes; doyā- pātre - object of mercy; pāile - attained; doyāmoya - merciful.
 
     O merciful Lord Kṛṣṇa, now You have found me. O most  merciful Lord, I will never leave You. O merciful Lord, now You  have found Bhaktivinoda, who is worthless like a pile of ashes 
and who desperately needs Your mercy. 

 
 
Song 11
 

Text 1
 
hari he
anya āśā nāhi jāra         taba pada-padma tāra
chāḍibāra jogya nāhi hoya
taba padāśroye nātha          kore sei dina-pāta
taba pade tāhāra abhoya
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; anya - other; āśā - desire;nāhi - not;  jāra - of whom; taba - of You; pada-padma - lotus feet;  tāra - of him;  chāḍibāra - to renounce; jogya - right; nāhi - not;hoya - is; 
taba - of You; pada - feet; āśroye - at the shelter; nātha - OLord;  kore - does; sei - this; dina-pāta - passing of a day; taba - of  You; pade - the feet; tāhāra - of him; abhoya - fearless.

      O Lord Kṛṣṇa, a person who desires only You and no one else  will never leave Your lotus feet. O Lord, he passes his days  under the shelter of Your feet. By Your feet, he is fearless. 
 

Text 2 
 
stanya-pāyī-śiśu-jane         mātā chāḍe krodha-mane
śiśu tabu nāhi chāḍe māya
je hetu tāhāra āra       e jībana dhoribāra
mātā binā nāhika upāya
 
     stanya - breast milk; pāyī - drinking; śiśu-jane - infant;  mātā - mother; chāḍe - abandons; krodha-mane - in anger;  śiśu - child; tabu - then; nāhi - not; chāḍe - abandons;  māya - mother; je - which; hetu - reason; tāhāra - of him; āra - another; e - this; jībana - life; dhoribāra - to hold; 
mātā - mother; binā - without; nāhika - no; upāya - means.
 
     With an angry heart, a mother may sometimes reject her  suckling infant, but the infant will never reject his mother, for  without his mother the infant has no way to stay alive.
 

Text 3 
 
e bhaktibinoda koya      tumi chāḍo doyāmoya
dekhiyā āmāra doṣa-gaṇa
āmi to' chāḍite nāri          tomā binā nāhi pāri
kakhana dhorite e jībana
 
     e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; koya - says;tumi - You;  chāḍaḥ - abandon; doyāmoya - merciful; dekhiyā - seeing;āmāra - of  me; doṣa - of faults; gaṇa - the host; āmi - I;to' - indeed; 
chāḍite - to reject; nāri - not; tomā - You;  binā - without; nāhi - not; pāri - I am able;  kakhana - something; dhorite - to maintain; e - this;jībana - life.
 
     Bhaktivinoda says: O merciful Lord, when You see my many  faults You may reject me, but I will never reject You. Without  You I cannot stay alive.

 


Song 12
 

Text 1
 
hari he
taba pada-paṅkajinī        jībāmṛta-sañcāriṇī
ati-bhāgye jība tāhā pāya
se amṛta pāna kori'      mugdha hoya tāhā hori
āra tāhā chāḍite nā cāya
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; taba - Your; pada - feet;paṅkajinī - pond  filled with lotus flowers; jība - life; amṛta-sancāriṇī - nectar that restores life; ati-bhāgye - very  fortunate; jība - soul; tāhā - him; pāya - attaining;se - that;  amṛta - nectar; pāna - drinking; kori' - doing;  mugdha - bewildered; hoya - is; tāhā - him; hori - taking; āra - onother; tāhā - him; chāḍite - to reject; nā - not;  cāya - desires.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, a very fortunate soul will find the lotus lake  of Your feet, a lake filled with the nectar of immortality.  Drinking that nectar, he will become intoxicated with bliss.  Never will he wish to leave that lake.
 

Text 2 
 
nibiṣṭa hoiyā tāya       anya sthāne nāhi jāya
anya rasa tuccha kori' mane
madhu-pūrṇa-padma-sthita      madhubrata kadācita
nāhi cāya ikhu-daṇḍa-pāne
 
     nibiṣṭa - entered; hoiyā - being; tāya - that;  anya - another; sthāne - place; nāhi - not; jāya - goes;anya - another;  rasa - nectar; tuccha - insignificant; kori' - doing; mane - in his heart; madhu - nectar; pūrṇa - full; padma - lotus;sthita - staying;  madhubrata - bee; kadācita - ever; nāhi - not;cāya - desires;  ikhu-daṇḍa - sugar cane; pāne - drinking.


     Entering that lake, he will not wish to go to any other  place. In his heart he will think all other nectars dull and  tasteless. A bee staying in a nectar-filled lotus will never wish  to fly away to a stand of sugarcanes.
 

Text 3 
 
e bhaktibinoda kabe      se paṅkaja-sthita ha'be
nāhi ja'be soṁsārābhimukhe
bhakta-kṛpā bhakti-bala       ei duiṭī su-sambala
pāile se sthiti ghaṭe sukhe
 
     e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; kabe - says;se - this;  paṅkaja-sthita - staying in the lotus flower; ha'be - will be;nāhi - not; ja'be - will go;  soṁsāra - the world of birth and death; abhimukhe - facing; bhakta- kṛpā - by a devotee's mercy; bhakti - of devotional service;bala - the power;  ei - this; duiṭī - two; su- sambala - great treasures; pāile - attained; se - this;  sthiti - situation; ghaṭe - is; sukhe - happiness. 

     Bhaktivinoda says: Staying in that lotus lake, I will never  return to the world of birth and death. Devotional service's  power and the devotees' mercy are my two treasures. Now that I 
have them, I am happy.

 
 
Song 13
 

Text 1
 
hari he
bhramite soṁsāra-bane      kabhu daiba-samghaṭane
kona-mate kona bhāgyabān
taba pada uddeśiyā       thāke kṛtāñjali hoya
eka-bāra ohe bhagabān
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; bhramite - wandering; soṁsārabane - in  the forest of birth and death; kabhu - when; daiba-samghaṭane - by  fate; kona-mate - somehow; kona - some; bhāgyabān - fortunateperson;  taba - of You; pada - the feet; uddeśiyā - in relation to;  thāke - stays; kṛtāñjali - folded hands; hoya - is; eka- bāra - one time; ohe - O; bhagabān - Lord.
 
     While wandering in the jungle of birth and death, a  fortunate soul, his hands reverently folded, will somehow, by  fate, find Your feet, O Lord Kṛṣṇa.
 

Text 2 
 
sei khaṇe tā'ra jata          amaṅgala hoya hata
su-maṅgala hoya puṣṭa ati
āra nāhi khaya hoya      krame tā'ra śubhodoya 
tā're deya sarbottama-gati
 
     sei khaṇe - at that moment; tā'ra - of him; jata - which;amaṅgala - inauspicious; hoya - is; hata - destroyed; su- maṅgala - great auspiciousness; hoya - is; puṣṭa - nourished; ati - great; ara - another; nāhi - not; khaya - destruction; hoya - is; krame - in due course; tā'ra -  f him; śubha - of goodfortune;  udoya - the arisal; ta're - of him; deya - gives; sarbottama- gati - the highest of all destinations.
 
     At that moment his misfortune perishes and his good fortune  grows. Never becoming less, his good fortune gradually grows  greater and greater until it becomes the greatest of all good 
fortunes.
 

Text 3 
 
emona doyālu tumi        emona durbhāgā āmi
kabhu nā korinu paraṇāma
taba pada-padma prati         nā jāne e duṣṭa-mati
bhaktibinodera pariṇāma
 
     emona - like this; doyālu - merciful; tumi - You;  emona - like this; durbhāgā - unfortunate; āmi - I;kabhu - when;  nā - not; korinu - I do; paraṇāma - obeisances; taba - then; pada- padma - lotus feet; prati - to; nā - not; jāne - I know;  e - this; duṣṭa - wicked; mati - heart;  bhaktibinodera - of  Bhaktivinoda; pariṇāma - transformation.
 
     O Lord, You are very merciful, and I am very unfortunate. I  never bow down before Your lotus feet. This wicked-hearted person  does not know what will happen to Bhaktivinoda.

 
 
Song 14
 

Text 1
 
hari he
tomāra caraṇa-padma        anurāga sudhā-sadma
sāgara-śīkara jadi pāya
kona bhāgyabāna jane          kona kārya-saṅgaṭane
tā'ra saba duḥkha dūre jāya
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; tomāra - of You; caraṇapadma - lotus  feet; anurāga - love; sudhā - of nectar; sadma - abode;sāgara - of  the ocean; śīkara - a drop; jadi - if; pāya - attaining; kona - some;  bhāgyabāna - fortunate; jane - person; kona - some; kārya- saṅgaṭane - action; tā'ra - of him; saba - all;  duḥkha - sufferings; dūre - far away; jāya - go.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, if he somehow attains a drop of nectar from  the ocean of love that flows from Your lotus feet, a fortunate  soul will find that his sufferings suddenly flee far away.
 

Text 2 
 
se sudhā-samudra-kaṇa         soṁsārāgni-nirbāpana
khaṇete koriyā phele tā'ra
parama nibṛtti diyā      tomāra caraṇe loya
deya tabe ānanda apāra
 
     se - that; sudhā - nectar; samudra - ocean; kaṇa - drop;  soṁsāra - of birth and death; agni - fire;nirbāpana - extinguishing;  khaṇete - in a moment; koriyā - doing; phele - result;tā'ra - of him;  parama - great; nibṛtti - cessation; diyā - giving; tomāra - of You; caraṇe - feet; loya - attaining; deya - gives;tabe - then;  ānanda - bliss; apāra - limitless.
 
     In a moment that drop from the ocean of nectar extinguishes  the fire of repeated birth and death. It brings liberation. It  takes one to Your feet. It brings limitless bliss.
 

Text 3 
 
e bhaktibinoda kānde          poḍiyā soṁsāra-phānde
bole nāhi kona bhāgya mora
e ghaṭana nā ghaṭilo        āmāra janama gelo
bṛthā roinu ho'ye ātma-bhora
 
     e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; kānde - weeps;  poḍiyā - falling; soṁsāra - of birth and death; phānde - in the  trap; bole - says;  nāhi - not; kona - something; bhāgya - good fortune; mora - ofme;  e - this; ghaṭana - happening; nā - not; ghaṭilaḥ - was; āmāra - of me; janama - birth; gelaḥ - gone;bṛthā - uselessly; roinu - was;  ho'ye - was; ātma-bhora - own interest.
 
     Falling into the trap of birth and death, Bhaktivinoda  weeps. He says: I am not fortunate. Good fortune did not come to  me. My life is gone. I selfishly wasted it.

 
 
Song 15
 

Text 1
 
hari he
tabāṅghri-kamala-dwoya          bilāsa-bikrama-moya
parābara jagata byāpiyā
sarba-khaṇa bartamāna         bhakta-kleśa-abasāna
lagi' sadā prastuta hoiyā
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; taba - Your; aṅghri - lotus;kamala - feet;  dwoya - two; bilāsa-bikrama-moya - playful;  para - high; abara - and low; jagata - material world;byāpiyā - filling;  sarba-khaṇa - every moment; bartamāna - being so;  bhakta - devotees; kleśa - sufferings; abasāna - end;  lagi' - taking; sadā - always; prastuta - glorified;hoiyā - being.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, with Your two playful lotus feet You walk  everywhere in the spiritual and material worlds. At every moment  You rescue Your devotees from their sufferings. That is why You  are always glorified.
 

Text 2 
 
jagatera sei dhana       āmi jaga-madhya-jana
ata eba sama adhikāra
āmi kibā bhāgya-hīna          sādhane bañcita dīna
ki kāja jībane āra chāra
 
     jagatera - of the world; sei - this; dhana - treasure;  āmi - I; jaga-madhya-jana - the people of the world; ata  eba - therefore;; sama - equal; adhikāra - qualification;āmi - I;  kibā - how?; bhāgya-hīna - unfortunate; sādhane - by  actions; bañcita - cheated; dīna - poor; ki - what?;  kāja - action; jībane - life; āra - or; chāra - a pile ofashes.
 
     A great treasure is present in this world. I live in this  world. I could have picked up that treasure. Why am I so  unfortunate? Why did I cheat myself and turn myself into a  pauper? Why did I turn this life into a pile of ashes?
 

Text 3 
 
kṛpā binā nāhi gati      e bhaktibinoda ati
dainya kori' bole prabhu pāya
kabe taba kṛpā pe'ye          uṭhibo sabale dhe'ye
heribo se pada-juga hāya
 
     kṛpā - mercy; binā - without; nāhi - not; gati - gial;  e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; ati - very;dainya - humility;  kori' - doing; bole - says;  prabhu - O Lord; pāya - attaining; kabe - when; taba - of You; kṛpā - mercy; pe'ye - attain; uṭhibaḥ - will rise;  sabale - strongly;  dhe'ye - give; heribaḥ - will see; se - this; pada-juga - twofeet;  hāya - Oh.
 
     Without Your mercy there is no auspicious future.  Approaching the Lord's feet, Bhaktivinoda humbly says: O Lord,  when will I attain Your mercy? When will I stand up and run to  meet You? When will I see Your two feet?





Song 16
 

Text 1
 
hari he
āmi sei duṣṭa-mati         nā dekhiyā anya-gati
taba pade lo'yechi śaraṇa
jānilama āmi nātha       tumi prabhu jagannātha
āmi taba nitya parijana
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; āmi - I; sei - this; duṣṭamati - wicked heart; nā - not; dekhiyā - seeing; anya-gati - any other  shelter; taba - You; pade - feet; lo'yechi - attain;śaraṇa - shelter; 
jānilama - know; āmi - I; nātha - Lord; tumi - You;  prabhu - master; jagannātha - Jagannatha; āmi - I;taba - You;  nitya - eternal; parijana - follower.
 
     Not seeing any alternative, I, a person with a wicked heart,  now surrender at Your feet. O Lord, now I know that You are the  master of all the worlds and i am Your eternal servant.
 

Text 2 
 
sei dina kabe ha'be      aikantika-bhābe jabe
nitya-dāsa-bhāba lo'ye āmi
manorathāntara jata      nihśeṣa koriyā swataḥ
sebibo āmāra nitya-swāmī
 
     sei - this; dina - day; kabe - when?; ha'be - will be; aikantika-bhābe - causeless love; jabe - when; nitya-dāsa- bhāba - the state of being an eternal servant; lo'ye - attain;  āmi - I; manorathāntara - other desires; jata - which;  nihśeṣa - completely; koriyā - doing; swataḥ - personally;  sebibaḥ - will serve; āmāra - my; nitya-swāmī - eternal master.
 
     When will I be your selfless servant? When will that day  come? When, turning away from all other desires, will I serve  You, my eternal master?
 

Text 3 
 
nirantara sebā-mati      bahibe cittete satī
praśānta hoibe ātmā mora
e bhaktibinoda bole      kṛṣṇa-sebā-kutūhole
ciro-dina thāki jena bhora
 
     nirantara - always; sebā - service; mati - heart;  bahibe - will carry; cittete - in the heart; satī - pure;  praśānta - peaceful; hoibe - will be;  ātmā - self; mora - my; e - this;bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; bole - says; kṛṣṇa-sebā-kutūhole - the joy of service to Lord  Kṛṣṇa;  ciro-dina - many days; thāki - stay; jena - person;bhora - greatly.
 
     When will my peaceful saintly heart always wish to serve  You? Bhaktivinoda says: I will always happily serve You. 
 


Song 17
 

Text 1
 
hari he
āmi aparādhī jana          sadā daṇḍya durlakhaṇa
sahasra sahasra doṣe doṣī
bhīma-bhabārṇabodare          patita biṣama ghore
gati-hīna gati-abhilāṣī
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; āmi - I; aparādhī - anoffender; jana - person; sadā - always; daṇḍya - fit to be punished;  durlakhaṇa - wicked; sahasra sahasra - thousands and thousands;  doṣe - faults; doṣī - faulty; bhīma - terrible; bhaba - ofmaterial  existence; arṇaba - ocean; udare - into the belly; -   patita - fallen; biṣama - horrible; ghore - horrible; gati- hīna - without any shelter; gati-abhilāṣī - yearning to find a  shelter.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, I, an offender, a sinner with thousands and  thousands of faults, a sinner who should be punished forever,  have fallen into the horrible belly of the ocean of birth and  death. Shelterless, I yearn for shelter.
 

Text 2 
 
hari taba pada-dwoye          śaraṇe loinu bhoye
kṛpā kori' koro ātma-sāṭha
tomāra pratijñā ei       śaraṇa loibe jei
tumi tā'ra rakhā-kartā nātha
 
     hari - O lord Kṛṣṇa; taba - Your; pada-dwoye - feet;  śaraṇe - shelter; loinu - I find; bhoye - fear;kṛpā - mercy;  kori' - doing; koraḥ - do; ātma - self; śātha - acceptance; tomāra -  - of  You; pratijñā - promise; ei - this; śaraṇa - shelter; loibe - attain; jei - which; tumi - You; tā'ra - of Him;rakhā- kartā - the doer; nātha - O master.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, pushed by fear, I surrender to Your feet.  Please kindly accept me. O Lord, You promised to protect the  souls that surrender to You.
 

Text 3 
 
pratijñāte kori' bhara      o madhaba prāṇeśwara
śaraṇa loilo ei dāsa
e bhaktibinoda gāya      tomāra se rāṅgā-pāya
deho dāse sebāya bilāsa
 
     pratijñāte - in the promise; kori' - doing; bhara - burden; aḥ - indeed; madhaba - Kṛṣṇa; prāṇeśwara - master of life; śaraṇa - surrender; loilaḥ - do; ei - this; dāsa - servant; e - this; 
bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; gāya - sings; tomāra - of You;  se - that; raṅga - red; pāya - feet; dehaḥ - please give;dāse - to the servant; sebāya - of service; bilāsa - pastime.
 
     O Kṛṣṇa, O master of my life, trusting in Your promise, this  servant now surrenders unto You. Bhaktivinoda sings: To this  servant please give pastimes of serving Your reddish feet.

 
 
Song 18
 

Text 1
 
hari he
abibeka rūpa ghana         tāhe dhik ācchādana
hoilo ta'te andhakāra ghora
tāhe duḥkha-bṛṣṭi hoya        dekhi' cāri-dike bhoya
patha-bhrama hoiyāche mora
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; abibeka - without discrimination;rūpa - form;  ghana - cloud; tāhe - in that; dhik - fie!;  ācchādana - covering; hoilaḥ - did; ta'te - that;andhakāra - blinding  darkness; ghora - terrible; tāhe - in that; duḥkha - ofsufferings;  bṛṣṭi - rain; hoya - did; dekhi' - see; cāri-dike - four  directions; bhoya - fear; patha - path; bhrama - wandering;  hoiyāche - doing; mora - of me.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa! Alas! Covering everything with a terrible  blinding darkness, clouds of illusions rain a monsoon of  sufferings. Seeing the four directions become fearful places, I 
stumble and fall from the path.
 

Text 2 
 
nija abibeka doṣe        poḍi' durdinera roṣe
prāṇa jāya soṁsāra-kāntāre
patha-pradarśaka nāi          e durdaibe mārā jāi
ḍāki tāi acyuta tomāre
 
     nija - own; abibeka - illusions; doṣe - fault;  poḍi' - falling; durdinera - inauspicious day; roṣe - with anger;  prāṇa - life; jāya - going; soṁsāra - of birth and death;  kāntāre - into the dark jungle; patha-pradarśaka - a guide to the  path; nāi - not; e - this; durdaibe - evil day; mārā - to death; jāi - I go; ḍāki - I call out; tāi acyuta - O  infallible Lord; tomāre - to You.
 
     By my own folly I fell into this angry, evil day. My life is  about to flee. There is no guide to show the way in this dark  jungle of birth and death. On this evil day I will die. I call  out to You: O infallible Lord! 
 

Text 3 
 
eka-bāra kṛpā-dṛṣṭi      koro āmā prati bṛṣṭi
tabe mora ghucibe durdina
bibeka sabala ha'be      bhaktibinoda tabe
dekhaibe patha samīcīna
 
     eka-bāra - one time; kṛpā-dṛṣṭi - merciful glance; - koraḥ - please do; āmā - to me; prati - to;  ṛṣṭi - rain; tabe - then;  mora - of me; ghucibe - will destroy; durdina -  - evil day;bibeka -  knowledge;  sabala - powerful; ha'be - will be; bhaktibinoda tabe       dekhaibe - will show; patha - the path; samīcīna - right.
 
     Please once place Your glance of mercy on me. Then this evil  day, this monsoon of folly, will perish. Then powerful knowledge  will come and show Bhaktivinoda the true path.    

 
 
Song 19
 

Text 1
 
hari he
agre eka nibedana          kori madhunisūdana
śuno kṛpā koriyā āmāya
nirarthaka kathā noya          nigūḍhārtha-moya hoya
hṛdoyā hoite bahirāya
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; agre - in the presence;eka - one; nibedana - request; kori - I do; madhunisūdana - O Kṛṣṇa;śunaḥ - please hear;  kṛpā - mercy; koriyā - doing; āmāya - to me; 
nirarthaka - meaningless; kathā - talk; noya - is not;  nigūḍha - deep; artha - meaning; moya - consisting of;hoya - is;  hṛdoyā - heart; hoite - from; bahirāya - come out.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, I place one request before You. Please kindly  listen. My words are not meaningless. They have deep meaning.  They come from the heart.
 

Text 2 
 
ati aprakṛṣṭa āmi        parama doyālu tumi
taba doyā mora adhikāra
je jata patita hoya      taba doyā tata tāya
ta'te āmi su-pātra doyāra
 
     ati - very; aprakṛṣṭa - lowly; āmi - I; parama - very;  doyālu - merciful; tumi - You; taba - of You; doyā - mercy; mora - of me;  adhikāra - qualification; je - which; jata - which;patita - fallen; 
hoya - is; taba - of You; doyā - mercy; tata - that;tāya - of  him; ta'te - that; āmi - I; su-pātra - the proper object; doyāra - of  mercy.
 
     I am very fallen. You are the most merciful. Therefore I am  qualified to receive Your mercy. However fallen a person may be,  he is still qualified to receive Your mercy. Therefore I am 
perfectly qualified for Your mercy.
 

Text 3 
 
more jodi upekhibe       doyā-pātre kothā pābe
doyāmoya nāmaṭi ghucā'be
e bhaktibinoda koya      doyā koro doyāmoya
jaśa-kīrti ciro-dina pā'be
 
     more - me; jodi - if; upekhibe - neglect; doyā- pātre - object of mercy; kothā - where?; pābe - will find;  doyāmoya - merciful;  nāmaṭi - name; ghucā'be - will be destroyed; e - this; 
bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; koya - says; doyā - mercy;  koraḥ - please do; doyāmoya - merciful; jaśa-kīrti - fame;ciro-dina - forever; pā'be - will attain.
 
     If You reject me, where will You find another person like me  to receive Your mercy? Then Your name "Merciful" will  perish. Bhaktivinoda says: Please be merciful. Then Your fame as 
"the merciful Lord" will continue forever.

 


Song 20
 

Text 1
 
hari he
tomā chāḍi' āmi kabhu      anātha nā hoi prabhu
prabhu-hīna dāsa nirāśroya
āmāke nā nile sātha      kaiche tumi ha'be nātha
domanīya ke tomāra hoya
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; tomā - You;chāḍi' - abandoning; āmi - I;  kabhu - when; anātha - without a master; nā - not; hoi - am;  prabhu - O Lord; prabhu-hīna - without a master; dāsa - servant;  nirāśroya - without a shelter; āmāke - to me; nā - not;  nile - bring; sātha - association; kaiche - is; tumi - You; ha'be - will be; nātha - O Lord; domanīya - to be dominated;  ke - who?; tomāra - of You; hoya - is. 

     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, never will I leave You and become without my  master. Without my master I am a servant without shelter. O Lord,  if You do not accept me, You will not remain a master. Who will  You dominate then?
  
Text 2 
 
āmādera e sambandha      bidhi-kṛta su-nirbandha
sa-bidhi tomāra guṇa-dhāma
ata eba nibedana         śuno he madhu-mathana
chāḍā-chāḍi nāhe kona kāma
 
     āmādera - of us; e - this; sambandha - relationship;bidhi- kṛta - ordained by fate; su-nirbandha - the perfect relationship; sa bidhi - destined; tomāra - of You; guṇa-dhāma - the abode of  virtues; ata eba - therefore; nibedana - appeal; śunaḥ - please hear; he - O; madhu-mathana - Kṛṣṇa; chāḍā- chāḍi - separation; nāhe - not; kona - something;kāma - desire.
 
     That is our relationship, ordained by fate. O Kṛṣṇa, O  killer of Madhu, You are the abode of all virtues. Therefore  please hear my appeal: I do not wish that we shall ever be apart.
 

Text 3 
 
e bhaktibinoda gāya      rākho more taba pāya
pālo more nā chāḍo kakhana
jabe mama pāo doṣa       koriyā ucita roṣa
daṇḍa diyā deo śrī-caraṇa
 
     e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; gāya - sings;  rākhaḥ - protect; Lord; more - me; taba - of You;pāya - attaining;  pālaḥ - protector; more - to me; nā - not;chāḍaḥ - rejection;  kakhana - sometime; jabe - when; mama - of me; pāaḥ - attain; doṣa - fault; koriyā - doing; ucita - proper; roṣa - anger; daṇḍa - punishment; diyā - giving;deaḥ - please give; śrī- caraṇa - graceful feet.
 
     Bhaktivinoda sings: Please protect me. Please never leave  me. When I am at fault, with proper anger please punish me, and  then place me at Your graceful feet.

 


Song 21
 

Text 1
 
hari he
strī-puruṣa-deha-gata      barṇa-ādi dharma jata
tāhe punaḥ deha-gata bheda
sattwa-rajas-tamo-guṇa        āśroyeche bheda punaḥ
ei-rūpa sahasra prabheda
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; strī-puruṣa-deha-gata - gone to a  female or male body; barṇa-ādi - beginning with the varnas;  dharma - dharma; jata - which;  tāhe - in that; punaḥ - again; deha-gata - gone to a body;  bheda - difference; sattwa-rajas-tamo-guṇa - the modes of goodness, passion, and ignorance;  āśroyeche - take shelter; bheda - difference; punaḥ - again;ei- rūpa - form; sahasra - thousand; prabheda - difference.
 
     Divided into male and female, divided again into varṇas and  other divisions, and then divided again by the modes of goodness,  passion, and ignorance, material bodies are divided in thousands  of different types.
 

Text 2 
 
jekhona śarīra thāki          jekhona abasthā rākhi
se saba ekhona taba pāya
saṁpilāma prāṇeśwara         mama boli' ataḥ para
āra kichu nā rohilo dāya
 
     jekhona - whatever; śarīra - body; thāki - I stay;  jekhona - whatever; abasthā - condition of life; rākhi - I attain;  se - them; saba - all; ekhona - one; taba - that;pāya - feet;  saṁpilāma - I offer; prāṇeśwara - O master of life;  mama - of me; boli' - saying; ataḥ para - then; āra - other; 
kichu - something; nā - not; rohilaḥ - stay; dāya - duty.
 
     In whatever kind of body I stay, and in whatever condition of life I  live, I offer everything to Your feet, O master of my life.  Saying that, I have no further duty to fulfill.
 

Text 3 
 
tumi prabhu rākho mora        saba taba adhikāra
āchi āmi tomāra kiṅkora
e bhaktibinoda bole      taba dāsya-kautūhole
thāki jena sadā-sebā-pora
 
     tumi - You; prabhu - master; rākhaḥ - please protect;mora - me; saba - all; taba - Your;  dhikāra - qualification; āchi - am;  āmi - I; tomāra - of You; kiṅkora - servant; e - this;  bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; bole - says; taba - of You;dāsya - of service; kautūhole - with the  oy; thāki - I stay;jena - as;  sadā - always; sebā - on service; pora - intent.
 
     O Lord, please protect me. Do whatever you wish, I am Your  servant. Bhaktivinoda says: I am always happy and eager to serve  You. 

 
 
Song 22
 

Texts 1 and 2
 
hari he
beda-bidhi-anusāre         karma kori' e soṁsāre
punaḥ punaḥ jība janma pāya
pūrba-kṛta-karma-phale        tomāra bā icchā-bale
janma jadi labhi punarāya

tabe eka kathā mama      śuno he puruṣottama
taba dāsa-saṅgi-jana-ghore
kīṭa-janma jadi hoya          tāhāte-o doyāmoya
rohibo he santuṣṭa antore
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; beda - of the Vedas; bidhi - therules;  anusāre - by following; karma - pious deeds; kori' - doing;e - this;  soṁsāre - in the world of birth and death; punaḥ -  again; punaḥ - and  again; jība - the individuual soul; janma - birth;pāya - attaining;  pūrba - previous; kṛta - done; karma - actions; phale - theresult;  tomāra - of You; bā - or; icchā - of desire; bale - by thepower;  janma - birth; jadi - if; labhi - I attain; punarāya - again; tabe - then;  eka - one; kathā - statement; mama - of me; śunaḥ - pleasehear;  he - O; puruṣottama - Supreme Person; taba - of You;dāsa - servants;  saṅgi - association; jana - people; ghore - in the home;kīṭa - an  insect or a worm; janma - birth; jadi - if; hoya - is;  tāhāte-aḥ - in that; doyāmoya - O merciful Lord; rohibaḥ - will  stay; he - indeed; santuṣṭa - happy; antore - within.
 
     Performing the pious deeds prescribed in the Vedas, the soul  takes birth again and again in this world. O Lord Kṛṣṇa, O  Supreme Person, if, either as the result of my previous deeds or 
by the power of Your desire I must again take birth in this  world, then please hear this request: If I must again take birth  in this world, please allow me to take birth in the home of  people who associate with Your servants. O merciful Lord, if I  am even an insect or a worm in such a home, I will be happy in my  heart.
 

Text 3  

taba dāsa-saṅga-hīna          je gṛhastha ārbacīna
tā'ra gṛhe caturmukha-bhūti
nā hao kakhana hari          kara-dwoya joḍa kori'
kore bhaktibinoda minati
 
     taba - of You; dāsa-saṅga-hīna - without the  association of devotees; je - which; gṛhastha - householder;  ārbacīna - neophyte; tā'ra - of him;  gṛhe - in the home; caturmukha - of the demigod Brahmā; bhūti - the  glory; nā - not; haaḥ - I leave; kakhana - when; hari - OKṛṣṇa; 
kara-dwoya - two hands; joḍa - folded; kori' - doing;kore - does;  bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; minati - prayer.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa please let me not take birth in the home of a  foolish householder who does not associate with Your servants,  even if his home is opulent like the planet of Brahmā. Folding 
his hands, Bhaktivinoda makes this request. 
 


Song 23
 

Text 1
 
hari he
tomāra je śuddha-bhakta         tomāte se anurakta
bhukti mukhti tuccha kori' jāne
bāreka dekhite taba      cid-ākāra-śrī-baibhaba
tṛṇa boli' anya sukha mane
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; tomāra -  - of You; je - who;śuddha-bhakta - pure devotee; tomāte - to You; se - he; anurakta - devoted;  bhukti - sense gratification; mukhti - impersonal liberation; 
tuccha - insignificant; kori' - doing; jāne - knows; bāreka - onetime;  dekhite - to see; taba - of You; cit - spiritual;  ākāra - form; śrī - handsomeness; baibhaba - powers and glories;  tṛṇa - a blade of grass; boli' - saying; anya - other;  sukha - happiness; mane - in the heart.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, falling in love with You, a pure devotee knows  that material sense pleasures and impersonal liberation are all  pathetic and insignificant. Anyone who once sees the glory of 
Your handsome form thinks in his heart that everything else is  worthless like crumbs of straw.
 

Text 2 
 
se saba bhaktera saṅge        līlā koro nānā-raṅge
biraha sahite nāhi pāra
kṛpā kori' akiñcane      dekhāo mahātma-gaṇe
sādhu binā gati nāhi āra
 
     se - these; saba - all; bhaktera - devotees; saṅge - in the  company; līlā - pastimes; koraḥ - do; nānā-raṅge - variouskinds;  biraha - separation; sahite - to tolerate; nāhi - not;pāra - able;  kṛpā - mercy; kori' - doing; akiñcane - pauper;  dekhāaḥ - please show; mahātma-gaṇe - the great souls;  sādhu - saints; binā - without; gati - shelter; nāhi - not;  āra - other.
 
     With these great souls You enjoy many pastimes. I cannot  bear to stay apart from them. O Lord, to this poor person please  kindly show me these great souls. I have no shelter but the 
saintly devotees. 
 
Text 3 
 
se bhakta-caraṇa-dhana        kabe pā'bo daraśana
sodhibo āmāra duṣṭa mana
e bhaktibinoda bhaṇe          kṛpā ha'be jata-khaṇe
mahātmara ho'be daraśana
 
     se - this; bhakta-caraṇa-dhana - the treasure of the devotee'sfeet; kabe - when; pā'baḥ - attain; daraśana - sight;  śodhibaḥ - will be pure; āmāra - my; duṣṭa - wicked;mana - heart;  e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; bhaṇe - says;  kṛpā - mercy; ha'be - will be; jata-khaṇe -  when; mahātmara - of  the great souls; ho'be - will be; daraśana - sight.
 
     When will I find the treasure of these devotees' feet? When  will my wicked heart become pure? Bhaktivinoda says: When You are  kind, I will see the great souls.

 
 
Song 24
 

Text 1
 
hari he
śuno he madhu-mathana      mama eka bijñāpana
biśeṣa koriyā boli āmi
tomāra sebātwa mama      swakiyā baibhabottama
āmi dāsa tumi mora swāmī
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; śunaḥ - please listen; he - O; madhu-mathana - killer of Madhu; mama - my; eka - one; bijñāpana - words;  biśeṣa - specific; koriyā - doing; boli - say; āmi - I;tomāra - of 
You; sebātwa - service; mama - of me; swakiyā - own;  baibhaba - glory; uttama - supreme; āmi - I; dāsa - servant;  tumi - You; mora - my; swāmī - master.
 
     O Kṛṣṇa, O killer of Madhu, please hear my words. I say that  service to You is my greatest wealth. I am Your servant, and You  are my master.
 

Text 2 
 
se-baibhaba-bahirbhūta        hoite hoile he acyuta
khaṇa-mātra sahite nā pāri
deho prāṇa sukha āśā          ātma prati bhalābāsa
sarba-tyāga korite bicāri
 
     se - this; baibhaba - treasure; bahirbhūta - different from;  hoite - from; hoile - is; he - O; acyuta - infallible Lord;khaṇa- mātra - for a single moment; sahite - to tolerate; nā - not;pāri - I 
am able; dehaḥ - body; prāṇa - life; sukha - happiness;āśā - desires; ātma - own self; prati - to; bhalābāsa - love;  sarba - all; tyāga - renunciation; korite - to do; bicāri - Ihave  decided. 

     O infallible Lord, I cannot for a single moment bear  anything that has no relation to this treasure of serving You.  Therefore I have no decided to renounce all attachment to this 
body, this life, material happiness, material desires, and  material egotism.
 

Text 3 
 
e saba jāuka nāśa        śata-bāra śrīnibāsa
tabu thāku dāsatwa tomāra
e bhaktibinoda koya      kṛṣṇa-dāsa jība hoya
dāsya binā kiba āche āra
 
     e - these; saba - all; jāuka - may go; nāśa - to  destruction; śata-bāra - a hundred times; śrīnibāsa - O resting  place of the goddess of fortune; tabu - then; thāku - may stay; 
dāsatwa - service; tomāra - of You; e - this;  bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; koya - is; kṛṣṇa-dāsa - srvant ofLord Kṛṣṇa; jība - soul; hoya - is;  dāsya - service; binā - without; kibā - what?; āche - is; āra - other.
 
     O resting place of the goddess of fortune, let these things  run to destruction a hundred times. I will always be Your  servant. Bhaktivinoda says: The individual soul is Lord Kṛṣṇa's 
servant. Without devotional service what does he possess?

 
 
Song 25
 

Text 1
 
hari he
āmi nara-paśu-prāya        ācāra-bihīna tāya
anādi ananta su-bistāra
ati-kaṣṭe parihārja          sahajete anibārja
aśubhera āspada ābāra
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; āmi - I; nara - human being;paśu - animal;  prāya - almost; ācāra - good conduct; bihīna - without;  tāya - of him;  anādi - without beginning; ananta - without end; su-bistāra - very  great; ati-kaste - in great suffering; parihārja - to be  rejected; sahajete - bear; 
anibārja - always; aśubhera - inauspicious; āspada - abode;  ābāra - again.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, I have become like a human beast. I have no  saintly activities. I am always thrown into great sufferings  without beginning or end. I am the abode of all that is 
inauspicious.
 

Text 2 
 
tumi to' doyāra sindhu        tumi to' jagad-bandhu
asīma bātsalya-payonidhi
taba guṇa-gaṇa smari'         bhaba-bandha cheda kori'
nirbhīka hoibo nirabadhi


     tumi - You; to' - indeed; doyāra - of mercy; sindhu - an  ocean; tumi - You; to' - indeed; jagad-bandhu - the friend of the world; asīma - limitless;  bātsalya - the love of a parent; payonidhi - an ocean; taba - ofYou;  guṇa-gaṇa - virtues; smari' - remenbering; bhaba - of the 
material world; bandha - bondage;  cheda - cutting; kori' - doing; nirbhīka - fearless;hoibaḥ - am;  nirabadhi - always.
 
     You are an ocean of mercy. You are the friend of the world.  You are a limitless ocean of love. Meditating on Your  transcendental qualities, and cutting the ropes that tie me to  this world of birth and death, I will be always fearless.
 

Text 3 
 
ei icchā kori' mane      śrī-jāmuna-caraṇe
gāya bhaktibinoda ekhana
jāmuna-bipina-bidhu      śrī-caraṇābja-sīdhu
tā'ra śire koruṇa arpaṇa

      ei - this; icchā - desire; kori' - doing; mane - in theheart;  śrī-jāmuna-caraṇe - at the feet of Śrī Yamunacarya; gāya - sings;  bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; ekhana - this; jāmuna - by the Yamuna  river; bipina - in the forest; bidhu - the moon;śrī - graceful;  caraṇa - feet; abja - lotus; sīdhu - nectar; -  tā'ra - ofhim;  śire - on the head; koruṇa - mercy; arpaṇa - placing.
 
     His heart filled with this desire, Bhaktivinoda stands  before Śrī Yāmunācārya's feet and sings: I pray that Lord Kṛṣṇa,  who is like a moon shining in the forests by the Yamunā's bank, 
and whose feet are like nectar lotus flowers, may place His mercy  upon my head.  
 


Song 26
 

Text 1
 
hari he
tumi jagatera pitā         tumi jagatera mātā
doyita tanoya hari tumi
tumi suhṛn mitra guru         tumi gati kalpa-taru
twadīya-sambandha-mātra āmi
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; tumi - You; jagatera - of theworld; pitā - the father; tumi - You; jagatera - of the world; mātā - the mother;  doyita - beloved;  tanoya - son; hari - O Kṛṣṇa; tumi - You; tumi - You;suhṛn - well-wisher;  mitra - friend; guru - spireitual master; tumi - You;  gati - ashelter; kalpa- taru - kalpa-vṛkṣa tree; twadīya - with You;  sambandha - relationship; mātra - only; āmi - I.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, You are the father of the univrese. You are  the mother of the universe. O Lord Kṛṣṇa, You are the beloved  son. You are the spiritual master, the well-wisher, and the 
friend. You are the shelter and the kalpa-vṛkṣa tree. In these  ways I have a relationship with You.
 

Text 2 
 
taba bhṛtya parijana          gati-prārthi akiñcana
prapanna tomāra śrī-caraṇe
taba sattwa taba dhana        tomāra pālita jana
āmāra mamatā taba jane
 
     taba - of You; bhṛtya - swrvant; parijana - follower;  gati - shelter; prārthi - begging; akiñcana - pauper;  prapanna - surrendered; tomāra - of You; śrī-caraṇe - at thefeet;  taba - of You; sattwa - goodness; taba - of You;dhana - wealth;  tomāra - of You; pālita - protected; jana - person; āmāra - of me; mamatā - possessiveness; taba - of You; jane - person. 

     I am Your servant, Your follower, a poor person who begs You  for shelter, a soul surrendered atb Your graceful feet. I am Your  property, Your creation, Your dependent protected by You. I am  Yours.
 

Text 3 
 
e bhaktibinoda koya      ahantā-mamatā noya
śrī-kṛṣṇa-sambandha-abhimāne
sebāra sambandha dhori'       ahantā-mamatā kori'
tad-itare prākṛta bidhāne
 
     e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; koya - says; ahantā mamatā - I and mine; noya - not; śrī-kṛṣṇa - with ŚrīKṛṣṇa; sambandha - relationship; abhimāne - thinking; sebāra - of service;  sambandha - relationship; dhori' - holding; ahantā-mamatā - I  and mine; kori' - doing; tad-itare - another;prākṛta - material;  bidhāne - arrangement.
 
     Bhaktivinoda says: I do not proudly think "I" and  "mine" in my relationship with Lord Kṛṣṇa. Still, as I  serve Him, I do think in terms of "I" and "mine". Outside of  serving Him, these would be only material thoughts. 
 


Song 27
 

Text 1
 
hari he
āmi to' cañcala-mati       amaryāda khudra ati
asūya-prasaba sadā mora
pāpiṣṭha kṛtaghna mānī        nṛśaṁsa bañcane jñānī
kāma-baśe thāki sadā ghora
 
     hari - Kṛṣṇa; he - O; āmi - I; to' - indeed; cancala - restless; mati - heart; amaryāda - beyond the bounds  of what is proper; khudra - petty; ati - very;  asūya - of envy; prasaba - creation; sadā - always; mora - ofme;  pāpiṣṭha - sinner; kṛtaghna - ungrateful; mānī - proud;  nṛśaṁsa - cruel; bañcane - in cheating; jnānī - learned; kāma - of lust; baśe - in the control;  thāki - I stay;  sadā - always; ghora - horrible.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, I am always restless at heart, ill-mannered,  petty, envious, sinful, ungrateful, proud, cruel, vicious, expert  in cheating others, ferocious, horrible, and always in lust's  grip.
 

Text 2 
 
e heno durjana ho'ye          e duḥkha-jaladhi bo'ye
caritechi soṁsāra-sāgore
kemone e bhabāmbudhi          pāra ho'ye nirabadhi
taba pada-sebā mile more
 
     e henaḥ - like this; durjana - wicked; ho'ye - is;e - this;  duḥkha-jaladhi - ocean of sufferings; bo'ye - is; caritechi - go;  soṁsāra-sāgore - in the ocean of birth and death; kemone - how?;  e - this; bhaba - of the material world; ambudhi - ocea;  pāra - crossing to the farther shore; ho'ye - is;nirabadhi - always;  taba - of You; pada-sebā - service to the feet; mile - meets;more - me.
 
     Being so wicked, I am always plunged in an ocean of  sufferings. I swim in the ocean of birth and death. How will I  find the shore of the ocean of birth and death? How will I find  service to Your feet? 


Text 3 
 
tomāra koruṇā pāi        taba to' toriyā jāi
amki e duranta-sāgora
tumi prabhu śrī-caraṇe        rākho dāse dhūli-sane
nahe bhaktibinoda kātora
 
     tomāra - of You; koruṇā - mercy; pāi - I attain;taba - of You; to' - indeed; toriyā - crossing; jāi - go; amki - I;  e - this; duranta - impassable; sāgora - ocean; tumi - You;prabhu - O  master; śrī-caraṇe - at the graceful feet; rākhaḥ - please  protect; dāse - servant; dhūli - dust; sane - in the association;  nahe - not; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; kātora - suffers.
 
     Only if I get Your mercy will I cross this impassable ocean.  O Lord, please keep this servant with the dust under Your  graceful feet. Then Bhaktivinoda will no longer suffer.

 
 
Part 2 A Record-book of Appeals for Mercy
Song 1
Text 1
 
āmi ati dina-mati        braja-kuñje nibasati
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-jugala-caraṇe
kāndiyā kāndiyā aja      chāḍi' saba loka laja
nibedibo jata āche mane
 
     āmi - I; ati - very; dina-mati - poor-hearted; braja- kuñje - in the forest of Vraja; nibasati - residence; rādhā- kṛṣṇa-jugala-caraṇe - the feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa;  kāndiyā - weeping; kāndiyā - and weeping; aja - now;  chāḍi' - renouncing; saba - all;  loka - world; laja - shyness; nibedibaḥ - offer prayers;  jata - which; āche - are; mane - in the heart.
 
     Weeping and weeping, and turning away from all shyness, I, a  very poor-hearted person who lives in Vraja's forests, now speaks  the prayers that are in my heart.
 

Text 2 
 
tumi kṛṣṇa nīlamaṇi      naba-megha-prabhā jini'
brajānanda koro bitaraṇa
tumi rādhe naba-gaurī         gorocanā-garba hori'
braje horo kṛṣṇacandra-mana
 
     tumi - You; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; nīlamaṇi - sapphire;naba - new;  megha - cloud; prabhā - splendor; jini' - defeating;brajānanda - the  bliss of Vraja; koraḥ - do; bitaraṇa - giving; tumi - You; rādhe - Rādhā;  naba-gaurī - new and fair; gorocanā-garba - the pride of  gorocana; hori' - removing; braje - in Vraja; horaḥ - do; kṛṣṇacandra-mana - the heart of Kṛṣṇa.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, defeating the splendor of sapphires and new  clouds, You delight the people of Vraja. O Śrī Rādhā, Your fair  complexion removing the pride of yellow gorocanā, You charm Lord  Kṛṣṇa's heart.
 

Text 3 
 
tumi kṛṣṇa pītāmbare          parājiyā ārtaśware
braja-bane nitya-keli-rata
tumi rādhe nīlāmbarī          palāśera garba hari'
kṛṣṇa-keli-sahāya satata
 
     tumi - You; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; pītāmbare - yellow garments;  parājiyā - defeating; ārtaśware - gold; braja-bane - in the forst  of Vraja; nitya - eternal; keli - pastimes; rata - relighted; tumi - You;  rādhe - O Rādhā; nīlāmbarī - blue garments; palāśera - of  the palasa flower; garba - the pride; hari' - removing;kṛṣṇa- keli-sahāya - helping Kṛṣṇa's pastimes; satata - always.
 
     O Kṛṣṇa who eternally enjoys pastimes in Vraja's forests,  dressed in yellow garments, You conquer gold. O Śrī Rādhā who  eternally helps Lord Kṛṣṇa in His pastimes, dressed in blue 
garemnts, You remove the palāśa flower's pride.
 

Text 4 
 
tumi kṛṣṇa harinmaṇi          jubā-bṛnda-śiromaṇi
rādhikā tomāra prāṇeśwarī
brajaṅgaṇa-siraḥ-śobhā        dhammila-mallikā-probhā
tumi rādhe kṛṣṇa-priyāṅkarī
 
     tumi - You; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; harinmaṇi - sapphire;jubā- bṛnda-śiromaṇi - the crest jewel of youths; rādhikā - Rādhā;  tomāra - of You; prāṇeśwarī - the queen of life; brajaṅgaṇa- siraḥ - head; śobhā - beauty; dhammila - braids;mallikā - jasmine  flowers; probhā - splendor; tumi - You; rādhe - O Rādhā; kṛṣṇa- priyāṅkarī - pleasing Kṛṣṇa.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, You are the sapphire in the crown of all  youths. Rādhā is the queen of Your life. O Śrī Rādhā, You are the  jasmine crown decorating the braids of Vraja's girls. You are 
always eager to please Lord Kṛṣṇa.

 
Text 5 
 
ramā-pati-śobhā jini'        kṛṣṇa taba rūpa-khāni
jagat mātāya braja-bane
ramā jini' brajāṅganā-         gaṇa-madhye su-śobhana
tumi rādhe kṛṣṇa-cittāṅgane
 
     ramā-pati - of lord Nārāyaṇa; śobhā - the splendor;jini' - defeating; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; taba - of You; rūpa-khāni - the form;  jagat - the world;  mātāya - wild with bliss; braja-bane - in Vraja's forest;  ramā - Goddess Lakṣmī; jini' - defeating; brajāṅganā-gaṇa - the  girls of Vraja;  madhye - in the midst; su-śobhana - very beautiful; tumi - You; rādhe - Rādhā; kṛṣṇa - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; citta - of the heart; aṅgane - in  the courtyard.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, defeating the splendor of Lord Nārāyaṇa, Your  handsome form in Vraja's forests makes the whole world wild with  bliss. O Śrī Rādhā, defeating Goddess Lakṣmī, in the courtyard of  Lord Kṛṣṇa's heart You are the most beautiful of Vraja's girls.
 

Text 6 
 
taraṅga-saurabha-kaṇa         baṁśī-gīta anukhaṇa
ohe kṛṣṇa rādhā-mana hore
rādhe aṅga-gandha taba        tomāra su-binā-raba
kṛṣṇa-citta unmādita kore
 
     taraṅga - waves; saurabha - fragrance; kaṇa - particle;  baṁśī - flute; gīta - music; anukhaṇa - at every moment;ohe - O;  kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;  rādhā - Rādhā's; mana - heart; hore - steal; rādhe - ORādhā; aṅga - of the  limbs; gandha - the fragrance; taba - Your; tomāra - Your; su- bīṇā - vina; 
raba - sound; kṛṣṇa-citta - Kṛṣṇa's heart; unmādita - wild with  bliss; kore - does.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, with flute music and with waves of sweet  fragrance You charm Rādhā's heart at every moment. O Śrī Rādhā,  with vīṇā music and with the fragrance of Your limbs You make 
Lord Kṛṣṇa's heart wild with bliss.
 

Text 7 
 
tomāra capalekhaṇa       hare rādhā-dhairya-dhana
tumi kṛṣṇa cora-śiromaṇi
baṅka dṛṣṭi-bhaṅgi taba       śrī-kṛṣṇa-hṛdayāsaba
tumi rādhe kalābatī dhanī
 
     tomāra - of You; capala - restless; īkhaṇa - eyes;  hare - rob; rādhā - of Rādhā; dhairya - the peace; dhana - thewealth;  tumi - You; kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; cora - of thieves;śiromaṇi - crest jewel; 
baṅka - crooked; dṛṣṭi - glances; bhaṅgi - waves;taba - Your; śrī- kṛṣṇa - of Śrī Kṛṣṇa hṛdaya - heart; āsaba - intoxicating;  tumi - You; rādhe - Rādhā; kalābatī - graceful artist;  dhanī - wealthy.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, O crest jewel of thieves, with Your restless  glances You have robbed Rādhā of Her wealth of peacefulness. O  graceful artist, O wealthy Śrī Rādhā, Your waves of crooked 
glances make Lord Kṛṣṇa intoxicated with bliss.
 

Text 8 
 
parihāse rādhikāra       kathā nāhi sare jāra
tumi kṛṣṇa naṭa-kula-guru
kṛṣṇa narma-ukti śuni'        romañcita tanu-khani
taba rādhe rasa-kalpa-taru
 
     parihāse - in joking; rādhikāra - of Rādhā;kathā - talks;  nāhi - not; sare - do; jāra - of which; tumi - You;kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;  naṭa-kula - of dancers; guru - the master; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;narma- ukti - joking words; śuni' - hearing; romañcita - hairs  standing erect;  tanu-khani - body; taba - Your; rādhe - Rādhā; rasa-kalpa- taru - nectar kalpa-vṛkṣa tree.
 
     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, O master of dancers and actors, Rādhā's jokessometimes make You speechless. O Śrī Rādhā, O kalpa-vṛkṣa tree of  nectar, hearing Lord Kṛṣṇa's jokes, You become ecstatic, and the  hairs of Your body stand erect.



Text 9 
 
aprākṛta-guṇa-maṇi-       binirmita-giri-śreṇi
tumi kṛṣṇa sarba-guṇa-moya
umādi ramaṇī-jana       bāñchanīya guṇa-gaṇa
rādhe taba swabhābika hoya
 
     aprākṛta - not material; guṇa - virtues; maṇi - jewel;  binirmita - made; giri - of mountains; śreṇi - series;tumi - You;  kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; sarba - all; guṇa - virtues;moya - consisting;  umā - Parvati; ādi - beginning with; ramaṇī-jana - beautifulgirls;  bāñchanīya - desired; guṇa-gaṇa - virtues; rādhe - O  Rādhā; taba - of You; swabhābika - nature; hoya - is.
 
     O all-virtuous Kṛṣṇa, You are a mountain range made of the  jewels of transcendental qualities. O Śrī Rādhā, You possess a  host of transcendental qualities Pārvatī and other beautiful  girls yearn to attain.
 

Text 10 
 
āmi ati manda-mati       kori he kākuti nati
nikhapaṭe e prārthana kori
bṛndābana-adhīśwara      tumi kṛṣṇa prāṇeśwara
tumi rādhe braja-baneśwarī
 
     āmi - I; ati - very; manda-mati - foolish at heart;  kori - do; he - O; kākuti - words filled with emotion;nati - bowing  down; nikhapaṭe - sincere; e - this; prārthana - prayer;kori - do; 
bṛndābana-adhīśwara - O king of Vṛndāvana; tumi - You;  kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; prāṇeśwara - master of life; tumi - You; rādhe - Rādhā; braja-baneśwarī - the queen of Vraja's forests.
 
     O Kṛṣṇa of Vṛndāvana, O queen of Vraja's forests, O rulers  of my life, with words choked with emotion, I, a great fool,  place this honest request before You both.
 

Text 11 
 
tomādera kṛpā pāi       e-rūpa jogyatā nāi
jadi āmāra braja-bane
duṅhe mama kṛpā-moya jāni' kainu padāśroya
kṛpā koro e adhama jane
 
     tomādera - of You; kṛpā - mercy; pāi - I attain; e- rūpa - in this way; jogyatā -  appropriateness; nāi - not;jadi - if;  āmāra - of me; braja-bane - in the forests of Vraja; duṅhe - two;  mama - my; kṛpā-moya - made of mercy; jāni' - knowing; kainu - Ido;  padāśroya - shelter of the feet; kṛpā - mercy; koraḥ - please  do; e - this; adhama - lowest; jane - person.
 
     If You think I am not worthy to receive Your mercy in this  forest of Vraja, please be merciful anyway to this fallen person.  O merciful king and queen, I take shelter of Your feet.
 

Text 12 
 
kebala ajogya nahi       aparādhī āmi hoi
tathāpi koroho kṛpā dāna
loke kṛpābiṣṭa jana      khame aparādha-gaṇa
tumi duṅhe mahā-kṛpābān
 
     kebala - only; ajogya - unsuitable; nāhi - not;  aparādhī - offender; āmi - I; hoi - am; tathāpi - still;korohaḥ - do;  kṛpā - mercy; dāna - in gift; loke - in the world;kṛpā - mercy;  ābiṣṭa - entered; jana - person; khame - forgiveness;  aparādha-gaṇa - offenses;  tumi - You; duṅhe - both; mahā-kṛpābān - very merciful. 

     Although I am unworthy, and although I am an offender,  please be merciful to me. You two are very merciful. You forgive  a host of offenses. 
 

Text 13 
 
kṛpā-hetu bhakti-sāra         leśābhāsa nāhi tā'ra
kṛpā-adhikārī nāhi āmi
duṅhe mahā-līleśwara           hana sei līlāpara
kṛpā koro braja-jana-swāmī
 
     kṛpā - of mercy; hetu - the cause; bhakti - devotion;  sāra - best; leśa - slight; ābhāsa - dim light;nāhi - not;  tā'ra - of that; kṛpā-adhikārī - qualified for mercy;nāhi - not;  āmi - I; duṅhe - You two; mahā-līleśwara - the masters of  playful pastimes; hana - are; sei - this; līlāpara - intent on enjoying pastimes; kṛpā - mercy; koraḥ - please do; brajajana- swāmī - O king and queen of Vraja. 

     I do not possess even a single drop of the shadow of  devotion to You, devotion that brings Your mercy. I am not worthy  to receive Your mercy. Still, O playful king and queen of 
pastimes, O rulers of Vraja's people, please be merciful  to me anyway.
 

Text 14 
 
su-duṣṭa abhakta jane         sibādi debata-gaṇe
prasanna hoilo kṛpā kori'
mahā-līlā sarbeśwara          duṅhu mama prāṇeśwara
doyā koro doṣa parihori'
 
     su-duṣṭa - very wicked; abhakta - nondevotee; jane - person; śiba-ādi - beginning with Lord Śiva; debata- gaṇe - demigods; prasanna - pleased;  hoilaḥ - are; kṛpā - mercy; kori' - doing; mahā-līlā - greatpastimes;  sarbeśwara - masters of all; duṅhu - both; mama - of me;  prāṇeśwara - rulers of life; doyā - mercy; koraḥ - please do; doṣa - faults; parihori' - removing.
 
     You were merciful to Śiva and the demigods. You were  merciful even to the wicked nondevotees. O playful rulers of all,  O king and queen of my life, please forgive my faults and be  merciful to me.
 

Text 15 
 
adhame uttama maṇi      mūḍha bijña abhimānī
duṣṭa hana siṣṭa-abhimāna
ei doṣe doṣi hana        gelo ciro-dina bana
nā korinu bhajana-bidhāna
 
     adhame - low; uttama - exalted; maṇi - think;mūḍha - fool;  bijña - wise; abhimānī - proud; 
duṣṭa - wicked; hana - am; siṣṭa-abhimāna - proud of being a  saint; ei - these; doṣe - faults; doṣi - faulty;hana - am;  gelaḥ - gone; ciro-dina - many days; bana - am; nā - not;korinu - do; 
bhajana-bidhāna - devotional service. 

     Although I am lowly, I proudly think myself exalted.  Although I am a fool, I proudly think myself wise. Although I am  wicked, I proudly think myself a saint. These are my faults. Many 
days have passed, and still I do not worship You.
 

Text 16 
 
tathāpi e dīna-jane      jadi nāma-uccaraṇe
nāmābhāse korilo jībane
sarba-doṣa-nibaraṇa      duṅhu nāma-sañjalpana
prasāde prasīda dui jane
 
     tathāpi - still; e - this; dīna-jane - poor person;  jadi - if; nāma - the holy name; uccaraṇe - in chanting;  nāmābhāse - namabhasa; korilaḥ - does; jībane - life; sarbadoṣa- nibaraṇa - free of all sins; duṅhu - both; nāma-sanjalpana - chanting the holy name; prasāde - with mercy;  prasīda - please be kind; dui - both; jane - people.
 
     Still, if in this lifetime this poor person somehow chants the  dim light (nāmābhāsa) of the holy name, then please, O divine  couple, be merciful to him, free him of his faults, and allow him  to chant Your holy names.
 

Text 17 
 
bhakti-laba-mātre khoya       sarba-aparādhā hoya
khama-śīla duṅhera kṛpāya
e āśā mane dhori'        caraṇe prārthana kori'
śodha doṣa khamiyā amāya
 
     bhakti-laba-mātre - a tiny fragment of devotional service;  khoya - destruction; sarba-aparādhā - all offenses; hoya - is; khama-śīla - forgiving; duṅhera - of both; kṛpāya - mercy;e - this; āśā - desire; mane - in the heart; dhori' - holding;  caraṇe - at the feet; prārthana - prayer; kori' - doing;  śodha - purify; doṣa - faults; khamiyā - excusing; amāya - my.
 
     Even a small fragment of devotional service destroys all  offenses. O merciful divine couple, please forgive me and purify  me of my faults. That is the desire in my heart. That is the  prayer I place before your feet.
 

Text 18 
 
sādhana-sampatti-hīna         ohe e jība dīna
ati-kaṣṭe dhṛṣṭatara chāra
duṅhu pada-nipatita      prārthana koroye hita
prasannatā hauka doṅhāra
 
     sādhana - sadhana; sampatti - good fortune; hīna - without;  ohe - O; e - this; jība - soul; dīna - poor; atikaṣṭe - great pain;  dhṛṣṭatara - arrogant; chāra - pile of ashes; duṅhu - both;pada-
nipatita - fallen; prārthana - prayer; koroye - do;hita - welfare; prasannatā - being pleased; hauka - may be; doṅhāra - You  both.
 
     This poor soul who has no wealth of devotional service, this  person proud of how hard he struggles and how he suffers, this  person worthless like a pile of ashes falls before Your feet and 
prays for Your kindness. Please be pleased with with him.
  

Text 19 
 
dante tṛṇa dhori' hāya        kānditeche ubharāya
e pāpī kampita śarīra
ha nātha ha nātha boli'       ho'ye aji kṛtāñjali
prasāda arpiyā koro sthira
 
     dante - in the teeth; tṛṇa - straw; dhori' - holding;hāya - is; kānditeche - weeps; ubharāya - loudly; e - this;  pāpī - sinner; kampita - trembling; śarīra - body; ha - O;  nātha - Lord; ha - o; nātha - Lord; boli' - saying;ho'ye - is;  aji - now; kṛtāñjali - folded hands; prasāda - mercy; 
arpiyā - offering; koraḥ - please make; sthira - peaceful and steady.
 
     Loudly weeping, his body trembling, his hands folded, and a  of straw between his teeth, this sinner says: O master! O master!  Please kindly make me peaceful.
 

Text 20 
 
e durbhaga ha ha sware        prasāda prārthanā kore
anutāpe gaḍāgaḍi jāya
he rādhe he kṛṣṇacandra       śuno mama kāku-bāda
tuṅhu kṛpā binā prāṇa jāya
 
     e - this; durbhaga - misfortune; ha - O; ha - O;sware - words;  prasāda - mercy; prārthanā - prayer; kore - does;  anutāpe - repentance; gaḍāgaḍi - rolling on the ground;  jāya - going; he - O; rādhe - Rādhā; he - O;kṛṣṇacandra - Kṛṣṇa; śunaḥ - please hear; mama - my;  āku-bāda - words filled with  emotion; tuṅhu - You; kṛpā - mercy; binā - without;  prāṇa - life; jāya - goes. 

     Calling out, "O! O!", this miserable person begs for  mercy. Repenting his sins, he rolls about on the ground. He says,  "O Rādhā! O Kṛṣṇacandra! Please hear my words choked with 
emotion. Without Your mercy my life-breath will flee away."
 

Text 21 
 
phutkāra koriyā kānde         āhā āhā kāku-nāde
bole hao prasanna amāya
ei to' ajogya jane       kṛpā koro nija-guṇe
koruṇa-sāgara rākho pāya
 
     phutkāra - calling out; koriyā - doing; kānde - weep;  āhā - Ah; āhā - Ah; kāku-nāde - with an emotional voice;  bole - say; haaḥ - please be;  prasanna - pleased; amāya - with me; ei - this; to' - indeed;  ajogya - unworthy; jane - person; kṛpā - mercy; koraḥ - pleasedo;  nija-guṇe - own virtue;  koruṇa-sāgara - O ocean of mercy; rākhaḥ - please keep; pāya - at  the feet.
 
     Weeping, I call out, "O! O!" In a voice choked with  emotion I say: Please be pleased with me. Becuase You have all  good qualities, please be merciful to this unworthy person. O  oceans of mercy, please keep me at Your feet. 
 

Text 22 
 
mukhete aṅguṣṭha diyā         uccaiḥsware ārta hana
kāndite kāndite bole nātha
koruṇa-kaṇikā-dāne       rākha koro mora prāṇe
koro ei dine ātma-śāṭha
 
     mukhete - in the mouth; aṅguṣṭha - thumb; diyā - placing; uccaiḥsware - with a loud voice; ārta - distraught;  hana - am; kāndite - weeping; kāndite - and weeping;bole - say;  nātha - O master; koruṇa - of mercy; kaṇikā - particle;dāne - gift; rākha - protect; koraḥ - do;  ora - of me; prāṇe - life;  koraḥ - do; ei - this; dine - poor person; ātmaśāṭha - acceptance.
 
     Placing my thumb in my mouth I make a loud sound of grief.  Weeping and weeping, I say: O master, please give me a small  particle of Your mercy. Please rescue my life. Please accept this  poor person. 
 

Text 23 
 
e taba mūḍha-jana        dīna-bākye su-krandana
prārthanā koroye dṛḍha-mane
he koruṇā-sunidhāna      anugati koro dāna
koruṇormi-cchaṭā braja-bane
 
     e - this; taba - You; mūḍha-jana - fool; dīnabākye - with poor words; su-krandana - with weeping;  prārthanā - prayer;  koroye - does; dṛḍha-mane - determined heart; he - Vaiṣṇava;
koruṇā-sunidhāna - abode of mercy; anugati - the state of  being a follower; koraḥ - please do; 
dāna - gift; koruṇa - of mercy; ūrmi - waves;  chaṭā - abundance; braja-bane - forests of Vraja.
 
     Weeping, this fool earnestly and humbly prays: O abodes of  mercy, please splash me with Your waves of mercy in this forest  of Vraja.
 

Text 24 
 
bhāba citta-sukhakara         jata āche su-madhura
prakaṭāprakaṭa līlā-sthāne
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-prema-sāra        sakalera sārāt sāra
sei bhāba jeni kṛpā-bale
 
     bhāba - being; citta-sukhakara - pleasing the heart;  jata - which; āche - is; su-madhura - very sweet;prakaṭa - manifest;  aprakaṭa - and unmanifest; līlā - pastimes; sthāne - places;rādhā- kṛṣṇa - for Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; prema - love;sāra - best;  sakalera - of all; sārāt - of the best; sāra - best;sei - this;  bhāba - state; jeni - which; kṛpā-bale - by the power of mercy.
 
     In the places of Your manifest and unmanifest pastimes the  different states of being are all very sweet and pleasing to the  heart. Of all these states of being, pure love for Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, which is attained only by Your mercy, is the best of the  best.
 

Text 25 
 
jodi e dāsīra prati      prasanna koruṇā-mati
duṅhu pada-sebā koro dāna
āra kichu nāhi cāi       jugala-caraṇa pāi
śītala hauka mora prāṇa
 
     jodi - if; e - this; dāsīra - maidservant; prati - to;  prasanna - pleased; koruṇā-mati - merciful heart; duṅhu - both;  pada - of the feet; -sebā - service; koraḥ - please do;dāna - gift;  āra - other; kichu - something; nāhi - not; cāi - I desire;  jugala - of the divine couple; caraṇa - feet; pāi - I attain;  śītala - cool; hauka - may be; mora - my; prāṇa - life.
 
     If You are pleased with this maidservant and in Your hearts  feel kind to her, then please give her the gift of service to  Your feet. Please allow me to approach Your feet. That will cool  the fever that burns my life. That is all I desire.
 

Text 26 
 
anātha-batsala tumi      adhama anātha āmi
twadīya sākhāt-dāsya māgi
e prasāda koro dāna      rākho anātheraprāṇa
chāḍi' saba taba dāsya māgi
 
     anātha - to they who have no master; batsala - affectionate;  tumi - You; adhama - lowest; anātha - without a master;āmi - I;  twadīya - Your; sākhāt - direct; dāsya - service;māgi - beg; 
e - this; prasāda - mercy; koraḥ - please do; dāna - gift;  rākhaḥ - protect; anāthera - who has no master; prāṇa - life;  chāḍi' - leaving; saba - all; taba - of You;dāsya - service; māgi - I  beg.
 
     You are kind and affectionate to persons who have no master  or shelter. I am very low and fallen. I have no master. I have no  shelter. I beg to serve You directly. Please give me the gift of 
Your mercy. Please save the life of this person without master or  shelter. Turning away from all else I beg to serve You. 
 

Text 27 
 
śirete añjali dhori'          o-pade bijapti kori
āmāra abhīṣṭa nibedana
eka-bāra dāsya diyā      śītala koro he hiyā
tabe māni sārthāka jībana
 
     śirete - on the head; añjali - folded hands;dhori' - placing; o-pade - at the feet; bijapti - request; kori - I do;  āmāra - of me; abhīṣṭa - desire; nibedana - request; eka- bāra - one time; dāsya - service; diyā - giving;śītala - cool;  koraḥ - please do; he - O; hiyā - heart; tabe -  then; māni - I think;  sārthāka - a success; jībana - life.
 
     My folded hands resting on my head, I place this request  before Your feet: One time please allow me to serve You. In this  way You will cool my feverish heart. Then I will think my life is 
a success. 


Text 28 
 
kabe duṅhe ei bane       bilokibo sammilane
amūlyāṅga-parimala-ghrāṇa
āmāra nāsikā-dware       prabeśiyā citta-pure
acaitanya koribe bidhāna
 
     kabe - when; duṅhe - both; ei - this; bane - in theforest;  bilokibaḥ - will see; sammilane - meeting; amūlya - priceless;aṅga - of  the limbs; parimala - fragrance;  ghrāṇa - smelling; āmāra - of me; nāsikā-dware - by the  nostrils; prabeśiyā - entering; citta-pure - the city of the  heart; 
acaitanya - unconscious; koribe - will become; bidhāna - action.
 
     When will I see You both meet in the forest? When, the  priceless fragrance of Your limbs entering the city of my heart,  will I suddenly fall unconscious? 
 

Text 29 
 
duṅhāra nūpura-dhwani         haṁsa-kaṇṭha-swara jini'
madhura madhura mama kāne
prabeśiyā kona khaṇe          mama citta-surañjane
mātāibe sebā-rasa-pāne
 
     duṅhāra - of You two; nūpura - of the anklets; dhwani - the  sound; haṁsa - of swans; kaṇṭha - throat; swara - sound;  jini' - defeating; madhura - sweet; madhura - sweet; mama - my; kāne - in  the ear; prabeśiyā - entering; kona - at what?;khaṇe - moment;  mama - my; citta - of the heart; surañjane - delight;  mātāibe - will make wild; sebā-rasa-pāne - by drinking the nectar 
of service. 

     When will the sweet, sweet tinkling of Your anklets, a tinkling that  defeats the cooing of swans, enter my ears? When, with a happy  heart drinking the nectar of service to You, will I become wild  with bliss?
 

Text 30 
 
cakrādi saubhāgyāspada        bilakhita duṅhu pada
cihna ei bṛndābana-bane
dekhiyā e dāsī kabe      bhāsibe ānandotsabe
duṅhu kṛpā peye saṅgopane
 
     cakra - cakra; ādi - beginning; saubhāgya - of good fortune;  aspada - abode; bilakhita - seen; duṅhu - of You both; pada - of  the feet; cihna - the marks; ei - this; bṛndābana-bane – in Vṛndāvana  forest; dekhiyā - seeing; e - this; dāsī - maidservant;kabe - when?; bhāsibe - will float; ānanda - of bliss; utsabe - in a  festival; duṅhu - both; kṛpā - mercy; peye - attain; 
saṅgopane - in secret.
 
     When, in Vṛndāvana forest seeing Your auspicious footprints  bearing the cakra and other marks, will this maidservant,  secretly attaining Your mercy, float in a festival of bliss?
 

Text 31 
 
sakala-saundarjāspada         nīrājita duṅhu pada
he rādhe he nandera nandana
mamākhi-gocare kabe      sarbādbhuta-mahotsabe
koribe ānanda-bitaraṇa
 
     sakala - all; saundarja - of beauty; aspada - abode;  nīrājita - splendid; duṅhu - both; pada - feet; he - O;  rādhe - Rādhā; he - O; nandera nandana - son of Nanda; mama - ofme;  akhi - of the eyes; gocare - in the realm of perception;kabe - when?; sarbādbhuta-mahotsabe - great festival; koribe - will  do; ānanda-bitaraṇa - giving bliss.
 
     O Rādhā, O Kṛṣṇa, when, Your splendid feet, feet that are  the abode of all beauty, come before my eyes, will i celebrate a  wonderful festival of bliss?
 

Text 32 
 
pracīnāśā phala-pūrti         tuṅhu padāmbhuja-sphūrti
sei duṅhu jana-daraśana
e janme ki habe mama          e utkaṇṭhā su-biṣama
bicalita kore mama mana
 
     pracīna - old; āśā - desires; phala - result;  pūrti - fulfillment; tuṅhu - You; pada - feet; ambhuja - lotus;  sphūrti - manifestation; sei - this; duṅhu - both;jana - people;  daraśana - sight; e - this; janme - birth; ki - whether;habe - will be;  mama - of me; e - this; utkaṇṭhā - yearning; su- biṣama - great; bicalita - thought; kore - do; mama - my;mana - in  the heart.
 
     For a long time I have yearned to see Your lotus feet. Will  this difficult to attain desire be fulfilled in this birth? That  is the thought in my heart.
 

Text 33 
 
kabe āmi bṛndābana-      kuñjāntare daraśana
koribo sundara duṅhu jane
surata-līlāya rata       āmā hoite adūrata
preme magna ha'bo daraśane
 
     kabe - when?; āmi - I; bṛndābana- - of Vṛndāvana;kunjāntare - in the forest; daraśana - sight; koribaḥ - will do;  sundara - beautiful; duṅhu - both; jane - persons; surata- līlāya - amorous pastimes; rata - enjoying; āmā - me;  hoite - from; adūrata - not far away; preme - in love;  magna - plunged; ha'baḥ - will be; daraśane - sight.
 
     When will I see You two beautiful lovers enjoy amorous  pastimes in the groves of Vṛndāvana forest not far away from me?  When, gazing at You, will I become plunged into bliss? 


Text 34 
 
ghaṭanābaśataḥ kabe      duṅhu joga asambhabe
paraspara sandeśa āniyā
bāḍāibo duṅhu sukha      jabe tabe mano-duḥkha
bāḍāibo ānande mātiyā
 
     ghaṭanābaśataḥ - in the course of events; kabe - when?;  duṅhu - both; joga - meeting; asambhabe - not possible;paraspara - of  each other; sandeśa - letters; āniyā - carrying;bāḍāibaḥ - I will  increase; duṅhu - of You both; sukha - the happiness;jabe - when;  tabe - then; manaḥ - of the heart; duḥkha - suffering;  bāḍāibaḥ - I will send away; ānande - with bliss; mātiyā - wild.
 
     When, carrying Your letters to each other when You  cannot meet, and thus banishing the sufferings of Your hearts and  increasing Your happiness, will I become wild with bliss?
 

Text 35 
 
kabe ei bṛndābane        duṅhu duṅha adarśane
phire ja'bo duṅhe anweṣiyā
sammilana korāibo        hara-padakādi pā'bo
parituṣṭa duṅhāre koriyā  
 
     kabe - when; ei - this; bṛndābane - in Vṛndāvana;  duṅhu - both; duṅha - both; adarśane - not seeing;phire - go; ja'baḥ - will  go; duṅhe - both;  anweṣiyā - searching; sammilana - meeting; korāibaḥ - will  do; hāra - necklace; padaka - locket; ādi - beginning;pā'baḥ - will attain; 
parituṣṭa - pleased; duṅhāre - both; koriyā - making.
 
     When, the two of You searching for each other in Vṛndāvana  forest and not finding each other, will I bring You together and,  pleasing You, receive a necklace, locket, and other things as a  reward?
 

Text 36 
 
duṅhe hāra dhori' paṇe        dyūta-krīḍā samāpane
āmi jayī āmi jayī boli'
koribe kalaha tabe       hara-saṅgrahete kabe
āmi tāhā dekhibo sakali
 
     duṅhe - both; hāra - necklace; dhori' - holding; paṇe - as the prize; dyūta-krīḍā - in the gambling match; samāpane - in  attaining; āmi - I; jayī - victor; āmi - I am;jayī - victor; boli' - I 
am; koribe - will do; kalaha - dispute; tabe - then; hara saṅgrahete - in taking the necklace; kabe - when?; āmi - I;  tāhā - this; dekhibaḥ - will see; sakali - all.
 
     I will hold the necklace intended as the victor's prize in  the gambling match, and You will quarrel over the necklace, each  of You claiming, "I won. I won." When will I see all  this?
 

Text 37 
 
āhā kabe dui jane        kuñja-mājhe su-sayane
kusuma-śayyāya birāmibe
se samaye duṅhu pada          sambahana-susampada
e dāsīra saubhāgya milibe
 
     āhā - O; kabe - when; dui - two; jane - people;kunja-mājhe - in the forest; su-sayane - resting; kusuma - of  flowers; śayyāya - on the bed; birāmibe - will rest;se - that;  samaye - at the time; duṅhu - both; pada - feet;  sambahana - massage; susampada - fortunate; e - this; dāsīra - of the maidservant; saubhāgya - good fortune; milibe - will meet.
 
     When, as You both recline on a bed made of flowers, will  this maidservant, by massaging Your feet, become fortunate? 


Text 38 
 
kandarpa-kalahodgāre          chiṇḍibe kaṇṭhera hāre
latā-gṛhe paḍibe khāsiyā
se hāra gānthite kabe         e dāsī nijukta ha'be
duṅhu kṛpā-ājñā śire pāñā
 
     kandarpa - amorous; kalahodgāre - battle;  chiṇḍibe - will break; kaṇṭhera - of the neck; hāre - necklace;  latā - vine;-gṛhe - cottage; paḍibe - will go;khāsiyā - breaking;  se - that; hāra - necklace; gānthite - to string;kabe - when?;  e - this; dāsī - maidservant; nijukta - in the forest; ha'be - will be; duṅhu - both; kṛpā - mercy; ājñā - order;  śire - on the herad; pāñā - attain.
 
     When, Your necklaces broken during Your amorous battle, will  this maidservant be commanded to string them again? I will place  that merciful command on my head.
 

Text 39 
 
keli-kallolera jabe      duṅhu kesa srasta habe
dui-janara iṅgita pāiyā
śikhi-piñcha kore dhori'      kuntala-madhita kori'
āmi rabo ānande ḍubiyā
 
     keli - of pastimes; kallolera - of waves; jabe - when;  duṅhu - both; keśa - hair; srasta - creation; habe - will be; dui- janara - of the divine couple; iṅgita - hint; pāiyā - giving;
śikhi-piñcha - peacock feather; kore - does; dhori' - holding;kuntala - hair; maṇḍita - decorated; kori' - doing;  āmi - I; rabaḥ - will stay; ānande - in bliss;ḍubiyā - diving.
 
     When, the decorations in Your hair washed away by the waves  of Your pastimes, will I, on Your hinted command, become plunged  into bliss by decorating Your hair with peacock feathers? 
 

Text 40 
 
kandarpa-krīḍāya jabe         duṅhu srak srasta ha'be
tabe āmi duṅhu ājñā pāñā
ubhaya lalāṭa-mājhe      koribo tilaka-sāje
matta ha'be se śobhā dekhiyā
 
     kandarpa - amorous; krīḍāya - pastimes; jabe - when;  duṅhu - You both; srak - garland; srasta - creation; ha'be - willbe;  tabe - then; āmi - I; duṅhu - of You both; ājñā - command; 
pāñā - attaining; ubhaya - both; lalāṭa-mājhe - on  the foreheads; koribaḥ - will do; tilaka-sāje - tilaka  decorations; matta - intoxicated; ha'be - will be; se - this; 
śobhā - beauty; dekhiyā - seeing. 
 
     When, the previous decorations are destroyed during Your amorous  pastimes, will I, on Your command, make new tilaka decorations on  both Your foreheads? Gazing at the beauty of those decorations, I  will become wild with bliss.
 

Text 41 
 
kṛṣṇa taba bakhe āmi          bana-mala diyā swāmī
rādhe taba nayane kajjala
kuñja-mājhe kona dina         pā'bo sukha samīcīna
preme citta ha'be ṭalamala
 
     kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; taba - of You; bakhe - on the chest;āmi - I; bana-mala - forest garland; diyā - placing; swāmī - master;  rādhe - O Rādhā; taba - of You;  nayane - on the eyes; kajjala - mascara; kuñja-mājhe - in the  forest; kona - what?; dina - day; pā'baḥ - will attain; sukha - happiness; samīcīna - right; preme - with love;  citta - heart; ha'be - will be; ṭalamala - trembling.
 
     O my master Kṛṣṇa, I will place a forest garland on Your  chest. O Rādhā, I will decorate Your eyes with black mascara.  When, as I do this in the forest, will I feel blissful, and will 
my heart tremble with love? 


Text 42 
 
kabe jāmbunada-barṇa          loiyā tāmbūla-parṇa
śirā śūnya karpūrādi-juta
bīṭika nirmāṇa kori'          duṅhu mukhe dibo dhori'
preme citta ha'be paripluta
 
     kabe - when?; jāmbunada - of gold; barṇa - color;  loiyā - taking; tāmbūla-parṇa - betel leaf; śirā - veins;  śūnya - without; karpūra - camphor; ādi - beginning;juta - with;  bīṭika - betelnuts; nirmāṇa - making; kori' - doing;  duṅhu - both; mukhe - in the mouths; dibaḥ - will place;dhori' - holding; preme - with love; citta - heart; ha'be - will be;  paripluta - plunged.
 
     When, as I take golden-colored batel-leaves, mix them  with camphor and other perfect ingredients, and place the  bīṭis I thus make in both Your mouths, will my heart become 
plunged into ecstatic love?  


Text 43 
 
kothā e durāśā mora      kothā e duṣkarma ghora
e prārthanā jodi bolo keno
he rādhe he ghana-śyāma       duṅhu jana-guṇa-grāma
mādhurī bolāya more heno
 
     kothā - where; e - this; durāśā - unattainable desire;mora - my; kothā - where?; e - this; duṣkarma - wicked deeds;  ghora - horrible; e - this; prārthanā - prayer; jodi - if;bolaḥ - say; 
kenaḥ - why?; he - O; rādhe - Rādhā; he - O; ghanaśyāma - Kṛṣṇa  dark like a monsoon cloud; duṅhu - You both; jana-guṇa- grāma - multitude of virtues; mādhurī - sweetness;  bolāya - make speak; more - me; henaḥ - like this. 

     Who am I? I am wicked sinner. What are my desires? They are  very difficult to attain. Why do I make these requests? O Rādhā!  O Kṛṣṇa dark like a monsoon cloud! Your transcendental qualities  and Your sweetness make me talk in this way.
 

Text 44 
 
duṅhāra je kṛpā-guṇe          pāinu dhāma-bṛndābane
se kṛpā abhīṣṭa-pūraṇa
koruṇa āmāya nātha       pāñā tunu sakhī-sāṭha
kuñja-sebā pāi anukhaṇa
 
     duṅhāra - of You both; je - which; kṛpā-guṇe - by teh  virtue of mercy; pāinu - I may attain; dhāma-bṛndābane - the  abode of Vṛndāvana; se - that;  kṛpā - mercy; abhīṣṭa - of desires; pūraṇa - fulfillment; koruṇa - mercy; āmāya - to me; nātha - Lords; pānā - attaining; tunu - both; sakhī-sāṭha - in the company  of the friends; kuñja - in the forest; sebā - service;  pāi - I attain;  anukhaṇa - at every moment.
 
     By Your mercy I have attained this holy abode of Vṛndāvana.  By the same mercy please fulfill my desires. O my king and queen,  please me merciful to me, so I may be accepted among Your gopī  friends and I may serve You both in the forest groves at every  moment.
 

Text 45 
 
ohe rādhe ohe kṛṣṇa      sei braja-rasa-tṛṣṇa
kārpaṇya-pañjikā-kathā-chale
jalpana koroye sadā      tā'ra bāñchā-pūrti tadā
koruna duṅhu kṛpā-bale
 
     ohe - O; rādhe - Rādhā; ohe - O; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; sei - this;  braja - of Vraja; rasa - the nectar; tṛṣṇa - thirst;kārpaṇya-panjikā-kathā - of the words of Karpanya-panjika; chale - on the 
pretext; jalpana - talk; koroye - do; sadā - always;tā'ra - of  him; bāñchā - of desires; pūrti - fulfillment;tadā - then; koruna - may do; duṅhu - both; kṛpā-bale - by the power of  mercy.
 
     O Rādhā! O Kṛṣṇa! By the power of Your mercy may anyone  who, on the pretext of repeatedly reading aloud this Kārpaṇya- pañjikā, thirsts to attain the nectar rasas of Vraja, attain the  fulfillment of his desires.
 

Text 46 
 
śrī-rūpa-mañjarī-pada         śire dhori' su-sampada
kamala-mañjarī kore āśā
śrī-godruma-braja-bane        duṅhu līlā-sandarśane
pūrṇa hao rasera pipāsā
 
     śrī-rūpa-mañjarī-pada -  at the feet of Śrī Rūpa- mañjarī; śire - head; dhori' - placing; su-sampada - great  treasure; kamala-mañjarī - Kamala-mañjari; kore - does;  āśā - desire; śrī-godruma-braja-bane - in the Vraja forest of Śrī  Godruma; duṅhu - both; līlā - pastimes; sandarśane - seeing; pūrṇa - full; haaḥ - do; rasera - of rasa; pipāsā - thirst.
 
     Placing her head at the glorious feet of Śrī Rūpa- mañjarī, Kamala-mañjarī expresses her desires. By gazing  at the divine couple's pastimes in the Vraja forest of Śrī  Godruma, may her thirst to taste the nectar of the rasas be  satisfied.

 
 
Part 3 Dispelling Grief
Song 1
 

Text 1
 
pradoṣa-samaye      śrībāsa-aṅgane
saṅgopane gorā-maṇi
śrī-hari-kīrtane         nāce nānā-raṅge
uṭhilo maṅgala-dhwani
 
     pradoṣa-samaye - at sunset; śrībāsa-aṅgane - in  Śrīvāsa's courtyard; saṅgopane - secretly; gorā-maṇi - the fair jewel of Lord Caitanya; śrī-hari-kīrtane - in Kṛṣṇa - kīrtana; nāce - dances; nānā-raṅge - in different ways;  uṭhilaḥ - rose; maṅgala-dhwani - auspicious sound.
 
     In the early evening, as there was an auspicious sound of  Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names, the golden jewel of Lord Caitanya danced  in many ways in Śrīvāsa's secluded courtyard, 
 

Text 2 
 
mṛdaṅga mādala      bāje karatāla
mājhe mājhe jayatura
prabhura naṭana          dekhi' sakalera
hoilo santāpa dūra
 
     mṛdaṅga - mṛdaṅgas; mādala - mādalas; bāje - played; karatāla - karatalas; mājhe - middel; mājhe - middle;  jayatura - sounds of jayatu; prabhura - of the Lord;naṭana - dancing; dekhi' - seeing; sakalera - of all; hoilaḥ - was;  santāpa - distress; dūra - far away.
 
     There was a great sound of mṛdaṅgas, mādalas, and karatālas.  There were calls of "Jayatu" (Victory!). As they gazed at  the Lord's dancing, everyone felt their sufferings flee far away.
 

 Text 3 
 
akhaṇda premete          mātala takhana
sakala bhakata-gaṇa
āpana pāsari'       gorācande gheri'
nāce gāya anukhaṇa
 
     akhaṇda - unbroken; premete - love; mātala - wild;  takhana - then; sakala - all; bhakata-gaṇa - devotees;  āpana - selves; pāsari' - forgetting; gorācande - Lord  Caitanya; gheri' - surrounding; nāce - dance; gāya - sing; anukhaṇa - at every moment.
 
     Wild with love, and forgetting their own selves, at every  moment the devotees sang and danced, surrounding Lord Caitanya. 


Text 4 
 
emona samaye        daiba-byādhi-joge
śrībāsera antaḥ-pure
tanaya-bijoge       nārī-gaṇa śoke
prokāśalo uccaiḥ-sware
 
     emona - at this; samaye - time; daiba-byādhi-joge - with a  destined disease; śrībāsera - of Śrīvasa; antaḥ-pure - in the  inner rooms of the house; tanaya - of the son; bijoge - in 
separation; nārī-gaṇa - the women; śoke - lamentation;  prokāśalaḥ - manifested; uccaiḥ - loud; sware - with sounds. 

     Touched by fate, at that moment Śrīvāsa's son died of a  disease in an inner room of the house. The women loudly grieved  for him.
 

Text 5 
 
krandana uṭhile          habe rasa-bhaṅga
bhakatibinoda ḍare
śrībāsa amani       bujhilo kāraṇa
paśilo āpana ghare
 
     krandana - weeping; uṭhile - arose; habe - will be;  rasa-bhaṅga - breaking of the rasa; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda;  ḍare - fears;  śrībāsa - Śrīvasa; amani - like that; bujhilaḥ - understood;  kāraṇa - the reason; paśilaḥ - entered; āpana - his own;  ghare - house.
 
     Weeping arose. Bhaktivinoda fears the rasa of kīrtana will  break. Śrīvāsa knew the reason for the weeping. He entered his  house. 
 


Song 2
 

Text 1
 
prabeśiyā antaḥ-pure          nārī-gaṇe śānta kore
śrībāsa āmiyā upadeśe
śuno pāgalinī-gaṇa       śoka koro akāraṇa
kibā duḥkha thāke kṛṣṇābeśe
 
     prabeśiyā - entering; antaḥ-pure - the inner rooms  of the house; nārī-gaṇe - the women; śānta - peaceful;kore - did;  śrībāsa - Śrīvāsa; āmiyā - nectar; upadeśe - teachings; śunaḥ - please hear; pāgalinī-gaṇa - O foolish women;  śoka - grief; koraḥ - you do; akāraṇa - without reason; 
kibā - why?; duḥkha - suffering; thāke - stays; kṛṣṇa - ofLord Kṛṣṇa;  ābeśe - when rapt in meditation. 

     Entering the inner rooms of the house, Śrīvāsa pacified the  women with words sweet like nectar. He said, "O foolish  women, you grieve without reason. How can grief stay where people 
are rapt in thinking of Lord Kṛṣṇa?
 

Text 2 
 
kṛṣṇa nitya suta jāra        śoka kabhu nāhi tāra
anitya āsakti sarba-nāśa
asiyācho e soṁsāre       kṛṣṇa bhajībara tāre
nitya-tattwe koroho bilāsa
 
     kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; nitya - eternal; suta - son; jāra - ofwhom;  śoka - grief; kabhu - ever; nāhi - not; tāra - of him;  anitya - temporary; āsakti - attachment; sarba-nāśa - destruction of everything; asiyāchaḥ - is; e - this; soṁsāre - materialworld;  kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; bhajībara - to worship; tāre - him; nitya tattwe - eternal truth; korohaḥ - please do; bilāsa - pastimes.
 
     "She who has Kṛṣṇa as her eternal son will never grieve. She  who becomes attached to a son that is not eternal will lose  everything. You have all come to this world of birth and death to 
worship Lord Kṛṣṇa. Please find Your happiness in eternal Kṛṣṇa. 


Text 3 
 
e dehe jabata sthiti          koro kṛṣṇacandre rati
kṛṣṇa jāno dhana jana prāṇa
e-deho-anuga jata        bhāi bandhu pati suta
anitya sambanda boli' mano
 
     e - this; dehe - body; jabata - until; sthiti - situation;  koraḥ - do; kṛṣṇacandre - Kṛṣṇa; rati - love;kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; jānaḥ - please  know; dhana - wealth; jana - followers; prāṇa - life; edeho-anuga - in  relation to this body; jata - what; bhai-brother;bandhu - relatives; pati - husband; suta - son; anitya - temprary; sambanda - relationship;  boli' - saying; manaḥ - heart.
 
     "As long as you stay in this body, please place your love in  Lord Kṛṣṇa. Please think of Lord Kṛṣṇa as your wealth, your  kinsman, and your life. Please tell your hearts that ties with  husband, sons, brothers, kinsmen, and everything in relation to  the material body are all temporary. 


Text 4 
 
kebā kāra pati suta      anitya-sambandha-kṛta
cāhile rākhite nāre tāre
karama-bipaka-phale      suta ho'ye baise kole
karma-khaya āra raite nāre
 
     kebā - whoever; kāra - of whom; pati - husband;suta - son; anitya- sambandha-kṛta - does a temporary relationship; cāhile - desires;  rākhite - to protect;  nāre - cannot do; tāre - of him; karama - of karma; bipaka - theripe;  phale - fruit; suta - son; ho'ye - is; baise - stays;kole - on the  lap;  karma - of karma; khaya - the destruction; āra - or; raite - toprotect;  nāre - is not able.
 
     "Any woman who wishes to always keep her temporary  relationship with husband or son will find that she cannot. When  his karma's fruit is ripe, the son will perish. Even if the son 
sits on her lap, she has no power to protect him. 


Text 5 
 
ithe sukha duḥkha māni'       adho-gati labhe prāṇī
kṛṣṇa-pada hoite paḍe dūre
śoka sambariyā ebe       nāmānanda māja' sabe
bhakatibinoda-bāñchā pūre
 
     ithe - in this; sukha - happiness; duḥkha - suffering;māni' - thinking; adhaḥ - below; gati - destination; labhe - attains;  prāṇī - living entity; kṛṣṇa - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; pada - feet;  hoite - from; paḍe - falls; dūre - far; śoka - grief;  sambariyā - stopping; ebe - now; nāma - of the holy name;  ānanda - bliss; māja' - dive; sabe - all; bhakatibinoda - of  Bhaktivinoda; bāñchā - desire; pūre - fulfillment. 

     "Thinking happiness and suffering come from material  relationships, the soul falls far from Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet, falls  into a lower life. Therefore, please stop your grief. Dive into  the bliss of the holy name."

     All these words fulfill the desires of Bhaktivinoda.

 
 
Song 3
 
 
Text 1
 
dhana jana deha geha kṛṣṇe samarpaṇa
koriyācho śuddha-citte koroho smaraṇa
 
     dhana - wealth; jana - associates; deha - body;geha - home;  kṛṣṇe - to Kṛṣṇa; samarpaṇa - offering; koriyāchaḥ - did;  śuddha - pure; citte - hearts; korohaḥ - please do;  smaraṇa - remembering.
 
     "You have already placed your wealth, followers,  bodies, and home before Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet. Please remember this  in your pure hearts.
 

Text 2 
 
tabe keno mama suta boli' koro duḥkha
kṛṣṇa nilo nija-jana tāhe tāra sukha
 
     tabe - then; kenaḥ - why?; mama - my; suta - son;boli' - saying;  koraḥ - do; duḥkha - sad; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; nilaḥ - tooknija-jana - own person;  tāhe - in that; tāra - of him; sukha - happiness. 
 
     "Why do you lament, `O my son!' Lord Kṛṣṇa has  happily taken back His devotee.
 

Text 3 
 
kṛṣṇa-icchā-mate saba ghaṭaya ghaṭanā
tāhe sukha-duḥkha-jñāna abidyā-kalpanā
 
     kṛṣṇa-icchā-mate - by Lord Kṛṣṇa's will; saba - all;  ghaṭaya - happens; ghaṭanā - happening; tāhe - in that;  sukha - happiness; duḥkha - distress; jñāna - knowledge;  abidyā - and ignorance; kalpanā - creation.
 
     All that happens happens by Lord Kṛṣṇa's will. Ignorance of  this creates the idea that some situations are happy and others  painful.
 

Text 4 
 
jāhā icchā kore kṛṣṇa tāi jāno bhāla
tyajiyā āpana icchā ghucāo jañjāla
 
     jāhā - which; icchā - desire; kore - does; kṛṣṇa - LordKṛṣṇa;  tāi - so; jānaḥ - please know; bhāla - good;tyajiyā - abandoning;  āpana - own; icchā - desire; ghucāaḥ - destroy; janjāla - trouble.
 
     Please know that whatever Lord Kṛṣṇa wishes is good. Turning  from your own wishes, put an end to all this grieving.     


Text 5 
 
deya kṛṣṇa neya kṛṣṇa pāle kṛṣṇa sabe
rākhe kṛṣṇa māre kṛṣṇa icchā kore jabe
 
     deya - gives; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; neya - removes;kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;  pāle - maintains; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; sabe - all;rākhe - protects;  kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; māre - kills; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;icchā - desire; kore - does; 
jabe - when. 

     Kṛṣṇa gives. Kṛṣṇa takes away. Kṛṣṇa protects everyone.  Kṛṣṇa rescues. Kṛṣṇa kills. Kṛṣṇa does what He wishes. 


Text 6 
 
kṛṣṇa-icchā biparīta je kore bāsanā
tāra icchā nāhi phale se pāya jātanā
 
     kṛṣṇa-icchā - Lord Kṛṣṇa's wishes; biparīta - opposite;  je - who; kore - does; bāsanā - desire; tāra - of him;icchā - desire;  nāhi - not;  phale - fruit; se - he; pāya - attains; jātanā - suffering.
 
     She whose desire goes against Kṛṣṇa's desire finds her desire  not fulfilled. She attains only suffering. 


Text 7 
 
tyajiyā sakala śoka śuno kṛṣṇa-nāma
parama ānanda pabe pūrṇa habe kāma
 
     tyajiyā - renouncing; sakala - all; śoka - grief;śunaḥ - hear;  kṛṣṇa-nāma - Kṛṣṇa'sname; parama - great; ānanda - bliss;pabe - attain;  pūrṇa - fulfilled; habe - will be; kāma - desire.
 
     Renouncing all else, simply hear Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy name.  Then you will be blissful and all your desires will be fulfilled. 


Text 8 
 
bhakatibinoda māge śrībāsa-caraṇe
ātma-nibedana-śakti jībane maraṇe
 
     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; māge - begs;; śrībāsa- caraṇe -  - at the feet of Śrīvāsa; ātma-nibedana-śakti - the power  of surrender; jībane - in life; maraṇe - in death.
 
     At Śrīvāsa's feet Bhaktivinoda begs for the power to  surrender to Lord Kṛṣṇa in life or in death. 
 


Song 4
 

Text 1
 
sabu meli' bālaka-bhāga bicāri'
choḍabi moha śoka citta-bikārī
 
     sabu - all; meli' - meeting; bālaka - of the boy;bhāga - the  fate; bicāri' - considering; choḍabi - abandonn;moha - bewilderment;  śoka - grief; citta - of the heart; bikāri - suffering.
 
     Everyone meet and consider this boy's fate. Turn away from  bewilderment, grief, and unhappy hearts. 


Text 2 
 
caudda-bhubana-pati nanda-kumāra
śacī-nandana bhelo nadīyā-abatāra
 
     caudda-bhubana-pati - the master of the fourteen worlds;  nanda-kumāra - the son of Nanda; śacī-nandana - the son of Śacī; bhelaḥ - enjoys pastimes; nadīyā-abatāra - descended in Nadīyā.
 
     Nanda's son, who is the master of the fourteen worlds, has  descended to this world in Nadīyā. Now He enjoys pastimes as  Śacī's son.
 

Text 3 
 
sohiu gokula-cānda aṅgane mora
nācāi bhakta-saha ānanda-bibhora
 
     sohiu - He; gokula-cānda - the moon of Gokula; aṅgane - in the  courtyard; mora - my; nācāi - dances; bhakta-saha - with the  devotees; ānanda - bliss;  bibhora - overcome.
 
     Overcome with bliss, He who is the moon of Gokula now dances  in my courtyard with the devotees. 


Text 4 
 
śunata nāma-gaṇa bālaka mora
choḍalo deha hari-prīti-bibhora
 
     śunata - hearing; nāma-gaṇa - the holy names; balaka - boy;  mora - my; choḍalaḥ - abanonded; deha - body; hari-prīti - withlove for  Lord Kṛṣṇa; bibhora - overcome.
 
     Listening to the holy names, and overcome with love for Lord  Kṛṣṇa, my boy left his body.

 
Text 5 
 
aichana bhāga jaba bhai hāmārā
tabahuṅ hau bhāba-sāgara-pārā
 
     aichana - is; bhāga - fate; jaba - when; bhai hāmārā - ofus;  tabahun - then; hau - is; bhaba - of the material world;  sāgara - the ocean; pārā - the farther shore.
 
     If that happened to us we would cross to the farther shore  of the ocean of birth and death.
 

Text 6 
Tunhu sabu bichari ehi bicārā
kāṅhe korobi śoka citta-bikārā

   tuṅhu - you; sabu - all; bichari - think; ehi - this; bicārā - thought; kāṅhe - in what?; korobi - do;śoka - lamenttaion;  citta - heart; bikārā - toruble.
 
     Everyone please consider: Why do you grieve with unhappy  hearts?
 

Text 7 
 
sthira nāhi haobi jadi upadeśe
bañcita haobi rase abaśeṣe
 
     sthira - peaceful; nāhi - not; haobi - will be;jadi - if;  upadeśe - in teaching; bañcita - cheated; haobi - will be;  rase - nectar; abaśeṣe - at the end. 

     If you do not become peaceful from this advice, at the end you  will be cheated of the sweetest nectar. 


Text 8 
 
paśibuṅ hama suratatinī-māhe
bhakatibinoda pramāda dekhe tāhe
 
     paśibun - enter; hama - of me; suratatinī-māhe - in the midst  of the Ganga; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; pramāda - calamity;  dekhe - sees; tāhe - in that.
 
     "That will make me drown myself in the Gaṅgā." 
     Bhaktivinoda watches all this trouble.





Song 5
 

Text 1
 
śrībāsa-bacana      śrabaṇa koriyā
sādhwī pati-brata-gaṇa
śoka parihari'      mṛta śiśu rākhi'
hari-rase dilo mana
 
     śrībāsa-bacana - Śrīvāsa's words; śrabaṇa - hearing;  koriyā - doing; sādhwī - saintly woman; pati-brata - devoted to her  husband;  gaṇa - host; śoka - grief; parihari' - abandoning;mṛta - dead;  śiśu - boy; rākhi' - keeping; hari-rase - in the nectar of Lord  Kṛṣṇa;  dilaḥ - placed; mana - hearts. 

     Hearing Śrīvāsa's words, the saintly women devoted to their  husbands turned away from grief. Guarding the dead boy, they kept  their hearts in the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa.
 

Text 2 
 
śrībāsa takhana          ānande mātiyā
aṅgane ailo punaḥ
nāce gorā-sane      sakala pāsari'
gāya nanda-suta-guṇa


     śrībāsa - Śrīvāsa; takhana - then; ānande - with  bliss; mātiyā - wild; aṅgane - in the courtyard;ailaḥ - went;  punaḥ - again;  nāce - danced; gorā-sane - with Lord Caitanya; sakala - all;  pāsari' - forgetting; gāya - sang; nanda-suta - of Lord Kṛṣṇa;  guṇa - the glories.


     Wild with bliss, Śrīvāsa returned to the courtyard.  Forgetting everything, he sang Lord Kṛṣṇa's glories and danced  with Lord Caitanya.
 

Text 3 
 
cāri daṇḍa rātre         mārilo kumāra
aṅgane keho nā jāne
śrī-nāma-maṅgale         tṛtīya prahara
rajanī atīta gāne
 
     cāri - four; daṇḍa - dandas; rātre - night;  mārilaḥ - died; kumāra - boy; aṅgane - in the courtyard;kehaḥ - someone;  nā - not; jāne - knew; śrī-nāma-maṅgale - in the auspicious 
glories of the holy name; tṛtīya - third; prahāra - prahara; rajanī - night; atīta - gone; gāne - sang.
 
     An hour and a half into the night the boy had died, but in  the courtyard no one knew. Nine hours of the night passed and  everyone still sang the auspicious glories of the holy name.
 

Text 4 
 
kīrtana bhaṅgile         kohe gaura-hari
āji keno pāi duḥkha
bujhi ei gṛhe       kichu amaṅgala
ghaṭiyā harilo sukha
 
     kīrtana - kirtana; bhaṅgile - broke; kohe - said; gaura- hari - Lord Caitanya; āji - now; kenaḥ - why?; pāi - I haveattained;  duḥkha - sadness; bujhi - I know; ei - this; gṛhe - in thehouse; 
kichu - something; amaṅgala - inauspicious; ghaṭiyā - happening;  harilaḥ - took away; sukha - happiness.
 
     The kīrtana broke. Lord Caitanya said: "Why do I  feel sad? I know an inauspicious event in this house robbed My  joy."
 

Text 5 

tabe bhakta-jana         nibedana kore
śrībāsa-śiśura kathā
śuni' gorā rāya          bole hāya hāya
marame pāinu byathā
 
     tabe - then; bhakta-jana - the devotees;  nibedana - explanation; kore - did; śrībāsa-śiśura - ofŚrīvāsa's  son; kathā - the explanation; śuni' - hearing; gorā - LordCaitanya;  rāya - the king; bole - said; haya - alas; hāya - alas;  marame - in the heart; pāinu - attained; byathā - suffering.
 
     The devotees explained everything. Hearing about Śrīvāsa's  son, Lord Caitanya said, "Alas! Alas! This pains My  heart.
 

Text 6 
 
keno nā kohile      āmāre takhana
bipada-sambada sabe
bhakatibinoda       bhakata-batsala
snehete mājilo tabe

      kenaḥ - why?; nā - not; kohile - said; āmāre - to me;  takhana - then; bipada-sambada - description of the calamity;  sabe - all;  bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; bhakata-batsala - the lover  of the devotees; snehete - in love; mājilaḥ - plunged;tabe - then.
 
     "Why did You not tell Me then of this calamity?"
      Bhaktivinoda is plunged into love for Lord Caitanya, who 
dearly loves His devotees.





Song 6
 

Text 1
 
prabhura bacana          takhana śuniyā
śrībāsa loṭāñā bhūmi
bole śuno nātha          taba rasa-bhaṅga
sahite nā pāri āmi
 
     prabhura - of the Lord; bacana - the words;  takhana - then; śuniyā - hearing; śrībāsa - of Srivasa;loṭānā - rolling; bhūmi - on the ground; bole - said;śunaḥ - hear;  nātha - O master; taba - of You; rasa-bhaṅga - breaking  the rasa; sahite - to bear; nā - not; pāri - am able;āmi - I.
 
     Hearing the Lord's words, Śrīvāsa fell to the ground and  said: "O Lord, please hear. I cannot bear to break Your  tasting the rasas (mellows of ecstatic love).
 

Text 2 
 
ekaṭi tanaya        mariyāche nātha
tāhe mora kiba duḥkha
jadi saba mare      tomāre heriyā
tabu to' pāibo sukha
 
     ekaṭi - one; tanaya - son; mariyāche - may die; nātha - O  Lord; tāhe - in that; mora - of me; kiba - how?;duḥkha - suffering;  jadi - if; saba - all; mare - die; tomāre - You;heriyā - seeing; tabu - then; to' - indeed; pāibaḥ - I attain; sukha - happiness.
 
     [O Lord, why should I be unhappy that one of my sons has  died? Even if all of them die, I will be happy simply by seeing  You.
 

Text 3 
 
taba nṛtya-bhaṅga        hoile āmāra
maraṇa hoite hari
tāi ku-sambāda      nā dilo tomāre
bipada āśaṅkā kori'
 
     taba - of You; nṛtya - of the dancing; bhaṅga - breaking; hoile - is; āmāra - to me; maraṇa - death; hoite - from;hari - O %;  tāi - therefore;  ku-sambāda - bad news; nā - not; dilaḥ - give; tomāre - to  You; bipada - calamity; āśaṅkā - thinking; kori' - doing.
 
     To break Your dancing is for me worse than death. Fearing  that calamity, I did not give You the bad news. 


Text 4 
 
ebe ājñā deho       mṛta suta lo'ye
satkāra koruna sabe
eteka śuniyā        gorā dwija-maṇi
kāndite lagilo tabe
 
     ebe - now; ājñā - command; dehaḥ - please give;  mṛta - dead; suta - son; lo'ye - take; satkāra - cremation; koruna - may  do; sabe - all; eteka - one; śuniyā - hearing;gorā - Lord  Caitanya; dwija-maṇi -  - the jewel of the brahmanas; kāndite  lagilaḥ - wept; tabe - then.
 
     "Give the order, and we will perform the cremation  ceremony of the dead boy." Hearing all this, Lord Caitanya, the  jewel of the brāhmaṇas, wept.
 

Text 5 
 
kemone e saba       chāḍiyā jāibo
paraṇa bikala hoya
se kathā śuniyā          bhakatibinoda
manete pāilo bhoya
 
     kemone - how?; e - these; saba - all;chāḍiyā - lraving;  jāibaḥ - I will go; parāṇa - life; bikala - devastated;hoya - is;  se - this;  kathā - statement; śuniyā - hearing; bhakatibinoda -  bhaktivinoda; manete - in the heart; pāilaḥ - attains; bhoya - fear.
 
     Lord Caitanya said, "How can I ever leave you all?  If I did, My life would become devastated."  
     Hearing these words, Bhaktivinoda feels fear in his heart.

 


Song 7
 

Text 1
 
gorācandera ajña peye gṛha-bāsi-gaṇa
mṛta suta aṅganete āna tata-khaṇa
 
     gorācandera - of Lord Caitanya; ajña - the command;  peye - attaining; gṛha-bāsi-gaṇa - the residents of the house;  mṛta - dead; suta - boy;  aṅganete - to the courtyard; āna - brought; tata-khaṇa - at once.
 
     On Lord Caitanya's order, the people of the house at once  brought the dead son into the courtyard. 


Text 2 
 
kali-mala-hari gorā jijñāse takhana
śrībāse chāḍiyā śiśu jāo ki kāraṇa


     kali - of Kali-yuga; mala - impurities; hari - removing;  gorā - Lord Caitanya; jijñāse - questioned; takhana - then;  śrībāse - Srivasa;  chāḍiyā - leaving; śiśu - boy; jāaḥ - you go;ki - what?;  kāraṇa - reason.
 
     Then Lord Caitanya, the purifier of the Kali-yuga, asked,  "Child, why did you leave Śrīvāsa and go away?" 


Text 3 
 
mṛta-śiśu-mukhe jība kore nibedana
loka-śikha lāgi prabhu taba ācaraṇa
 
     mṛta-śiśu-mukhe - in the mouth of the dead boy; jība - the  soul; kore - did; nibedana - statement; loka-śikha - theteaching of  the world; lāgi - taking; prabhu - O Lord; taba - of You;
ācaraṇa - action.
 
     Speaking through the dead boy;s mouth, the spirit soul said,  "Lord, You act to teach the world. 


Text 4 
 
tumi to' parama-tattwa ananta adwaya
para śakti tomāra abhinna tattwa hoya
 
     tumi - You; to' - indeed; parama-tattwa - the Supreme Truth; ananta - limitless; adwaya - non-dual; para - supreme;śakti - potency;  tomāra - of You;  abhinna - not different; tattwa - truth; hoya - is. 

     ["You are the limitless, non-dual Supreme Truth.  Your spiritual potency is not different from You. 


Text 5 
 
sei parā śakti tridhā hoiyā prokāśa
taba icchā-mata koraya tomāra bilāsa
 
     sei - this; parā - spiritual; śakti - potency; tridhā - inthree  ways; hoiyā - is; prokāśa - manifest; taba - of You;icchā-mata - by  the desire; koraya - does; tomāra - of You; bilāsa - pastimes.
 
     "Your spiritual potency manifests in three ways. By  Your wish it helps with Your pastimes.
 

Text 6 
 
cic-chakti-swarūpe nitya-līlā prokāśiyā
tomāre ānanda dena hlādinī hoiyā
 
     cic-chakti - spiritual potency; swarūpe - own form; nitya- līlā - eternal pastimes; prokāśiyā - manifesting;tomāre - You;  ānanda - bliss;  dena - gives; hlādinī - hladini; hoiyā - becoming.
 
     "Your spiritual potency manifests Your eternal  pastimes. Becoming Your hlādinī śakti (pleasure potency), Your  spiritual potency gives You bliss.
 

Text 7 
 
jība-śakti hana taba cit-kiraṇa-caye
taṭastha-swabhābe jība-gaṇe prakaṭaye
 
     jība-śakti - the potency of the individual souls; hana - is;  taba - of You; cit-kiraṇa-caye - particles of spiritual effulgence;  taṭastha-swabhābe - nature on the border;  jība-gaṇe - multitude of souls; prakaṭaye - manifests.
 
     "Becoming the jīva-śakti (potency of individual  souls), Your spiritual potency manifests the multitude of  individual souls, who are tiny particles of spiritual effulgence  on the border (taṭastha) of matter and spirit. 


Text 8 
 
māyā-śakti ho'ye kore prapañca sṛjana
bahirmukha jībe tāhe koroya bandhana
 
     māyā-śakti - maya-sakti; ho'ye - is; kore - does;prapanca - material world; sṛjana - creation; bahirmukha - turning the  face;  jībe - individual souls; tāhe - in that; koroya - do;  bandhana - imprisonment. 

     "Becoming the māyā-śakti (material potency), Your  spiritual potency creates the material world, where she imprisons  the rebellious souls who have turned their faces away from You."
 

Text 9 
 
bhakatibinoda bole aparādha-phale
bahirmukha ho'ye āchi prapañca-kabale
 
     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; bole - says; aparādha-phale - the  result of offenses; bahirmukha - turning the face away;ho'ye - is;  āchi - I am;  prapañca - in the material world; kabale - become a mouthful. 

     Bhaktivinoda says: Because of my offenses, I turned my face  away from Lord Kṛṣṇa. That is why I was devoured by the material  potency.

 
 
Song 8
 

Text 1
 
pūrṇa-cid-ānanda tumi        tomāra cit-kaṇa āmi
swabhābataḥ āmi tuyā dāsa
parama swatantra tumi         tuyā paratantra āmi
tuyā pada chāḍi' sarba-nāśa
 
     pūrṇa - perfect; cit - spiritual; ānanda - bliss;tumi - You; tomāra - of You; cit-kaṇa - particle  of spirit; āmi - I;  swabhābataḥ - by nature; āmi - I; tuyā - of You;dāsa - servant;  parama - supremely; swatantra - independent; tumi - You;  tuyā - on You; paratantra - dependent; āmi - I; tuyā - ofYou;  pada - the feet; chāḍi' - leaving; sarba-nāśa - destruction of  everything.
 
     "You are filled with perfect spiritual bliss. I am a  particle of Your spiritual effulgence. I am naturally Your  servant. You are supremely independent. I am dependent on You.  Turning away from Your feet, I found all I had was destroyed. 
 

Text 2 
 
swatantra ho'ye jakhana       māyā prati koinu mana
swa-swabhāba chāḍilo āmāya
prapañce māyāra bandhe        padinu karmera dhande
karma-cakre āmāre phelya
 
     swatantra - independent; ho'ye - is; jakhana - when;  māyā - maya; prati - to; koinu - I did; mana - heart; swaswabhāba - own  nature; chāḍilaḥ - abandoned; āmāya - of me; prapance - material world; māyāra - of maya; bandhe - in the  prison; paḍinu - I fell; karmera - of karma; dhande - bewilderment; karma-cakre - on the wheel of karma; āmāre - me;  phelya - throwing.
 
     When I became independent of You, I felt my heart become  attracted to māyā. Renouncing my original nature, I fell into  māyā's prison in the world of five elements. Bewildered by 
material activities, I was forced to move on the wheel of karma. 
 
Text 3 
 
māyā taba icchā-mate          bāndhe more e jagate
adṛṣṭa nirbandha lauha-kore
sei to' nirbandha more        ane śrībāsera ghore
putra-rūpe malinī-jaṭhore
 
     māyā - maya; taba - of You; icchā-mate - by the  desire; bāndhe - imprisoned; more - me; e - this;jagate - in the  material world; adṛṣṭa - by unseen fate;  nirbandha - bound; lauha-kore - iron shackles; sei - this;to' - indeed;  nirbandha - bondage; more - to me; ane - led; śrībāsera - ofSrivasa; ghore - in the house; putra-rūpe - in  the form of a son; malinī-jaṭhore - in the womb of Malini. 

     "By Your will Māyā placed me in the prison of this  world. Bound by the iron shackles of unseen fate, I was carried  to Śrīvāsa's house and placed in Mālinī's womb as her son.
 

Text 4 
 
se nirbandha punarāya         more ebe lo'ye jāya
āmi to' thākite nāri āra
taba icchā su-prabala         mora icchā su-durbala
āmi jība akiñcana chāra
 
     se - this; nirbandha - fate; punarāya - again; more - to  me; ebe - now; lo'ye - attains; jāya - go; āmi - I;to' - indeed;  thākite - to stay; nāri - I am not; āra - other; taba - ofYou;  icchā - by the will; su-prabala - very powerful; mora - of me;  icchā - will;  su-durbala - very weak; āmi - I; jība - an individual soul;  akiñcana - without anything; chāra - like a pile of ashes.
 
     "Pulled by fate, I now must leave. I have no power  to stay. Your will is very powerful. My will is very weak. I am  only an individual soul. I have nothing. I am worthless like a  pile of ashes.
 

Text 5 
 
jathāya pāṭhāo tumi      abaśya jāibo āmi
kara keba putra pati pitā
jaḍera sambandha saba         tāhā nāhi satya-laba
tumi jībera nitya pālayitā
 
     jathāya - as; pāṭhāaḥ - send; tumi - You;  abaśya - inevitably; jāibaḥ - I will go; āmi - I; karakeba - of  someone; putra - the sun; pati - the husband; pitā - thefather;  jaḍera - of matter; sambandha - relationship; saba - all;  tāhā - this; nāhi - not; satya-laba - a tiny fragment of 
eternity; tumi - You; jībera - of the soul; nitya - eternal;  pālayitā - protector.
 
     "Wherever You send me, I must go, to become  someone's son, husband, or father. All those relationships are  material. There is not the smallest fragment of the eternal  spiritual reality in them. You alone are the soul's eternal  protector.
 

Text 6 
 
sañjoge bijoge jini      sukha-duḥkha mane gaṇi
taba pade chāḍena āśroya
māyāra gardabha ho'ye         mājena soṁsāra lo'ye
bhaktibinodera sei bhoya

      sañjoge - in meeting; bijoge - and separation; jini - who;sukha-duḥkha - happiness and  distress; mane - in the heart;  gaṇi - considers; taba - of You; pade - the feet;chāḍena - abandons;  āśroya - shelter; māyāra - of maya; gardabha - the jackass;ho'ye - is; mājena - plunged; soṁsāra - the material world; lo'ye - is;  bhaktibinodera - of Bhaktivinoda; sei - this; bhoya - fear.
 
     "O Lord, a person who, in his heart thinking contact  and separation with his kinsmen is the source of true happiness  and suffering, turns away from the shelter of Your feet, is  truly Māyā's donkey. He is truly drowning in the world of birth  and death."

     All this brings fear to Bhaktivinoda. 

 


Song 9
 
Text 1 

bāndhilo māyā       je dina ho'te
abidyā-moha-ḍore
aneka janma         labhinu āmi
phirinu māyā-ghore
 
     bāndhilo; māyā - Maya; je - which; dina - day;  ho'te - from; abidyā - ignorance; moha - illusion;ḍore - bonds;  aneka - many; janma - birth; labhinu - attained; āmi - I;  phirinu - I was cast; māyā-ghore - into Maya's prison. 
 
     "From the day Māyā imprisoned me I have been bound  with shackles of ignorance and illusion. Many births I have  passed in Māyā's prison.
 

Text 2 
 
deba dānaba         mānaba paśu
pataṅga kīṭa ho'ye
swarge narake       bhū-tale phiri
anitya āśā lo'ye
 
     deba - demigod; dānaba - demon; mānaba - human;  paśu - animal; pataṅga - bird; kīṭa - insect and worm;ho'ye - been;  swarge - in Svarga; narake - in hell; bhū-tale - on the earth; 
phiri - cast; anitya - temporary; āśā - desires;  lo'ye - attained.
 
     "I have been a demigod, demon, human, animal, bird,  insect, and worm. I have lived in Svarga, earth, and hell. I have  been obsessed with desires for temporary things.
 

Text 3 
 
nā jāni kibā        sukṛti-bale
śrībāsa-suta hoinu
nadīyā-dhāme        caraṇa taba
daraśa-paraśa koinu
 
     nā - not; jāni - I know; kibā - why?; sukṛti-bale - by the power of pious deeds; śrībāsa-suta - as Śrīvāsa's son; hoinu - I attained; nadīyā-dhāme - in the holy abode of Nadiya;  caraṇa - the feet; taba - Your; daraśa - sight;paraśa - touch;  koinu - I attained.
 
     "By the power of what pious deeds was I able to take  birth as Śrīvāsa's son in holy Nadīyā and both see and touch Your  feet, O Lord? I do not know.

 
Text 4 
 
sakala bāre         maraṇa-kāle
aneka duḥkha pāi
tuyā praśaṅge       parama sukhe
e bāra ca'le jāi
 
     sakala - every; bāre - time; maraṇa-kāle - at the time  of death; aneka - many; duḥkha - sufferings; pāi - Iattain; tuyā - of  You;  praśaṅge - in the association; parama - great; sukhe - happiness; e - this; bāra - time; ca'le jāi - I go. 

     "At every death I suffered greatly. But this death,  by Your touch, was very happy.
 

Text 5 
 
icchāya tora        janama jadi
ābāra hoya hori
caraṇe taba         prema-bhakati
thāke minati kori
 
     icchāya - by the desire; tora - of You; janama - birth;  jadi - if; ābāra - again; hoya - is; hori - O Kṛṣṇa;caraṇe - at the  feet; taba - of You;  prema-bhakati - love and devotion; thāke - may stay;  minati - prayer; kori - I do.
 
     "If by Your wish I must take birth again, I pray  that I may have love and devotion for Your feet." 


Text 6 
 
jakhana śiśu        niraba bhelo
dekhiyā prabhura līlā
śrībāsa-goṣṭhi      tyajiyā śoka
ānanda-magaṇa bhela
 
     jakhana - when; śiśu - the boy; niraba - silent;  bhelaḥ - was; dekhiyā - seeing; prabhura - of the Lord;  līlā - pastimes; śrībāsa - of Śrīvāsa; goṣṭhi - theassembly;  tyajiyā - leaving; śoka - grief; ānanda-magaṇa - plunged into  bliss; bhela - became.
 
     Then the boy became silent. Seeing Lord Caitanya's pastimes,  Śrīvāsa's family turned away from grief and became plunged into  bliss.
 

Text 7 
 
gaura-carita        amṛta-dhārā
korite korite pāna
bhaktibinoda        śrībāse māge
jāya jena mora prāṇa

      gaura-carita - Lord Caitanya's pastimes; amṛta- dhārā - a flood of nectar; korite - doing; korite - and doing; pāna - drinking; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda;  śrībāse - Śrīvāsa; māge - begs; jaya - goes; jena - likethis;  mora - of me; prāṇa - life.
 
     Bhaktivinoda begs Śrīvāsa: May I pass this life drinking and  and drinking from the flood of nectar that is Lord Caitanya's  pastimes.

 
 
Song 10
 

Text 1
 
śrībāse kohena prabhu tuṅhu mora dāsa
tuyā prīte bāndhā āmi jagate prokāśa


     śrībāse - to Śrīvāsa; kohena - said; prabhu - the Lord;  tuṅhu - You; mora - My; dāsa - servant; tuyā - for You;prīte - by love;  bāndhā - bound; āmi - I; jagate - in the world;prokāśa - manifest.
 
     To Śrīvāsa Lord Caitanya said: "You are My servant.  Bound by love for You, I came to this world. 


Text 2 
 
bhakta-gaṇa senāpati śrībāsa paṇḍita
jagate ghuṣuka āji tomāra carita
 
     bhakta-gaṇa - of the devotees; senāpati - the general;  śrībāsa - Śrīvāsa; paṇḍita - Paṇḍita; jagate - in theworld;  ghuṣuka - said; āji - now; tomāra - of you; carita - character.
 
     " `Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita is the commander-in-chief of  the army of devotees.' With these words the whole world praises  you.
 

Text 3 
 
prapañca-kārā-rākhinī māyāra bandhana
tomāra nāhiko kabhu dekhuka jagaj-jana
 
     prapañca - of the world of five elements; kārā - of  the prison; rākhinī - the guardian; māyāra - of Maya;  bandhana - the bondage; tomāra - of you;  nāhikaḥ - not; kabhu - ever; dekhuka - sees; jagaj-jana - thepeople of  the world.
 
     "You are never shackled by Māyā, the warden of the  prison that is this material world. This the people of the world  see.
 

Text 4 
 
dhana jana deha geha āmāre arpiyā
āmāra sebāya sukhe ācho sukhi hana
 
     dhana - wealth; jana - people; deha - body; geha - home; āmāre - to  Me; arpiyā - offering; āmāra - of Me; sebāya - byservice; sukhe - in  happiness;  āchaḥ - are; sukhi - happy; hana - are.
 
     "To Me You offer your wealth, followers, body, and  home. By serving Me you are happy.
 

Text 5 
 
mama līlā-puṣṭi lagi' tomāra soṁsāra
śikhuka gṛhastha-jana tomāra ācāra
 
     mama - of Me; līlā - pastimes; puṣṭi - nourishment;  lagi' - accepting; tomāra - of you; soṁsāra - in the materialworld;  śikhuka - teach; gṛhastha-jana - the grhasthas; tomāra - of you; 
ācāra - the good conduct.
 
     "To help My pastimes you came to this world of birth  and death. You ideal conduct teaches the gṛhasthas. 


Text 6 
 
taba preme baddha āchi āmi nityānanda
ama duṅhe suta jāni' bhuñjaha ānanda
 
     taba - of you; preme - by the love; baddha - bound;āchi - am;  āmi - I; nityānanda - Nityānanda; ama - Me; duṅhe - both; suta - sons;  jāni' - thinking; bhuñjaha - enjoy; ānanda - bliss. 

     "I am shackled by your love for Me. Thinking  Nityānanda and Me to be your sons, you enjoy transcendental  bliss.
 

Text 7 
 
nitya-tattwa suta jāra anitya tanoya
āsakti nā kore sei sṛjane praloya
 
     nitya - eternal; tattwa - truth; suta - sons; jāra - ofwhom;  anitya - temporary; tanoya - son; āsakti - attachment;nā - not;  kore - does; sei - he; sṛjane - in creation; praloya - indestruction.
 
     "We are your true sons eternally, for you are not  attached to your temporary sons, to their birth or death. 


Text 8 
 
bhaktite tomāra ṛṇī āmi ciro-dina
taba sādhu-bhābe tumi khama mora ṛṇa
 
     bhaktite - to devotion; tomāra - of you; ṛṇī - debtor;āmi - I;  ciro-dina - many days; taba - of you; sādhu-bhābe - because of the  saintly nature; tumi - you; khama - forgive; mora - My;ṛṇa - debt. 

     "Because of your devotion to Me, for many days I  have been in debt to You. You are so saintly you have forgiven My  debt.
 

Text 9 
 
śrībāsera pāya bhaktibinoda kujana
kākuti koriyā māge gaurāṅga-caraṇa
 
     śrībāsera - of Śrīvāsa; pāya - attaining;  bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; kujana - wicked; kākuti - words choked  with emotion; koriyā - doing; māge - mege; gaurāṅgacaraṇa - the  feet of Lord Caitanya.
 
     Speaking words choked with emotion, wicked Bhaktivinoda,  approaches Śrīvāsa and begs to attain Lord Caitanya's feet. 
  

Song 11
  
Text 1
 
śrībāsera prati          caitanya-prasāda
dekhiyā sakala jana
jaya śrī-caitanya        jaya nityānanda
boli' nāce ghana ghana
 
     śrībāsera - Śrīvāsa; prati - to; caitanya- prasāda - Lord Caitanya's mercy; dekhiyā - seeing; sakala - all;  jana - people; jaya - glory; śrī-caitanya - to Śrī Caitanya; jaya - glory; nityānanda - to Nityānanda; boli' - saying;  nāce - dance;  ghana ghana - again and again.
 
     Seeing Lord Caitanya's mercy to Śrīvāsa, again and again  everyone danced and called out, "Jaya Śrī Caitanya! Jaya  Nityānanda!" 
 

Text 2 
 
śrībāsa-mandire          ki bhāba uṭhilo
tāhā ki barṇaṇa hoya
bhāba-yuddha sane        ānanda-krandana
uṭhe kṛṣṇa-prema-moya
 
     śrībāsa - of Śrīvāsa; mandire - in the house;  ki - how?; bhāba - ecstasy; uṭhilaḥ - arose; tāhā - that; ki - how?;  barṇaṇa - description; hoya - is; bhāba - of ecstasy;yuddha - battle;  sane - with; ānanda - bliss; krandana - weeping;  uṭhe - arose; kṛṣṇa - for Lord Kṛṣṇa; prema-moya - consisting oflove. 

     What kind of ecstatic love suddenly came in Śrīvāsa's  home? How can anyone properly describe it? There was a great  battle of conflicting emotions. Joyful weeping filled with 
ecstatic love for Lord Kṛṣṇa became manifest.
 

Text 3 
 
cāri bhāi paḍi'         prabhura caraṇe
preme gadagada sware
kāndiyā kāndiyā          kākuti koriyā
gaḍi' jāya prema-bhare
 
     cāri - four; bhāi - brothers; paḍi' - falling down;  prabhura - of the Lord; caraṇe - at the feet; preme - with love; gadagada - choked up; sware - voices;  kāndiyā - weeping; kāndiyā - and weeping; kakuti - words  filled with emotion; koriyā - doing; gadi' jāya - rolled about 
on the ground;  prema-bhare - overcome with ecstatic love.
 
     Falling before the Lord's feet, the four brothers rolled on  the ground. Weeping and weeping, and overcome with ecstatic love,  with voices breaking with emotion they said:
 

Text 4 
 
ohe prāṇeśwara      e heno bipada
prati-dina jeno hoya
jāhāte tomāra       caraṇa-jugale
āsakti bāḍhite roya
 
     ohe - O; prāṇeśwara - master of life; e - this;henaḥ - like;  bipada - calamity; prati-dina - every day; jenaḥ - like which;hoya - is;  jāhāte - in which; tomāra - of You; caraṇa-jugale - to 
the feet; āsakti - attachment; bādhite roya - to be bound.
 
     "O master of our lives, we pray that calamities like  this may every day come to us, for then our attachment to Your feet  will grow stronger and stronger.
 

Text 5 
 
bipada-sampade      sei dina bhalo
je dina tomāre smari
tomāra smaraṇa      rohita je dina
se dina bipada hari
 
     bipada - in calamity; sampade - in good fortune; sei - this; dina - day; bhalaḥ - good; je - which; dina - day;tomāre - You;  smari - remembering; tomāra - of You;  smaraṇa - remembrance; rohita - without; je - which;dina - day; se - trhat; dina - day; bipada - calamity; hari - Kṛṣṇa.
 
     "Whether it brings calamity or good fortune, any day  when we remember You is a good day. O Lord Kṛṣṇa, any day when we  do not remember You is a true calamity.
 

Text 6 
 
śrībāsa-goṣṭhira         caraṇe padiyā
bhakatibinoda bhaṇe
tomādera gorā       kṛpā bitariyā
dekhāo durgata jane
 
     śrībāsa-goṣṭhira - of Śrīvāsa's family;  caraṇe - at the feet; padiyā - falling;bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda;  bhaṇe - says; tomādera - of you; gorā - of Lord Caitanya;  kṛpā - mercy; bitariyā - giving; dekhāaḥ - see;  durgata - unfortunate; jane - person.
 
     Falling at the feet of Śrīvāsa's family, Bhaktivinoda says:  Please convince Your Lord Caitanya to place His merciful glance  on this unfortunate person.

 


Song 12
 

Text 1
 
mṛta śiśu lo'ye tabe bhakata-batsala
bhakata-saṅgete gāya śrī-nāma-maṅgala
 
     mṛta - dead; śiśu - boy; lo'ye - took; tabe - then;bhakata- batsala - who loves His devotees; bhakata-saṅgete - with the  devotees; gāya - sang;  śrī-nāma-maṅgala - the auspicious holy names. 

     Then Lord Caitanya, who dearly loves His devotees,  personally carried the dead boy. Accompanied by the devotees, He  sang the auspicious holy names.
 

Text 2 
 
gāite gāite gelā jāhnabīra tīre
balake satkāra koilo jāhnabīra nīre
 
     gāite gāite - singing and singing; gelā - went;  jāhnabīra - of the Ganag; tīre - to the bank; balake - of theboy;  satkāra - the funeral; koilaḥ - did; jāhnabīra - of the Gaṅgā;  nīre - in the water.
 
     Singing and singing, they came to the Gaṅgā's bank. In the  Gaṅgā's water the last rites were performed for the boy.
 

Text 3 
 
jāhnabī bolena mama saubhāgya apāra
saphala hoilo brata chilo je āmāra
 
     jāhnabī - Gaṅgā; bolena - said; mama - my;saubhāgya - good  fortune; apāra - without limit; saphala - successful;hoilaḥ - is;  brata - vow;  chilaḥ - which; je - which; āmāra - of me.
 
     Goddess Gaṅgā said, "My good fortune has no end. The  vows I performed in the past have now borne their fruit." 


Text 4 
 
mṛta śiśu dena gorā jāhnabīra jale
uṭhali jāhnabī debī śiśu loya kole
 
     mṛta - dead; śiśu - boy; dena - gave; gorā - LordCaitanya;  jāhnabīra - of the Gaṅgā; jale - in the water; uṭhali - rose;  jāhnabī - Gaṅgā;  debī - Goddess; śiśu - boy; loya - placed; kole - embrace. 

     Lord Caitanya placed the dead boy in the Gaṅgā's water.  Holding the dead boy, Goddess Gaṅgā rose from the water. 


Text 5 
 
uṭhaliyā sparśa gorā-caraṇa-kamala
śiśu kole preme debī hoya ṭalamala
 
     uṭhaliyā - rising; sparśa - touched; gorā-caraṇa-kamala - Lord Caitanya's lotus feet; śiśu - boy; kole - holding; preme - withlove;  debī - the goddess; hoya - was; ṭalamala - trembling.
 
     Emerging from the water, the goddess touched Lord Caitanya's  feet. Holding the boy, she trembled with ecstatic love. 


Text 6 
 
jāhnabīra bhāba dekhi' jata bhakta-gaṇa
śrī-nāma-maṅgala-dhwani kore anukhaṇa
 
     jāhnabīra - of the Gaṅgā; bhāba - the ecstatic love;  dekhi' - seeing; jata - which; bhakta-gaṇa - the devotees;śrī- nāma - of the holy names; maṅgala - auspicious; dhwani - sound;
kore - did; anukhaṇa - at every moment.
 
     Seeing Goddess Gaṅgā's ecstatic love, the devotees made an  auspicious sound of the holy names moment after moment. 


Text 7 
 
swarge hoite debe kore puṣpa-bariṣaṇa
bimāna saṅkula tabe chailo gagana
 
     swarge - Svarga; hoite - from; debe - the demigods;kore - did;  puṣpa - of flowers; bariṣaṇa - shower; bimāna - airplabes;  saṅkula - filled; tabe - then; chailaḥ - was; gagana - the sky.
 
     Arriving from Svargaloka, the demigods showered flowers. The  sky was filled with their celestial airplanes. 
 
Text 8 
 
ei rūpe nānā-bhābe hoiyā magana
satkāra koriyā snāna koilo sarba-jana
 
     ei rūpe - in this way; nānā-bhābe - many kinds of ecstatic  love; hoiyā - doing; magana - plunged; satkāra - funeral;  koriyā - doing; snāna - bath; koilaḥ - did; sarbajana - everyone.
 
     Everyone was plunged in different kinds of ecstatic love.  After observing the funeral, everyone bathed. 


Text 9 
 
parama ānande sabe gelo nija ghare
bhakatibinoda māje gorā-bhāba-bhare
 
     parama - transcendental; ānande - bliss; sabe - all;gelaḥ - went;  nija - own; ghare - home; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda;māje - plunged;  gorā-bhāba-bhare - in ecstatic love for Lord Caitanya. 

     They all very joyfully returned to their homes. Bhaktivinoda  is now plunged in the ecstasy of love for Lord Caitanya. 
 


Song 13

Śrotṛ-gaṇera Prati Nibedana

Some Words to the Hearers
 

Text 1
 
nadīyā-nagare gorā-carita amṛta
piyā śoka bhoya chāḍo sthira koro cita
 
     nadīyā-nagare - in the towns of Nadiya; gorā-carita - Lord  Caitanya's pastimes; amṛta - nectar; piyā - drinking;śoka - grief;  bhoya - fear; chāḍaḥ - leave; sthira - peaceful;koraḥ - make; 
cita - heart. 

     Please drink in the nectar of Lord Caitanya's pastimes in  the towns of Nadīyā. In this way please become free of fear and  peaceful at heart.

 
Text 2 
 
anitya soṁsāra bhāi kṛṣṇa mātra sāra
gorā-śikhā mate kṛṣṇa bhaja anibāra
 
     anitya - not eternal; soṁsāra - world of birth and death;  bhāi - O brothers; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; mātra - only;sāra - nectar; gorā - of  Lord Caitanya; śikhā mate - with the teaching;kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; 
bhaja - worship; anibāra - always.
 
     O my brothers, Lord Kṛṣṇa is the only nectar in this  impermanent world of birth and death. Please follow Lord  Caitanya's instructions and worship Lord Kṛṣṇa at every moment.
 

Text 3 
 
gorāra caraṇa dhori' jei bhāgyabān
braje rādhā-kṛṣṇa bhaje sei mora prāṇa
 
     gorāra - of Lord Caitanya; caraṇa - the feet;dhori' - grasping;  jei - who; bhāgyabān - fortunate; braje - in Vraja; rādhākṛṣṇa - Śrī  Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa;  bhaje - worship; sei - this; mora - of me; prāṇa - the life. 

     A person who grasps Lord Caitanya's feet and worships Śrī  Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja is very fortunate. He is my very life. 


Text 4 
 
rādhā-kṛṣṇa gorācanda na'de bṛndābana
ei mātra koro sāra pā'be nitya dhana

      rādhā-kṛṣṇa - Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; gorācanda - LordCaitanya;  na'de - is; bṛndābana - in Vṛndāvana; ei - this;mātra - only; koraḥ - do;  sāra - best; pā'be - attain; nitya - eternal; dhana - treasure. 

     Lord Caitanya is not different from Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and  Lord Caitanya's abode is not different from Vṛndāvana. Understand  this nectar truth and you will attain an eternal treasure.
 

Text 5 
 
bidyā-buddhi hīna dīna akiñcana chāra
karma-jñāna-śūnya āmi śūnya-sad-ācāra
 
     bidyā - knowledge; buddhi - and intelligence; hīna - without;  dīna - poor; akiñcana - pauper; chāra - pile of ashes;  karma - karma; jñāna - jnana; śūnya - without; āmi - I; śūnya - without; sad-ācāra - good conduct. 

     I have neither intelligence nor learning. I am poor. I have  nothing. I am worthless like a pile of ashes. I have no  knowledge, pious deeds, or good conduct.
 

Text 6 
 
śrī-guru baiṣṇaba more dilena upādhi
bhakti-hīne upādhi hoilo ebe byādhi
 
     śrī-guru - spiritual master; baiṣṇaba - the Vaiṣṇavas;more - to  me; dilena - gave; upādhi - designation; bhakti-hīne - without devotion; upādhi - designation;  hoilaḥ - did; ebe - one; byādhi - disease. 

     The Vaiṣṇava spiritual masters have given me the name  Bhaktivinoda. But because I have no true devotion, for me this  name is only a disease.
 

Text 7 
 
jatana koriyā sei byadhi nibaraṇe
śaraṇa loinu āmi baiṣṇaba-caraṇe
 
     jatana - effort; koriyā - doing; sei - this;byadhi - disease;  nibaraṇe - cure; śaraṇa - shelter; loinu - I take; āmi - I;  baiṣṇaba-caraṇe - of the Vaiṣṇavas' feet.
 
     To cure myself of this disease, I take shelter of the  Vaiṣṇavas' feet.
 

Text 8 
 
baiṣṇabera pada-raja mastake dhoriyā
e śoka-satana gāya bhaktibinodiyā
 
     baiṣṇabera - of the Vaiṣṇavaa; pada - of the feet; raja - the  dust; mastake - on the head; dhoriyā - holding; e - this;śoka-satana - dispelling grief; gāya - sings;  bhaktibinodiyā - Bhaktivinoda. 

     Placing on his head the dust of the Vaiṣṇavaa' feet,  Bhaktivinoda sings this Śoka-śātana.

 


Part 4 A Mirror Held to the Devotional Service of Rūpanugas 
Song 1
Text 1
 
śrī-guru śrī-gauracandra      bṛndābane juba-dwandwa
braja-bāsi-jana-śrī-caraṇa
bandiyā praphulla mane        e bhaktibinoda bhaṇe
rūpanuga-bhajana-darpaṇa
 
     śrī-guru - spiritual master; śrī-gauracandra - Lord  Caitanya; bṛndābane - in Vṛndāvana; juba-dwandwa - the youthful  divine couple; braja-bāsi-jana - of the people of Vraja; śrī- caraṇa - the feet; bandiyā - bowing down; praphulla - blossomign with joy; mane - in the heart; e - this; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda;  bhaṇe - speaks; rūpanuga - of the followers of Śrī Rupa 
Gosvami; bhajana - worship; darpaṇa - mirror. 
 
     Bowing down before the feet of my spiritual master, Lord  Caitanya, the youthful divine couple in Vraja, and the people who  reside in Vraja, with a heart blossoming with joy Bhaktivinoda  speaks this Rūpānuga-bhajana-darpaṇa (A Mirror Held to the Devotional Service of Rūpa Gosvāmī's Followers) 
 


Song 2
 

Text 1 
 
bahu-janma-bhāgya-baśe        cinmoya madhura rase
spṛhā janme jībera hiyāya
sei spṛhā lobha hoya          braja-dhāme jība loya
rūpānuga-bhajane mātāya
 
     bahu - many; janma - births; bhāgya - good fortune;baśe - by the  power; cinmoya - spiritual; madhura - sweet; rase - nectar;  spṛhā - desire; janme - in the birth; jībera - of the soul;  hṛdāya - of the heart; sei - this; spṛhā - desire;lobha - greed;  hoya - is; braja - of Vraja; dhāme - in the holy abode;  jība - the soul; loya - takes; rūpānuga-bhajane - with the  worship following Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī; mātāya - wild.
 
     By the power of good fortunate attained after many births, a  soul may in his heart yearn after the spiritual madhura-rasa.  When this yearning becomes intense, the soul enters the holy abode  of Vraja and becomes passionately attached to the devotional  service practiced by the followers of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.  


Text 2 
 
bhajana-prakāra jata          sakalera sāra mata
śikhāilo śrī-rūpa gosāñi
se bhajana nā jāniyā          kṛṣṇa bhajibāre giyā
tuccha kāje jībana kāṭāi
 
     bhajana - of devotional service; prakāra - kind; jata - which; sakalera - of all; sāra - best; mata - considered;  śikhāilaḥ - taught; śrī-rūpa gosāñi - Śrī Rupa Gosvami;  se - that; bhajana - devotional service; nā - not;jāniyā - knowing; kṛṣṇa - Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhajibāre -  o worship; giyā - attaining; tuccha - useless; kāje - work; jībana - life;  kāṭāi - passes.
 
     Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī taught the best kind of devotional  service. Anyone who, not understanding this kind of devotional  service, tries to worship Lord Kṛṣṇa, passes his life performing  only petty and unimportant activities.
 

Text 3 
 
bujhibāre se bhajana          bahu jatna akiñcana
biracilo bhajana-darapaṇa
braje rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sebā        korite utsuka jebā
sukhe teṅha koruṇa śrabaṇa
 
     bujhibāre - to understand; se - this; bhajana - devotionalservice; bahu - many; jatna - efforts; akincana - without anything else; biracilaḥ - wrtoe; bhajana- darapaṇa - mirror of devotional service; braje - in Vraja; rādhā- kṛṣṇa-sebā - service to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; korite - to do;  utsuka - eager; jebā - who; sukhe - happily; teṅha - this;koruṇa - do; śrabaṇa - hearing.
 
     To teach this kind of devotional service, a poor person has  written this Bhajana-darpaṇa. Anyone who yearns to worship Śrī  Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja should happily hear this book.
 

Text 4 
 
lobhete janama pāi       ati śīghra bāḍi' jāi
śraddhā rati tabe hoya prīti
sahaja bhajana rati      nāhi cāya śikhā-mati
tabu śikhā prathamika-rīti
 
     lobhete - greed; janama - birth; pāi - I attain;ati - very;  sighra - quickly; bāḍi' - increasing; jāi - I go;śraddhā - faith;  rati - attraction; tabe - then; hoya - is; prīti - love;sahaja - natural; 
bhajana - worship; rati - attraction; nāhi - not;caya - seeing;  śikhā-mati - instruction; tabu - then; śikhā - instruction;  prathamika - first; rīti - way.
 
     If the desire for it takes birth within me, I will quickly  make advancement. Then faith, attraction, and spiritual love will  come, one after the other. When I am truly attracted to 
devotional service, I will no longer see the rules and  regulations of sādhana-bhakti. Those rules are meant for  beginners.
 

Text 5  

putra-sneha jananīra          sahaja hṛdoye sthira
dūṣita hṛdoye śikhā cāi
kṛṣṇa-prema sei rūpa          nitya-siddha aparūpa
baddha-jībe aprakaṭa bhāi
 
     putra - for children; sneha - love; jananīra - of a  mother; sahaja - natural; hṛdoye - heart; sthira - steady;  dūṣita - polluted;  hṛdoye - in the heart; śikhā - teaching; cāi - attain;kṛṣṇa-
prema - love for Lord Kṛṣṇa; sei - this; rūpa - form; nitya- siddha - eternally perfect; 
aparūpa - wonderful; baddha-jībe - imprisoned soul;  aprakaṭa - not manifested; bhāi - O brothers. 

     Love for her children naturally stays in a mother's heart,  but a wicked heart may need to learn that love. In the same way,  an eternally liberated soul naturally possesses very wonderful 
love for Lord Kṛṣṇa, but that love, O my brothers, is not visible  in the conditioned souls.
 

Text 6 
 
sei to' sahaja rati      pāiyāche apagati
śikhānuśīlana jadi pāya
se rati jāgiyā uṭhe      jībera bandhana chuṭe
brajānanda tāhāre nācāya
 
     sei - this; to' - indeed; sahaja - natural;rati - attraction;  pāiyāche - attained; apagati - destination;  śikhānuśīlana - following the teaching; -  jadi - if; pāya - attaining; se - that; rati - love;jāgiyā - awakening;  uṭhe - rises; jībera - of the soul; bandhana - bondage;chuṭe - breaks; 
braja - of Vraja; ānanda - the bliss; tāhāre - of him;  nācāya - dances.
 
     If the soul follows the rules and regulations of devotional  service, he will attain wonderful attraction to the Lord. When  that attraction awakens in the heart, the soul's material bondage 
breaks. Then the soul dances in the bliss of Vraja. 
 


Song 3
 

Text 1
 
joga jāga saba chāra          śraddhā sakalera sāra
sei śraddhā hṛdoye jāhāra
udiyāche eka bindhu      krame bhakti-rasa-sindhu
lābhe tāra hoya adhikāra
 
     joga - yoga; jāga - yajnas; saba - all; chāra - piles of  ashes; śraddhā - faith; sakalera - of all; sāra - thebest; sei - that;  śraddhā - faith; hṛdoye - in the heart; jāhāra - of whom;  udiyāche - rises; eka - one; bindhu - drop; krame - gradually;  bhakti-rasa-sindhu - the nectar ocean of devotional service;  lābhe - attains; tāra - of him; hoya - is;adhikāra - qualification.
 
     Yoga and yajñas are worthless like piles of ashes. Faith is  the best of all. A person who in his heart has faith attains  at first a single drap of nectar. Then gradually he becomes  qualified to enter the nectar ocean of devotional service.
 

Text 2 
 
jñāna karma deba debi         bahu jatanete sebi'
prāpta-phala hoilo tuccha jñāna
sādhu-jana-saṅgābeśe          śrī-kṛṣṇa-kathāra śeṣe
biśwāso to' hoya balabān
 
     jñāna - jnana; karma - karma; deba - demigods;  debi - goddesses; bahu - many; jatanete - efforts;sebi' - serving;  prāpta - attained; phala - result; hoilaḥ - was;tuccha - insignificant; 
jñāna - knowledge; sādhu-jana - devotees;  saṅga - association; ābeśe - entrance; śrī-kṛṣṇa-
kathāra - of topics of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; śeṣe - at the end;  biśwāsaḥ - faith; to' - indeed; hoya - is; balabān - powerful.
 
     With many efforts worshiping the demiogods and goddesses  with karma and jñāna, one attains only worthless pathetic  results and worthless and pathetic impersonal ideas. But if one 
stays among the devotees and hears about Lord Kṛṣṇa, one  attains powerful faith in the Lord.
 

Text 3 
 
sei to' biśwāse bhāi          śraddhā boli' sadā gāi
bhakti-latā bīja boli tāre
karmī jñānī jane jāre         śraddhā bole bāre bāre
sei bṛtti śraddhā hoite nāre
 
     sei - this; to' - indeed; biśwāse - faith; bhāi - O  brothers; śraddhā - faith; boli' - being; sadā - always; gāi - I sing;  bhakti-latā - of the vine of devotional service; bīja - the seed;boli - saing; tāre - in that; karmī - karmi; jñānī - jnani;  jane - people; jāre - in which;  śraddhā - faith; bole - sais; bāre - again; bāre - andagain;  sei - this; bṛtti - action; śraddhā - faith; hoite - from; nāre - not.
 
     O my brothers, this is true faith. Of this faith I always  sing. This faith is the seed that grows into the flowering vine  of devotional service. The karmīs and jñānīs talk again and  again about faith. But their faith is not like this faith. 
 

Text 4 
 
nāmera bibada mātra      śuniyā to' jwale gātra
lauhe jadi boloho kañcana
tabu lauha lauha roya         kañcana to' kabhu noya
maṇi sparśa nāhe jata-khaṇa
 
     nāmera - of the holy name; bibada - dispute; mātra - on;y;  śuniyā - hearing; to' - indeed; jwale - burns with flames;  gātra - limbs; lauhe - iron; jadi - if; bolohaḥ - you say;kancana - gold; tabu - then; lauha - iron; lauha - iron;roya - stays; kañcana - gold; to' - indeed; kabhu - ever; noya - not; maṇi - jewel; sparśa - touch; nāhe - not;jata-khaṇa - when.
 
     When I hear them dispute the glories of the holy name, my  limbs burn with flames. If you say an iron thing is made of gold,  the iron will remain iron. If it is not touched by a cintāmaṇi 
jewel, the iron will never become gold.
 

Text 5 
 
kṛṣṇa-bhakti cintāmaṇi        taṅra sparśe lauha-khani
kārma-jñāna-gata śraddhā-bhāba
haya jaya hema-bhara          chāḍiyā to' ku-bikāra
se kebala maṇira prabhāba
 
     kṛṣṇa-bhakti cintāmaṇi - the contamani jewel of devotion to  Lord Kṛṣṇa; taṅra - of that; sparśe - by the touch; lauha khani - iron; kārma-jñāna-gata - attained karma and jnana; 
śraddhā-bhāba - faith; haya - is; jaya - going; hemabhara - gold; chāḍiyā - leaving; to' - indeed; ku-bikāra - transformation; se - this; kebala - only; maṇira - ofthe jewel;  prabhāba - the power.
 
     Devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa is a cintāmaṇi jewel. By  its touch the iron that is faith in karma and jñāna becomes  transformed into the gold that is faith in devotional service.  Only the cintāmaṇi jewel of devotional service has that power.





Song 4
Kṛṣṇa-bhakti
Devotional Service to Lord Kṛṣṇa
 

Text 1
 
chāḍi' anya abhilāṣa          jñāna-karma-sahābāsa
ānukūlya kṛṣṇānuśīlana
śuddha-bhakti boli' tāre      bhakti-śāstra su-bicāre
śrī-rūpera siddhānta-bacana
 
     chāḍi' - renouncing; anya - other; abhilāṣa - desires;jñāna-karma - jnana and karma; 
sahābāsa - with; ānukūlya - favorable; kṛṣṇānuśīlana - in  relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; śuddha-bhakti - pure devotional service;  boli' - saying; tāre - in that;  bhakti-śāstra - devotional scriptures; su-bicāre - carefully  considering; śrī-rūpera - of Śrī Rupa Gosvami; siddhānta- bacana - the statement of the conclusion.
 
     "Uttama-bhakti, or unalloyed devotion to the Supreme  Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, involves the rendering of  devotional service in a way that is favorable to the Lord. This 
devotional service should be free from any extraneous motive and  devoid of fruitive karma, impersonal jñāna, and all other  selfish desires."* After studying all the scriptures of 
edevotion, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī came to this conclusion.
 

Text 2 
 
śrabaṇa kīrtana smṛti         sebārcana dāsya nati
sakhya ātma-nibedana hoya
sādhana-bhaktira aṅga         sādhakera jāhe raṅga
sadā sādhu-jana-saṅga-moya
 
     śrabaṇa - hearing; kīrtana - chanting; smṛti - remembering; sebā - service; arcana - worship;  āsya - carrying out  the orders; nati - bowing down; sakhya - friendship; ātma- nibedana - surrendering everything; hoya - are; sādhana-bhaktira - of  sadhana bhakti; aṅga - the limbs; sādhakera - of the  aspiring devotee; jāhe - in which; raṅga - joy;sadā - always;  sādhu-jana-saṅga-moya - consisting of the association of devotees. 

     Hearing and chanting about the transcendental holy name,  form, qualities, paraphernalia, and pastimes of Lord Viṣṇu,  remembering them, serving the lotus feet of the Lord, offering 
the Lord respectful worship with sixteen types of paraphernalia,  offering prayers to the Lord, becoming his servant, considering  the Lord one's best friend, and surrendering everything unto Him  (in other words, serving Him with the body, mind, and words),*  are the limbs of sāhana-bhakti (devotional service in practice).  Staying in the company of devotees, the aspiring devotee (sāhaka) delights inthem. 
 

Text 3 
 
sādhana-bhaktira bale         bhāba-rūpa bhakti-phale
tāhā punaḥ prema-rūpa pāya
preme jība kṛṣṇa bhaje        kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rase māje
sei rasa śrī-rūpa śikhāya
 
     sādhana-bhaktira - of sadhana-bhakti; bale - by the  power; bhāba-rūpa - devotional service is ecstasy; bhakti- phale - the fruit of devotion; tāhā - that;  punaḥ - again; prema-rūpa - as love; pāya - attaining;preme - love;  jība - the soul; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; bhaje - worships;kṛṣṇa- bhakti-rase - in the nectar of devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa; māje - isplunged; sei - that; rasa - nectar; śrī-rūpa - Śrī Rupa Gosvami;  śikhāya - teaches.
 
     By the power of sādhana-bhakti (devotional service in  practice), one attains bhāva-bhakti (devotional service in  ecstasy) and then prema-bhakti (devotional service in pure love  of God). Then the soul worships Lord Kṛṣṇa with love. Then the  soul dives into the nectar of devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Rūpa  Gosvāmī teaches the truth of this nectar.

 
 
Song 5
Śraddhā Dwibidha, Ata Eba Sādhana-bhakti-o Dwi-bidha
Two Kinds of Faith, and Therefore Two Kinds of Devotional Service in Practice (Sādhana-bhakti)
 

Text 1
 
śraddhā-debi nāma jāra        duiti swabhāba tāra
bidhi-mūla ruci-mūla bhede
śāstrera śāsana jabe          śraddhāra udoya ho'be
baidhī śraddhā tāre bole bede
 
     śraddhā-debi - the goddess of faith; nāma - name; jāra - ofwhom; duiti - two; swabhāba - natures; tāra - of that;  bidhi - rules and regulations;  mūla - root; ruci - attraction; mūla - root;bhede - difference;  śāstrera - of the scriptures; śāsana - teaching; jabe - which; 
śraddhāra - of faith; udoya - rising; ho'be - will be;  baidhī - according to rules; śraddhā - faith; tāre - in that; bole - says; bede - the Vedas.
 
     The goddess of faith (Śraddhā-devī) has two natures: faith  rooted in rules and regulations and faith rooted in spontaneous  attraction. When the soul follows the scriptures' teachings, 
faith arises. The Vedas call this kind of faith vaidhī śraddhā  (faith by following the rules and regulations of the scriptures).
 

Text 2 
 
braja-bāsī sebe kṛṣṇe         sei śuddha-sebā dṛṣṭe
jabe hoya śraddhāra udoya
lobhamoyī śraddhā satī        rāgānugā śuddhā mati
bahu bhāgye sādhaka labhoya
 
     braja-bāsī - the residents of Vraja; sebe - serve;kṛṣṇe - Kṛṣṇa; sei - this; śraddhā-sebā - faith and service; dṛṣṭe - seen;  jabe - when; hoya - is; śraddhāra - of faith; udoya - rising;  lobhamoyī - greedy; śraddhā - faith; sati - spiritual;  rāga - love; anugā - following; śraddhā - faith;mati - consideration; bahu - great; bhāgye - good fortune; sādhaka - the  aspiring devotee; labhoya - attains. 

     Seeing how the residents of Vraja purely serve Lord Kṛṣṇa,  the devotee finds faith arise within him. By great good fortune  the aspiring devotee attains faith that is eager, spiritual, 
pure, and filled with spontaneous love.
 

Text 3 
 
śraddhā-bhede bhakti-bhede         gāitecheche catur-beda
baidhī rāgānugā bhakti dwoya
sādhana-samoye jaiche         siddhi-kāle prāpti taiche
ei-rūpa bhakti-śāstre koya
 
     śraddhā-bhede - in differences of faith; bhakti-bhede - differences ofdevotional service; gāitecheche - sing; catur- beda - the four Vedas;  baidhī - vaidhi; rāgānugā - raganuga; bhakti - devotion;dwoya - two;  sādhana-samoye - at the time of sadhana; jaiche - go;  siddhi-kāle - at the time of perfection; prāpti - attainment;taiche - that; ei-rūpa - this way; bhakti-śāstre - the devotional  scriptures; koya - are.
 
     According to differences of faith, there are different kinds  of devotional service. The Four Vedas say vaidhī and rāgānugā are  the two kinds of devotional service. By practicing sādhana one  eventually attains perfection. This the scripures of devotion  describe.   


Text 4 
 
baidhī bhakti dhīra gati      rāgānugā tībra ati
ati śīghra rasābasthā pāya
rāga-bartma-su-sādhane        ruci hoya jāra mane
rūpānuga hoite sei dhāya
 
     baidhī bhakti - vaidhi bhakti; dhīra - slow; gati - movement; rāgānugā - raganuga; tībra - sharp; ati - very;  ati - very; śīghra - fast; rasābasthā - attainment of rasa;  pāya - attaining; rāga-bartma-su-sādhane - by the path of  araga; ruci - attachment; hoya - is; jāra - of whom;mane - in the  heart; rūpānuga - the followers of Śrī Rupa Gosvami;hoite - do;  sei - this; dhāya - following.
 
     Vaidhī bhakti is very slow and rāgānugā bhakti is very  swifty. Following it, one swiftly comes to the rasas. By  following the path of rāga one attains ruci (attachment) in his  heart. The followers of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī follow this path.

 


Song 6
Prākṛtāprakṛta Rasa-tattwa-jñānera Abaśyakatā
One Must Understand Both Material and Spiritual Mellows
 

Text 1
 
rūpānuga tattwa-sāra          bujhite akaṅkha jāṅra
rasa-jñāna tāṅra prayojana
cinmoya ānanda-rasa      sarba-tattwa jāṅra baśa
akhaṇḍa parama tattwa-dhana
 
     rūpānuga - following Śrī Rupa Gosvami; tattwa-sāra - besttruth; bujhite - to know; akaṅkha - desire; jāṅra - of whom;  rasa-jñāna - knowledge of rasa; tāṅra - of him;  prayojana - need; cinmoya - spiritual; ānanda-rasa - nectar of  bliss; sarba-tattwa - all truth; jāṅra - of whom; baśa - under the control; akhaṇḍa - unbroken; parama - supreme;tattwa - truth;  dhana - treasure.
 
     One who wishes to understand the truth of Śrīla Rūpa  Gosvāmī's teachings must understand the rasas. The spiritual  blissful rasas control all else. They are the great treasure of  the Supreme Truth.

 
Text 2 
 
jāṅra bhāṇe jñāni jana        brahmāloya-anweṣaṇa
kore nāhi bujhi' beda-marma
jāṅra chāyā-mātra bore        jogī-jana joga kore
jāra chale karmi kore karma
 
     jāṅra - of whom; bhāṇe - effulgence; jñāni  jana - philosophers; brahmāloya-anweṣaṇa - seeing the  impersoanl Brahman; kore - do; nāhi - not;bujhi' - understanding;  beda-marma - the heart of the Vedas; jāṅra - of whom; chāyā- mātra - only a shadow; bore - by the wish; jogī-jana - the  yogis; joga - yog; kore - do; jāra - of whom;chale - deception;  karmi - karmis; kore - do; karma - karma.
 
     Not understanding the heart of the Vedas, the impersonalists  search for the impersonal Brahman, which is the effulgence of the  rasas. Yearning to find the shadow of the rasas, the yogīs  practice yoga. Tricked into thinking they will find what is  really in the rasas, the karmīs perform karma.
 

Text 3 
 
bibhāba anubhāba āra          sāttwika sañcārī cāra
sthāyī bhābe milana śundara
sthāyī bhābe rasa hoya        nitya cid-ānanda-moya
parama āswādya nirantara
 
     bibhāba - vubhava; anubhāba - anubhava; āra - and;  sāttwika - sattvika-bhava; sañcārī - sancari-bhava;  cāra - four; sthāyī bhābe - sthayi-bhava; milana - meeting;  śundara - brautiful; sthāyī bhābe - sthayi-bhava; rasa - nectar;  hoya - is;  nitya cid-ānanda-moya - eternal and full of knowledge and bliss;  parama - supreme; āswādya - relishable; nirantara - always.


     Vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva, and sañcāri-bhāva become  beautiful when they meet in sthāyi-bhāva. In sthāyi-bhāva is the  the highest, eternal, most relishable spiritual bliss.
 

Text 4 
 
je rasa prapañca-gata         joḍa-kābye prokāśita
parama rasera asan-mūrti
asan-mūrti nitya hoya          ādarśera chāyā hoya
jena marīcikā jala-sphūrti
 
     je - which; rasa - rasas; prapañca-gata - in the material  world; joḍa-kābye - material poetry; 
prokāśita - manifested;  parama - supreme; rasera - of the rasas; asan-mūrti - not the form; 
asan-mūrti - not the form; nitya - eternal; hoya - are;  ādarśera - of a mirror; chāyā - reflection; hoya - is;  jena - like; marīcikā - mirage; jala-sphūrti - manifestation ofwater.
 
     The material rasas described in material poetry are not  spiritual or eternal. They are not eternal. They are like  reflections in a mirror or mirages in a desert.

 


Song 7
Sthāyi-bhābai Rasera Kalaḥ
The Mellows of Sthāyi-bhāva
 

Text 1
 
rasera ādhāra jini       tāṅra citte rasa-khani
sei cittera abasthā biśeṣe
śraddhā-niṣṭhā-rucy-āsakti         krame hoya bhāba-byakti
rati-nāme tāṅhāra nirdeśe
 
     rasera - of the rasas; ādhāra - the reservoir; jini - whom; tāṅra - of Him; citte - in the heart; rasa-khani - the the  jewel mine of rasas;  sei - that; cittera - of the heart;  abasthā - siotuation; biśeṣe - specific; śraddhā-niṣṭhā-rucy- āsakti - faith, attraction, and attachment; krame - in 
sequence;  hoya - are; bhāba-byakti - manifestation of ecstasy; rati- nāme - by the name rati; tāṅhāra - of him; nirdeśe - definition 

     He whose heart is the reservoir of rasas, the jewel-mine of  rasas, experiences in his heart first faith (śraddhā), and  then, one after the other, steadiness niṣṭhā), attraction  (ruci), and attachment (āsakti). In this way he attains ecstatic  love, which is called by the name rati.
 

Text 2 
 
biruddhābiruddha-bhāba        sarbopari swa-prabhāba
prokāśiyā loya nija-baśe
sakalera ādi-pati        haya śobhā pāya ati
sthāyī bhāba nāma pāya rase
 
     biruddha - opposed; abiruddha - not opposed; bhāba - mellows;  sarbopari - above all; swa-prabhāba - own power;  prokāśiyā - manifesting; loya - taking; nija-baśe - own power;  sakalera - of all; ādi-pati - the original master; haya - is;  śobhā - beauty; pāya - attaining; ati - very;sthāyī - steady;  bhāba - bhava; nāma - name; pāya - attaining; rase - in rasa.
 
     Manifesting its dominion over all favorable (aviruddha) and  unfavorable (aviruddha) bhāvas, the beautiful rasa known as  sthāyi-bhāva is the master of all bhāvas. 
 

Text 3 
 
mukhya-gauṇa-bhede tāra       paricoya dwi-prakāra
mukhya pañca gauṇa sapta-bidha
santa dāsya sakhya āra        bātsalya madhura sāra
ei pañca rati mukhyābhidha
 
     mukhya - primary; gauṇa - secondary; bhede - differences;tāra - of that; paricoya - recognition; dwi-prakāra - two kinds;  mukhya - primary; pañca - five; gauṇa - secondary; sapta-
bidha - seven kinds; santa - neutrality; dāsya - servitude;  sakhya - friendship; āra - and; bātsalya - parental love;  madhura - sweet; sāra - best; ei - these; pañca - five;  rati - rasas; mukhya - primary; abhidha - called. 

     The rasas are of two kinds: direct and indirect. Five are  direct and seven are indirect. The primary rasas are: śānta  (neutrality), dāsya (servitude), sakhya (friendship), vātsalya  (paternal love), and madhura (conjugal love).

 
Text 4 
 
hāsyādbhuta bīra āra          koruṇa o raudrākara
bhayānaka-bībhatsa-bibhede
rati sapta gauṇī hoya         saba kṛṣṇa-bhakti-moya
śobhā pāya rasera prabhede
 
     hāsya - laughter; adbhuta - wonder; bīra - heroism;āra - and; koruṇa - compassion; aḥ - and; raudra - anger; ākara - form;  bhayānaka - fear; bībhatsa - horror; bibhede - divisions;rati - rasas; 
sapta - seven; gauṇī - indirect; hoya - are; saba - all;  kṛṣṇa-bhakti-moya - made of devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa;  śobhā - beauty; pāya - attaining; rasera - of rasas;  prabhede - divisions. 

     The seven indirect rasas, which are all beautiful and all  filled with devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa, are: hāsya (laughter),  adbhuta (astonishment), vīra (chivalry), karuṇa (compassion),  raudra (anger), bhayānaka (dread), and bībhatsa (ghastliness).

 


Song 8
Madhura-rasai Sarba-śreṣṭha Rasa
Madhura-rasa Is the Best Mellow
 

Text 1

jei rati janme jāra      sei mata rasa tāra
rasa mukhya pañca-bidha hoya
gauṇa-sapta-rasa punaḥ        hoya ratira anuguṇa
ratira sambandha bhābāśroya
 
     jei - which; rati - rasa; janme - birth; jāra - of whom;  sei - this; mata - opinion; rasa - rasa; tāra - of that;rasa - rasa;  mukhya pañca-bidha - five direct rasas; hoya - are; gauṇa- sapta-rasa - seven indirect rasas; punaḥ - again; hoya - are;  ratira - of rasa; anuguṇa - following the qualities; ratira - of  rasa; sambandha - relationship; bhāba - nature;āśroya - shelter.
 
     The soul becomes attracted to one of the five direct rasas.  The seven indirect rasas follow that primary rasa. 


Text 2 
 
pañca mukhya madhye bhāi      madhurera guṇa gāi
sarba-śreṣṭha rasa-rāja boli
guṇa anya rase jata      madhurete āche tata
āra bahu bale hoya bali
 
     pañca - five; mukhya - direct; madhye - in the midst;  bhāi - O brothers; madhurera - of madhura; guṇa - virtues;  gāi - I sing;  sarba-śreṣṭha - the best of all; rasa-rāja - the king of rasas; 
boli - I say; guṇa - virtues; anya - other; rase - rasas;jata - which; madhurete - in madhura;  āche - are; tata - that; āra - other; bahu - many;bale - boy the  power; hoya - is; bali - powerful.
 
     O my brothers, now I will sing the glories of madhura-rasa,  I say it is the best of all, the king of all rasas. The virtues  of the other rasas are present in madhura-rasa. It is powerful  with their powers.
 

Text 3 
 
gauṇa rasa āche jata          saba sañcārīra mata
haya srṅgarera puṣṭi kore
śrī-rūpera anugata       bhajane je hoya rata
sthiti tāra kebale madhure
 
     gauṇa - indirect; rasa - rasas; āche - are;jata - which;  saba - all; sañcārīra - exciting; mata - considered;  haya - being so; srṅgarera - of the conjugal mellow;puṣṭi - increase; kore - do; śrī-rūpera - of Śrī Rupa Gosvami;  anugata - followed; bhajane - worship; je - which; hoya - is; rata - attachment; sthiti - situation; tāra - of that;kebale - only;  madhure - madhura-rasa.
 
     The indirect rasas sweeten madhura-rasa. Śrīla Rūpa  Gosvāmī's followers are naturally attached to madhura-rasa. 


Text 4 
 
madhura ujjwala-rasa          sadā śṛṅgārera baśa
braja-raja-nandana biṣoya
aiśwarja su-gupta ta'te       mādhurja-prabhābe mate
tāhāra āśroya bhakta-coya
 
     madhura - sweet; ujjwala-rasa - splendid rasa;  sadā - always; śṛṅgārera - of conjugal love; baśa - by thepower; braja- raja-nandana - the prince of Vraja; biṣoya - in the field of 
perception; aiśwarja - opulence; su-gupta - hidden;ta'te - that; mādhurja - sweetness;-
prabhābe - glory; mate - considered; tāhāra - of Him;  āśroya - shelter; bhakta-coya - the devotees. 

     Madhura-rasa is glorious and sweet. Lord Kṛṣṇa is always  under its dominion. In it Lord Kṛṣṇa's opulence is hidden and His  sweetness gloriously manifest. In it the devotees are the lovers  and the prince of Vraja (Lord Kṛṣṇa) is the object of their love.

 


Song 9
Madhurā ratira Abirbhāba-hetuḥ
The Cause of Madhura-rasa's Appearance
 

Texts 1 and 2
 
madhurera sthāyī bhāba        labhe jate abirbhāba
boli tāhā śuno eka-mane
abhijoga o biṣoya        sambandhābhimāna-dwoya 
tadīya biśeṣa upamāne

swabhāba āśroya kori'         citte rati abatori
śṛṅgāra rasera kore puṣṭi
abhijoga ādi choya       anye rati-hetu hoya
braja-debīra tāhe nāhi dṛṣṭi
 
     madhurera - of madhura-rasa; sthāyī - sthayi; bhāba - bhava; labhe - attains; jate - which; abirbhāba - manifestation;  boli - I say;  tāhā - that; śunaḥ - please hear; eka-mane - with one heart; abhijoga - complaints; aḥ - and; biṣoya - the object of the  sense perception;  sambandha - relationship; abhimāna - pride; dwoya - two;  tadīya - of Him; biśeṣa - specific; upamāne - comparison;  swabhāba - nature; āśroya - shelter; kori' - doing; citte - in  the heart; rati - rasa; abatori - descending; śṛṅgāra - ofconjugal  love;  rasera - of the rasa; kore - does; puṣṭi - nourishment;  abhijoga - abhiyoga; ādi - beginning; choya - six;anye - others;  rati-hetu - the cause of love;  hoya - is; braja-debīra - of the goddesses of Vraja; tāhe - in  that; nāhi - not; dṛṣṭi - sight.
 
     Abhiyoga (joking complaints), viṣoya (perception of Kṛṣṇa  through the senses), sambandha (things in relation to Kṛṣṇa),  abhimāna (pride), tadīya viśeṣa (Kṛṣṇa's unique  possessions), upamāna (poetic comparison of Kṛṣṇa to other  things), and svabhāva (spontaneous love) appear in the heart and  nourish the sentiment of madhura-rasa. However, the goddesses of 
Vraja (the gopīs) do not see any need for the six items that  begin with abhiyoga.
 

Text 3 
 
swataḥ-siddhi rati tāṅre      sambandhādi-sahākāre
samartha koriyā rākhe sadā
kṛṣṇa-sebā binā tāṅra         udyamo nāhika āra
swīya sukha ceṣṭa nāhi kadā
 
     swataḥ-siddhi - independently perfect; rati - love; tāṅre - inthat; sambandhādi-sahākāre - with the help of the things  that begin with sambandha; samartha - able; koriyā - doing;rākhe - keep; sadā - always; kṛṣṇa-sebā - service ot  Lord Kṛṣṇa; binā - without; tāṅra - of that;  udyamaḥ - endeavor;  nāhika - is not; āra - other; swīya - own;sukha - happiness;  ceṣṭa - endeavor; nāhi - not; kadā - when?. 

     Although it may be helped by sambandha and other things, the  gopīs' love is perfect and independent. It is always manifest.  The gopīs never do anything but service to Kṛṣṇa. They 
never strive for their own happiness.
 

Text 4 
 
ei rati prauḍha hoya          mahā-bhāba dāsa pāya
jāra tulya prāpti āra nāi
sarbādbhuta camatkāra         sambhogecchā e prakāra
barṇibāre bākya nāhi pāi 
 
     ei - this; rati - love; prauḍha - mature; hoya - is;mahā- bhāba - great ecstasy; daśā - condition of life;pāya - attaining;  jāra - of whom;  tulya - equal; prāpti - attainment; āra - other; nāi - not; 
sarba - all; adbhuta - wonderful; camatkāra - wonder;  sambhoga - enjoyment; icchā - desire; e - this;prakāra - kind;  barṇibāre - to describe; bākya - words; nāhi - not; pāi - ihave.
 
     When this love matures to its highest state it become mahā- bhāva, which has no equal, is the greatest wonder of all wonders,  and makes one yearn to please Lord Kṛṣṇa. I have no power to  describe this state with mere words.

 


Song 10
Madhura-rati-rūpa Sthāyi-bhābera Unnati-krama
Stages of Development in Madhura-rasa Sthāyi-bhāva 
(Constitutional or Existential Ecstasy)
 

Text 1
 
rati prema sneha māna         praṇaya o rāgākhyāna
anurāga bhāba ei sāta
rati jata gāḍha hoya          krame sapta nāma loya
sthāyī bhāba sadā abadāta
 
     rati - rati; prema - prema; sneha - sneha; māna - mana;  praṇaya - pranay; aḥ - and; rāgākhyāna - called raga;  anurāga - anuraga;  bhāba - bhava; ei - these; sāta - seven; rati - rati;jata - which;  gāḍha - deep; hoya - are; krame - in sequence; sapta - seven;  nāma - name; 
loya - taking; sthāyī bhāba - sthayi-bhava; sadā - always;  abadāta - giving.
 
     Madhura-rasa sthāyi-bhāva has seven stages, which are:  prema (pure love), sneha (affection), māna (jealous anger),  praṇaya (attachment), rāga (passion), anurāga (devotion), and  bhāva (ecstatic love).
 

Text 2 
 
snehādi je bhāba choya        prema nāme paricoya
sādhāraṇa janera nikaṭe
je bhāba kṛṣṇete jāṅra        sei bhābe kṛṣṇa tāṅra
e rahasya rase nitya baṭe
 
     snehādi - beginning with sneha; je - whiuch; bhāba - bhava;  choya - six; prema - prema; nāme - named;  paricoya - understanding; sādhāraṇa - general;  janera - people; nikaṭe - near; je - which; bhāba - bhava;kṛṣṇete - to  Kṛṣṇa; jāṅra - of whom; sei - which; bhābe - bhava;
kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;  tāṅra - of that; e - this; rahasya - secret; rase - rasa; nitya - eternal; baṭe - indeed.  

     The six items beginning with sneha are collectively known by  the name prema. Lord Kṛṣṇa reciprocates His devotee's love. In  this way the confidential rasas are manifest eternally.
 

Text 3 
 
bhakta-citta-siṁhāsana        ta'te upabiṣṭa hana
sthāyī bhāba sarba-bhāba-rāja
hlādinī je para śakti         tāṅrasāra śuddha-bhakti
bhāba-rūpe tāṅhāra birāja
 
     bhakta - of the devotee; citta - in the heart; siṁhāsana - on a  throne; ta'te - that; upabiṣṭa - seated; hana - is;sthāyī  bhāba - sthayi-bhava; sarba-bhāba-rāja - the king of all bhavas; 
hlādinī - the pleasure potency; je - which; para - spiritual;śakti - potency; tāṅra - of that; sāra - best; śuddha-bhakti - pure  devotional service; bhāba-rūpe - form; tāṅhāra - of that; birāja - manifestation. 

     Seated on the throne of the devotee's heart, sthāyi-bhāva  rules as the king of all bhāvas. Pure devotional service and the  spiritual pleasure potency (hlādinī) are then manifested in that  bhāva.
 

Text 4 
 
bibhābādi bhāba-gaṇe          nijāyatte ānayane
korena ye rasera prokāśa
rasa nityānanda-tattwa        nitya-siddha sāra-sattwa
jība-citte tāhāra bikāśa
 
     bibhābādi - beginning with the vibhavas; bhāba-gaṇe - the manybhavas; nija - own; āyatte - control; ānayane - bringing;  korena - do; ye - which;  rasera - of the rasa; prokāśa - manifestation; rasa - rasa;  nityānanda-tattwa - eternal bliss; nitya-siddha - eternally  perfect; 
sāra-sattwa - the best; jība-citte - in the soul's heart;  tāhāra - of that; bikāśa - manifestation.
 
     The rasas and the bhāvas beginning with vibhāva, which are  all eternal, blissful, eternally perfect, and sublime are then  manifest in the spirit soul's heart.

 


Song 11
Vibhāva 
Special Symptoms or Causes of Ecstasy
 

Text 1
 
raty-āswāda hetu jata         bibhāba nāmete khyāta
ālambana uddīpana hoya
biṣoya-āśroya-gata       ālambana dui mata
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa-bhakta se ubhoya
 
     raty - rasas; āswāda - tasting; hetu - cause;jata - which; bibhāba - vibhava; nāmete - name; khyāta - known;  ālambana - alambanma; uddīpana - uddipana; hoya - are; biṣoya āśroya-gata - the visaya and asraya; ālambana - alambana;  dui - two; mata - considered; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇabhakta - Kṛṣṇa's  devotee; se - that; ubhoya - both.
 
     The causes of relishing rasa are called vibhāva, which is  divided into alambana (primary causes of love) and uddīpana  (secondary causes of love). The lover is the devortee and the 
beloved is Lord Kṛṣṇa.  
 

Text 2 
 
nāyakera śiromaṇi        swayaṁ kṛṣṇa guṇa-maṇi
nitya guṇa-dhāma parāt para
tāṅra bhābe anurakta          guṇāḍhya jateka bhakta
siddha eka sādhaka apara
 
     nāyakera - of heroes; śiromaṇi - the crest jewel;  swayam - personally; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; guṇa-maṇi - jewelvirtues;  nitya - eternal; guṇa- dhāma - abode of virtues; parāt - than the greatest;para - greater;  tāṅra - of Him; bhābe - bhava; anurakta - attached;  guṇāḍhya - opulent with virtues;  jateka - which; bhakta - devotee; siddha - perfect; eka - one;  sādhaka - aspiring devotee; apara - others.
 
     Lord Kṛṣṇa is the crest jewel of heroes. He is decorated  with the jewels of transcendental qualities. He is the eternal  abode of all transcendental qualities. He is greater than the  greatest. Of the devotees who love Him, and who are also glorious  with transcendental qualities, some are perfect (siddha) and  others are aspiring for perfection (sādhaka).
 

Text 3 
 
bhāba uddīpana kore      uddīpana nāma dhore
kṛṣṇera sambandha bastu saba
smitāsya saurabha śṛṅga       baṁśī kambu khetra bhṛṅga
padāṅkanūpura kala-raba
 
     bhāba - love; uddīpana - inflaming; kore - doe;  uddīpana - uddipanas; nāma - named; dhore - hold; kṛṣṇera - ofKṛṣṇa;  sambandha - relationship; bastu - things; saba - all;smitāsya - smiling 
face; saurabha - fragrance; śṛṅga - horn;baṁśī - flute;  kambu - conchshell; khetra - place; bhṛṅga - bees;  padāṅka - footprints; nūpura - anklets; kala-raba - tinkling.
 
     The things that stimulate ecstatic love are called  uddīpanas. These are things that have a relationship with Lord  Kṛṣṇa. They include Kṛṣṇa's smile, bodily fragrance, buffalo-horn 
bugle, flute, conchshell, abode, bumblebees, footprints, and  tinkling ankle-bells.
 

Text 4  

tulasī bhajana cīna      bhakta jana-daraśana
ei-rūpa nānā uddīpana
bhakti-rasa-āswādane          ei saba hetu-gaṇe
nirdeśila rūpa-sanātana
 
     tulasī - tulasi; bhajana - of devotional service;cīna - signs; bhakta - devotee; jana - people; daraśana - sight; ei-rūpa - in  this way; nānā - various; uddīpana - uddipanas; bhakti-rasa
āswādane - in tasting the rasas of devotional service;  ei - these; saba - all; hetu-gaṇe - causes;nirdeśila - taught;  rūpa-sanātana - Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī.
 
     Tulasī, the signs of devotional service, and seeing the  devotees are also included among the uddīpanas, which cause one  to relish the nectar of devotional service. This was taught by 
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī.

 
 
Song 12
Madhura-rase Alambana-rūpa Vibhāva
Primary Causes of Ecstatic Love in Madhura-rasa
 

Text 1
 
śrī-nandānandana dhana        tadīya ballabhā-gaṇa
madhura-rasera ālambana
gopī-gata rati jāhān          gopī-cittāśroya tāhān
kṛṣṇa-mātra biṣoya takhan
 
     śrī-nandānandana - Kṛṣṇa; dhana - treasure;tadīya - His;  ballabhā-gaṇa - beloveds; madhura-rasera - of madhura-rasa;  ālambana - the primary cause of love; gopī-gata - for the gopīs;  rati - love; jāhān - which; gopī - of the gopīs;  citta - hearts; āśroya - lovers; tāhān - that; kṛṣṇa- mātra - Kṛṣṇa alone; biṣoya - beloved; takhan - then.
 
     The great treasure that is Lord Kṛṣṇa and His many beloveds  are the ālambana (primary causes) of madhura-rasa. The gopīs are  the lovers and Lord Kṛṣṇa is the only beloved in the gopīs'  hearts.
 

Text 2 
 
jāhān rati kṛṣṇa-gata         raty-āśroya kṛṣṇa-cita
gopī tāhān ratira biṣoya
biṣoya āśroya dhore'          sthāyī-bhāba rati core
naile rati udgata nā hoya
 
     jāhān - which; rati - rasa; kṛṣṇa-gata - to Kṛṣṇa;raty- āśroya - lover; kṛṣṇa-cita - in Kṛṣṇa's heart; gopī - thegopīs;  tāhān - that; ratira - love; biṣoya - object;biṣoya - object;  āśroya - lover; dhore' - holding;  sthāyī-bhāba - sthayi-bhava; rati - love; core - goes;  naile - is not; rati - love; udgata - rising; nā - not;hoya - is. 

     But Lord Kṛṣṇa is also the lover and the gopīs are the  beloveds in Kṛṣṇa's heart. Thus, in sthāyi-bhāva, Kṛṣṇa and the  gopīs are both lovers and beloveds. Without sthāyi-bhāva this 
exchange of love cannot take place.
 

Text 3 
 
bibhābete ālambana       rase nitya prayojana
braje tāi kṛṣṇa gopīnātha
madana-mohana dhana      brajāṅganā gopī-jana
ballabha rasika rādhā-nātha
 
     bibhābete - in vibhava; ālambana - alambana; rase - rasa;nitya - eternal; prayojana - need; braje - Vraja; tāi - that;  kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;  gopīnātha - master of the gopīs; madana-mohana - more charming than  Kamadeva; dhana - treasure; brajāṅganā - the girls of Vraja; gopī-jana - the gopīs;  ballabha - beloved; rasika - whose relishes rasa; rādhā-nātha - the  master of Rādhā.
 
     For the rasas to be manifest in vibhāva, the ālambanas are  necessary. In Vraja the ālambanas are first Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is  the master of Rādhā and the gopīs, the gopīs' beloved, the taster 
of the nectar of transcendental mellows, and more charming and  enchanting that Kāmadeva, and second the gopīs, who are the  girls of Vraja.
 

Text 4 
 
swīya-parakīya-bhede          rasa rasāntarāswāde
nityānanda biraje mādhaba
boro bhāgyabāna jei      nije ālambana hoi'
āswādaye se rasa-āsaba
 
     swīya - own; parakīya - others; bhede - difference;  rasa - rasa; rasa - rasas; antara - other; āswāde - taste; nityānanda - eternal bliss; biraje - manifest; mādhaba - Kṛṣṇa;  boraḥ - do; bhāgyabāna - fortunate; jei - which; nije - own;  ālambana - alambana; hoi' - being; āswādaye - relish;se - that;  rasa-āsaba - nectar of rasas.
 
     In this way Lord Kṛṣṇa tastes the eternal blissful nectar of  svakīya and parakīya rasa. The very fortunate souls who become  with Him the ālambana in this situation also taste the sweet 
nectar of this rasa.

 
 
Song 13
Nāyaka-śiromaṇi Śrī Kṛṣṇa-guṇa
The Transcendental Qualities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Crest-jewel of Heroes
 

Text 1
 
su-ramya madhura-smita        sarba-sal-lakhaṇānwita
balīyān taruṇa gambhīra
bābadūka priya-bhāṣī      sudhī sapratibhāśwāsī
bidagdha catura sukhī dhīra
 
     su-ramya - charming; madhura - sweet; smita - smile; sarba- sal-lakhaṇānwita - with all transcendental qualities;  balīyān - powerful;  taruṇa - young; gambhīra - deep; bābadūka - eloquent; priya- bhāṣī - the master of all languages; sudhī - intelligent;  sapratibhā-aswasi - intelligent; bidagdha - expert;catura - clever;  sukhī - intelligent; dhīra - grave.
 
     Lord Kṛṣṇa has a sweet smile. He has the most beautiful  transcendental body. That body possesses all good features. His  body is powerful, strong, and youthful. He is grave, expert in 
speaking, a very pleasing speaker, very wise, a genius, very  expert in artistic enjoyment, highly cunning, very happy, and  calm.
 

Text 2 
 
kṛtajña dakhiṇa preṣṭha       barīyān kīrtimac-chreṣṭha
lalanā-mohana keli-para
su-nitya nūtana-mūrti         kebala saundarya-sphūrti
baṁśī-gāne su-dakha tat-para
 
     kṛtajña - grateful; dakhiṇa - expert; preṣṭha - most dear; barīyān - the best; kīrtimac - glorious;  śreṣṭha - best; lalanā-mohana - charming to women; keli- para - playful; su-nitya - eternally; nūtana - new;mūrti - form;  kebala - transcendental; saundarya-sphūrti - handsome;  aṁśī- gāne - playing the flute; su-dakha - expert; tat-para - devoted.
 
     He is grateful, simple and liberal, most dear, the Supreme,  famous, attractive to the minds of women, playful, always fresh  and youhtful. His personal beauty and opulence are beyond compare.  He is expert at playing the flute. He is the supreme.
 

Text 3 
 
dhīrodātta dhīra-śānta        sudhīra lalitā kānta
dhīroddhata lalanā-nāyaka
ceṭaka-biṭa-beṣṭita      bidūṣaka-susebita
pīṭha-marda priya narmasakha
 
     dhīrodātta - dhirodatta; dhīra-śānta - dhira- prasanta; sudhīra - intelligent; lalitā - charming;kānta - handsome;  dhīroddhata - dhiroddhata; lalanā-nāyaka - a hero to women; 
ceṭaka-biṭa-beṣṭita - surrounded by servants;  bidūṣaka-susebita - served by witty comedian-friends;  pīṭha-marda priya narma-sakha - dear to his pitha-marda, priya- sakha, and narma-sakha friends. 

     He is dhīrodātta (grace and gentle), dhīra-praśānta  (peaceful and forbearing), sudhīra (grave and wise), dhīra-lalita  (expert in joking), lalita (charming), kānta (handsome),  dhīroddhata (proud and restless), a hero to women, surrounded by  ceṭaka and viṭa servants, served by witty jesting friends  (vidūṣakas), and served by pīṭha-marda, and priya-narma- sakhā friends.
 

Text 4 
 
e pañca sahāya-juta         nandīśwara-pati-suta
pati-upapati-bhābācārī
anukūla śaṭha dhṛṣṭa         sudakhiṇa rasa-tṛṣṇa
rasa-mūrti nikuñja-bihārī
 
     e - these; pañca - five; sahāya-juta - helpers;  nandīśwara-pati-suta - the son of King Nanda; pati - husband;  upapati - paramour; bhābācārī - with the actions;  anukūla - favorable; śaṭha - cheater; dhṛṣṭa - arrogant;  sudakhiṇa - expert; rasa-tṛṣṇa - thirsty to taste nectar; rasa- mūrti - nectar personified; nikuñja - in the forest groves;  bihārī - enjoying pastimes.
 
     With the help of these five kinds of servants and friends He  enjoys many pastimes. He also enjoys other pastimes as a husband  or a paramour. He is friendly, a rascal, arrogant, and clever. He  thirsts to taste the nectar of the rasas. His form is nectar  personified. He enjoys pastimes in the groves of the forests. 
 


Song 14
Tadīya Vallabhā-guṇa
The Transcendental Qualities of His Gopī-Beloveds
 

Text 1
 
su-ramyādi guṇa-gaṇa          hoiyāche bibhūṣaṇa
lalanā-ucita jata-dūra
pṛthu-prema su-mādhurja       sampadera su-pracurja
śrī-kṛṣṇa-ballabha rasa-pūra
 
     su-ramyā - very delightful; ādi - beginning; guṇagaṇa - qualities; hoiyāche - are; bibhūṣaṇa - ornaments;  lalanā - girls; ucita - appropriate; jata - which;dūra - far; pṛthu - great; prema - love; su-mādhurja - great sweetness;  sampadera - of good fortune; su-pracurja - abudnance; śrī-kṛṣṇa- ballabha - Lord Kṛṣṇa's beloveds; rasa-pūra - flood of nectar.
 
     Lord Kṛṣṇa's gopī beloveds are decorated with great beauty  and a host of other virtues appropriate for beautiful young  girls. They have great sweetness, great love, and great good 
fortune. They are flooded with the nectar of the rasas. 


Text 2 
 
ballabha to' dwi-prakāra      swīya parakīya āra
mugdhā madhyā pragalbheti troya
keho ba nāyikā tāhe      keho sakhī hoite cāhe
nije to' nāyikā nāhi hoya
 
     ballabha - beloveds; to' - indeed; dwi-prakāra - two kinds; swīya - own; parakīya - and of others; āra - other;  mugdhā - bewildered; madhyā - intermediate; pragalbhā - arrogant;  iti - thus; troya - three; kehaḥ - some; ba - or;nāyikā - heroines; tāhe - in that; kehaḥ - some; sakhī - friends; hoite - are; cāhe - desire; nije - own;to' - indeed; nāyikā - heroines; nāhi - not;  hoya - are.
 
     Lord Kṛṣṇa's beloveds are of two kinds: svakiya and  parakiya. These beloveds are also of three kinds: mugdhā (sweet  and gentle), madhyā (intermediate), and pragalbhā (shrewish). 
Some are heroines and others, not wishing to be heroines  themselves, are friends of a certain heroine. 


Text 3 
 
nāyikā-gaṇa-pradhāna          rādhā candrā dui jana
saundarya-baidagdhya-guṇāśroya
sei dui madhye śreṣṭha        rādhikā kṛṣṇera preṣṭha
mahā-bhāba-swarūpa-niloya
 
     nāyikā-gaṇa - of the heroines; pradhāna - most important;  rādhā - Rādhā; candrā - Candravali; dui - two;jana - people; saundarya - beauty; baidagdhya - intelligence; guṇa -  transcendental  qualities; āśroya - abode; sei - they; dui - two;madhye - in the  midst; śreṣṭha - best; rādhikā - Rādhā; kṛṣṇera - toLord Kṛṣṇa;  preṣṭha - most dear; mahā-bhāba-swarūpa-niloya - the abode  of ecstasy.
 
     Of all the heroines, Rādhā and Candrāvalī are the two most  prominent. They are both abodes of great beauty, intelligence,  and a host of transcendental qualities. Of them Rādhā is the  best. She is the most dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa. She is the abode of  maha-bhāva ecstatic love.
 

Text 4 
 
āra jata nitya-priyā          nija nija jūtha lañā
se du'yera korena sebana
śrī-rūpa-anuga jana      śrī-rādhikā-śrī-caraṇa
binā nāhi jāne anya dhana
 
     āra - and; jata - which; nitya-priyā - eternally dear;  nija - own; nija - own; jūtha - groups; lañā - taking;se - that;  du'yera - of the two; korena - do; sebana - service; śrī-rūpa anuga - following Śrī Rupa Gosvami; jana - people; śrī-rādhikā- śrī-caraṇa - Śrī Rādhā's feet; binā - without; nāhi - not;  jāne - know; anya - other; dhana - treasure.
 
     Forming into different groups, the gopīs serve one of these  two heroines. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's followers know no treasure but  Śrī Rādhā's feet.

 
 
Song 15
Nāyikā-gaṇera Aṣṭa Avasthā-sevā
Eight Situations of the Heroines
 

Text 1

śrī-kṛṣṇe sebibo boli'        gṛha chāḍi' kuñje coli'
jāite hoya abhisārī sakhī
kuñja sajjā kore jabe         bāsaka sajjā ha'na tabe
utkaṇṭhita kṛṣṇa-patha lakhi'
 
     śrī-kṛṣṇe - Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sebibaḥ -    will serve;boli' - saying; gṛha - home; chāḍi' - leaving; kuñje - to the forest; coli'  jāite - goes; hoya - is; abhisārī - abhisari;sakhī - gopī; kunja - in the forest; sajjā - decoration; kore - does;jabe - when;  bāsaka sajjā - vasaka-sajja; ha'na - is; tabe - then; 
utkaṇṭhita - utkanthita; kṛṣṇa-patha - on Kṛṣṇa's path;  lakhi' - looking.
 
     1. Abhisārikā: Thinking, "I will serve Kṛṣṇa", she  leaves home and goes to the forest. 2. Vāsaka-sajjā: She  decorates the forest grove. 3. Utkanṭḥitā: She eagerly watches  for Kṛṣṇa to come on the path.  


Text 2 
 
kāla ullaṅghiyā hori          bhoga-cihna dehe dhori'
aile hana khaṇḍitā takhana
saṅkete pāiyā baise      tabu kanta nā āise
bipralabdhā nāyikā to' hana
 
     kāla - time; ullaṅghiyā - passing; hori - Kṛṣṇa;bhoga- cihna - signs of enjoyment; dehe - on the body; dhori' - holding; aile - goes; hana - is;  khaṇḍitā - khandita; takhana - then; saṅkete - rendezvous place;  pāiyā - attaining; baise - sits; tabu - then;kanta - beloved;  nā - not; āise - comes;  bipralabdha - Vipralabdha; nāyikā - heroine; to' - indeed;hana - is.
 
     4. Khaṇḍitā: On the body of late-arriving Kṛṣṇa she sees the  marks of His having enjoyed with another gopī. 5. Vipralabdhā:  She goes to the place of rendezvous, but Kṛṣṇa never comes.
 

Text 3 
 
mānera kalahe hori       jana cali duḥkha kori'
kalahāntarita santāpinī
mathurāte kānta gelo          bahu-dina nā āilo
proṣita-bhartṛkā kāṅgālinī
 
     mānera - with jealous anger; kalahe - in a quarrel;hori - Kṛṣṇa; jana - person; cali - goes; duḥkha - unhappy; kori' - becoming;kalahāntarita - Kalahantarita; santāpinī - suffering; 
mathurāte - in Mathura; kānta - beloved; gelaḥ - goes; bahu- dina - many days; nā - not; āilaḥ - returns; proṣita- bhartṛkā - Proṣita-bhartṛkā; kāṅgālinī -  - poor girl.
 
     6. Kalahāntaritā: Sending Kṛṣṇa away in a jealous  argument, she becomes very unhappy. 7. Proṣita-bhartṛkā: Her  beloved Kṛṣṇa goes to Mathurā and does not return even after many 
days. She suffers greatly. 
 

Text 4 
 
nijāyatte kānte peye'         krīḍā kore kānta lo'ye
swādhīna-bhartṛkā se ramaṇī
nāyikā-mātrera hoya      ei aṣṭa-daśodaya
bipralambha-sambhoga-bodhinī
 
     nija - own; āyatte - power; kānte - beloved;peye' - does;  krīḍā - pastimes; kore - does; kānta - beloved;lo'ye - taking;  swādhīna-bhartṛkā - Svādhīna-bhartṛkā; se - that;  ramaṇī - girl; nāyikā-mātrera - as a heroine; hoya - is;  ei - this; aṣṭa - eight; daśā - conditions of existence;  udaya - rising; bipralambha - separation; sambhoga - enjoyment;  bodhinī - knowing.
 
     8. Svādhīna-bhartṛkā: Dominating her beloved, she  includes Him in her pastimes.
      These eight states of being are experienced only by the  heroines. In these ways they enjoy pastimes with Him directly and  they also suffer in separation from Him. 

 
 
Song 16
Prādhāna-nāyikā Śrīmati Rādhikāra Sakhī-varṇaṇa
Description of the Friends of Śrī Rādhā, the Most Important Heroine
 

Text 1
 
nāyikāra śiromaṇi        braje rādhā ṭhākurāṇī
pañca-bidha sakhī-gaṇa tā'ra
sakhī nitya-sakhī āra         prāṇa-sakhī ataḥ para
priyā-sakhī ei hoilo cāra
 
     nāyikāra - of heroines; śiromaṇi - the crest jewel;  braje - in Vraja; rādhā - Rādhā; ṭhākurāṇī - queen;panca-bidha - five kinds; sakhī-gaṇa - friends; tā'ra - of Her;  sakhī - friends; nitya-sakhī - eternal friends; āra - and;  prāṇa-sakhī - life friends; ataḥ - then; para - other;priyā- sakhī - dear friends; ei - this; hoilaḥ - is; cāra - four.
 
     Queen Rādhā in Vraja is the crest jewel of all heroines. The  first four kinds of Her five kinds of friends are: 1. sakhī  (friends), 2. nitya-sakhī (eternal friends), 3. prana-sakhī  (life friends), 4. priya-sakhī (dear friends).
 

Text 2 
 
pañcama parama-preṣṭha        sakhī-gaṇa madhye śreṣṭha
boli saba śuno bibaraṇa
kusumikā bindhyābatī          dhaniṣṭhādi braja-satī
sakhī-gaṇa madhyete gaṇana
 
     pañcama - fifth; parama-preṣṭha - most dear;  sakhī-gaṇa - friends; madhye - in the midst; 
śreṣṭha - best; boli - I say; saba - all; śunaḥ - pleasehear;  bibaraṇa - description; kusumikā - Kusumika;bindhyābatī - Vindhyavati;  dhaniṣṭhā - Dhanistha; adi - beginning; braja-satī - girls of  Vraja; sakhī-gaṇa - friends; madhyete - in the midst;  gaṇana - counted.
 
     The fifth kind of friends are the parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs  (most dear friends). They are trhe best of the friends. Please  hear, and I will describe all these kinds of friends. Kusumikā,  Vindhyāvatī, Dhaniṣṭhā, and many others are counted among  the sakhīs. They are all saintly girls in Vraja. 


Text 3 
 
śrī-rūpa rati kasturī         śrī-guṇa maṇi-mañjarī
prabhṛti rādhikā-nitya-sakhī
prāṇa-sakhī bahu tāra         basanti nāyikā āra
pradhāna tāhāraśaśimukhī
 
     śrī-rūpa - Śrī Rupa; rati - Rati; kasturī - Kasturi;śrī- guṇa - Śrī Guna; maṇi-mañjarī - Mani-manjari;  prabhṛti - beginning; rādhikā-nitya-sakhī - Śrī Rādhā's nitya- sakhis; prāṇa-sakhī - prana-sakhis; bahu - many; tāra - of  Her;  basanti - Vasanti; nāyikā - Nayika; āra - other; 
pradhāna - prominent; tāhāra - of Her; śaśimukhī - Sasimukhi. 

     Rādhā's nitya-sakhīs include śrī Rūpa, Rati, Kasturī, Śrī  Guṇa, and Maṇi-mañjarī. Rādhā's prāṇa-sakhīs  include Vasantī and Nāyikā. Of them Śaśimukhī is the most  improtant.
 

Text 4 
 
kuraṅgākṣī mañjukeśī      sumadhyā madanālasī
kamalā mādhurī kāmalatā
kandarpasundarī āra      mādhabī mālatī āra
śaśikalā rādhā-sebā-rata
 
     kuraṅgākṣī - Kuraṅgākṣī; mañjukeśī - Mañjukeśī;  sumadhyā - Sumadhyā; madanālasī - Madanālasī;kamalā - Kamalā;  mādhurī - Mādhurī; kāmalatā - Kāmalatā;  kandarpasundarī - Kandarpasundarī; āra - and;  mādhabī - Mādhabī; mālatī - Mālatī; āra - and;  śaśikalā - Śaśikalā; rādhā-sebā-rata - devoted to Śrī Rādhā's  service.
 
     The priya-sakhīs include Kuraṅgākṣī, Mañjukeśī,  Sumadhyā, Madanālasī, Kamalā, Mādhurī, Kāmalatā,  Kandarpasundarī, Mādhavī, Mālatī, and Śaśikalā. They are  all devoted to serving Śrī Rādhā. 
 

Text 5 
 
lalitā biśākhā citrā          tuṅgabidyā campalatā
indulekhā raṅga-debī satī
sudebīti aṣṭa-jana       parama-preṣṭha sakhī-gaṇa
rādhā-kṛṣṇe sebe eka mati
 
     lalitā - Lalitā; biśākhā - Viśākhā; citrā - Citrā; tuṅgabidyā - Tuṅgavidyā; campalatā - Campalatā;  indulekhā - Indulekhā; raṅga-debī - Raṅga-devī;satī - saintly;  sudebī - Sudevī; iti - thus; aṣṭa-jana - eight people;  parama-preṣṭha sakhī-gaṇa - most dear friends; rādhā- kṛṣṇe - Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; sebe - serve; eka - with one;mati - mind.
 
     Lalitā, Viśākhā, Citrā, Tuṅgabidyā, Campalatā,  Indulekhā, Raṅga-devī, and Sudevī are the eight parama- preṣṭha sakhīs. With one heart they serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā- Kṛṣṇa.

 


Song 17
Sakhīra Sādhāraṇa Sevā
Service of the Sakhīs in General
 

Text 1
 
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-gāna         mithāsakti sambardhana
ubhayābhisāra sampadana
kṛṣṇa sakhī-samarpaṇa         narma-bākya-āswādana
ubhayera subeśa-racana
 
     rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-gāna - singing Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa's  glories; mithāsakti - mutual attachment;sambardhana - increasing;  ubhaya - both; abhisāra - meeting; sampadana - accomplishing;  kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; sakhī-samarpaṇa - offering friends;  narma - joking; bākya - words; āswādana - relishing;  ubhayera - of the two; subeśa-racana - dressing and decorating.
 
     1. Sining Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa's glories, 2. making Śrī Śrī  Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa more attached to each other, 3. Arranging for the  divine couple to meet in a secret place, 4. Placing their friends 
before Lord Kṛṣṇa, 5. speaking delicious joking words, 6.  dressing and decorating the divine couple, . . . 


Text 2 
 
citta-bhāba-utgatana          mitha-cchidra saṅgopana
pratīpa janera subañcana
kuśala śikhaṇa āra       sammilana du'janara
byajanādi bibidha sebāna
 
     citta-bhāba-utgatana - revealing the love in the heart;  mitha-cchidra - mutual faults; saṅgopana - concealing;  pratīpa - hostile; janera - people; subañcana - cheating;  kuśala - auspicious; śikhaṇa - instruction; āra - and;  sammilana - meeting; du'janara - of the divine couple;  byajanādi - beginning with fanning; bibidha - various;  sebāna - services. 

 . . . 7. revealing to the divine couple the love They bear for  each other in Their hearts, 8. concealing teh divine couple's  faults, 9. tricking hostile people, 10. giving auspicious 
instructions, 11. arranging the divine couple's meeting, 12.  fanning the divine couple and performing other like services, . . .  
 

Text 3 
 
ubhaya kuśala dhyāna          doṣe tiraskāra dāna
paraspara sandeśa bāhana
rādhikāra daśā-kāle      prāṇa-rākha su-kauśale
sakhī-sādhāraṇakārja jana
 

     ubhaya - on the divine couple; kuśala - auspicious;dhyāna - meditation; doṣe - faults; tiraskāra - eclipsing; dāna - gifts;  paraspara - mutual;  sandeśa - letters; bāhana - carrying; rādhikāra - of Rādhā;daśā- kāle - in times of distress or danger; prāṇa-rākha - saving  the life; su-
kauśale - very expertly; sakhī-sādhāraṇa - of the sakhis in  general; kārja - duty; jana - people.
 
 . . . 13. meditating on the divine couple, 14. giving gifts to  atone for mistakes, 15. carrying the divine couple's letters to  each other, and 16. expertly saving Rādhā's life when She is in  distress or danger are the duties performed by the sakhīs in  general.
 

Text 4 
 
jeba je sakhīra kārja         biśeṣa boliyā dharja
pradarśita ha'be jathā-sthāne
rūpānuga bhaje jeba      je sakhīra jei sebā
tad-anuga sei sebā māne
 
     jeba - whichever; je - which; sakhīra - of the sakhis;kārja - duty; biśeṣa - specific; boliyā - saying; dharja - to be done;  pradarśita - shown; ha'be - will be; jathā-sthāne - asappropriate; 
rūpānuga - followers of Śrī Rupa Gosvami; bhaje - worship;jeba - whichever; je - which; sakhīra   of the sakhi; jei - which; sebā - service; tad-anuga - that;sei - following; sebā - service;  māne - meditate.
 
     The sakhī's particular service will be be revealed in the  appropriate situation. The followers of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī  follow the service of a particular sakhī. Tbey meditate on  following that service. 
 


Song 18
 

Text 1
 
pañca-sakhī madhye cāra       nitya-siddha rādhikāra
se sakale sādhana nā koilo
sakhī boli' ukta jei          sādhana-prabhābe tei
braja-rāja pure bāsa pāilo
 
     pañca-sakhī - five kinds of sakhis; madhye - in the  midst; cāra - four; nitya-siddha - eternally perfect;  rādhikāra - of Śrī Rādhā; se - that; sakale - all;sādhana - sadhana;  nā - not; koilaḥ - do; sakhī - sakhis; boli' - saying;ukta - said; jei - that; sādhana-prabhābe - by the power of sahdana; tei - indeed; braja-rāja - the king of Vraja; pure - inthe city;  bāsa - residence; pāilaḥ - attain.
 
     Of the five kinds of Śrī Rādhā's sakhī friends, the last  four are eternally perfect and never performed sādhana. The  first kind, called simply "sakhī", attained residence in  the town of Vraja's king by the power of their sādhana. 


Text 2 
 
sei sakhī dwi-prakāra         sādhanete siddha āra
sādhana-para boliyā gaṇana
siddha boli' ākhya tāṅra      gopī-deha hoilo jāṅra
kori' rāge jugala-bhajana
 
     sei - these; sakhī - sakhis; dwi-prakāra - two kinds;  sādhanete - by sadhana; siddha - perfect; āra - and;  sādhana - sadhana; para - beyond; boliyā - saying;gaṇana - counted;  siddha - perfect; boli' - saying; ākhya - name; tāṅra - ofthem;  gopī-deha - gopīs' bodies; hoilaḥ - are; jāṅra - of whom;  kori' - doing; rāge - with love; jugala-bhajana - worship of the  divine couple.
 
     These sakhīs are of two kinds: 1. they who are perfect and  remain performing sādhana, and 2. they who are beyond sādhana.  These sakhīs are called "siddha" (perfect). Attaining  gopīs' bodies, they worship the divine couple with great love.
 

Text 3 
 
kṛṣṇākṛṣṭa muni-jana          tathā upaniṣad-gaṇa
je nā loilo gopīra swarūpa
sādhana ābeśe bhaje      siddhi tabu nā upaje
braja-bhāba-prāpti aparūpa
 
     kṛṣṇa - to Lord Kṛṣṇa; ākṛṣṭa - attracted; munijana - sages; tathā - so; upaniṣad-gaṇa - Upaniṣads; je - who; nā - not;  loilaḥ - attained; gopīra - of gopīs; swarūpa - form;sādhana - sadhana;  ābeśe - entering; bhaje - worship; siddhi - perfection;  tabu - then; nā - not; upaje - attain; braja-bhāba-prāpti - the nature of Vraja; aparūpa - wonderful.
 
     Many great sages and personified Upaniṣads did not attain  gopī forms. Although they worshiped with great sādhana, they did  not attain the final perfection of entering the wonderful world  of Vraja.
 

Text 4 
 
je je śruti-muni-gaṇa         gopī haya su-bhajana
korilo sakhīra pada dhari'
nitya-sakhī-kṛpā-bale         tat-sālokya-lābha-phale
sebā kore śrī-rādhā-śrī-hari
 
     je je - whichever; śruti-muni-gaṇa - personfied Vedas  and sages; gopī - gopī; haya - is; su-bhajana - geratworship;  korilaḥ - did; sakhīra - of a sakhi; pada - feet;dhari' - grasping;  nitya-sakhī-kṛpā-bale - by the power of the mercy of a  nitya-sakhi; tat - that;-sālokya-lābha-phale - attainment of  residence on the same planet; sebā - service; kore - do;śrī- rādhā-śrī-hari - of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. 

     Still, by intense devotional service many great sages and  personified Vedas became gopīs. They grasped the feet of a nitya- sakhī, and by the power of that nitya-sakhī's mercy they 
attained sālokya-mukti. Thus they attained direct service to Śrī  Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.
 

Text 5 
 
debī-gaṇa sei bhābe      sakhīra sālokya-lābhe
kṛṣṇa-sebā kore sakhī ho'ye
brajera bidhāna eho       gopī binā āra keho
nā pāibe braja-juba-dwaye
 
     debī-gaṇa - demigoddesses; sei - this; bhābe - nature;  sakhīra - of a sakhi; sālokya-lābhe - attainment of residence on  the same planet; kṛṣṇa-sebā - service to Lord Kṛṣṇa;kore - do; 
sakhī - sakhi; ho'ye - be; brajera - of Vraja; bidhāna - theway; ehaḥ - this; gopī - gopī; binā - without; āra - other; kehaḥ - something;  nā - not; pāibe - attain; braja-juba-dwaye - the teenage couple of  Vraja.
 
     In this way many demigoddesses attained the world of the  sakhīs, became sakhīs themselves, and directly served Lord  Kṛṣṇa. Without the mercy of a gopī in Vraja no one can attain  the youthful divine couple.



Song 19
Sarva Sakhīra Paraspara Bhāva
The Relationships of All the Sakhīs
 

Text 1
 
parama caitanya hari          tāṅra śakti baneśwarī
parā śakti boli' bede gāya
śaktimāne sebibāre       śakti kāya-byūha kore
nānā śakti tāhe bahirāya
 
     parama - supreme; caitanya - consciousness; hari - Kṛṣṇa; tāṅra - of Him; śakti - potency; baneśwarī - queen of theforest;  parā - transcendental;  śakti - potency; boli' - saying; bede - Vedas; gāya - sing;  śaktimāne - master of potencies; sebibāre - to serve;  śakti - potency; kāya - body;- byūha - expansion; kore - does; nānā - various;  śakti - potencies; tāhe - in that; bahirāya - outside. 

     The Vedas say Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of  Godhead and His transcendental potency is the queen of Vṛndāvana  forest. To serve the master of all potencies, the transcendental  potency manifests many other potencies from Her own form.
 

Text 2 
 
ādhāra-śaktite dhāma          ahwaya-śaktite nāma
sandhinī-śaktite bastu jata
sambit-śaktite jñāna          taṭasthā jība-bidhāna
hlādinīte koilo sakhī-brata
 
     ādhāra-śaktite - the potency of worlds; dhāma - the  worlds; ahwaya - called; śaktite - potency; nāma - name; sandhinī-śaktite - sandini sakti; bastu - thing; jata - which; sambit-śaktite - samvit sakti; jñāna - knowledge;  taṭasthā - residing on the border; jība-bidhāna - the 
individual spirit souls; hlādinīte - hladini sakti;koilaḥ - does;  sakhī-brata - the gopīs.
 
     Thus the sandhinī potency manifests the various worlds, the  samvit potency manifests knowledge and the individual spirit  souls who stand on the border of matter and spirit, and the 
hlādinī potency manifests the gopīs. 


Text 3 
 
nitya-siddha sakhī saba       hlādinīra su-baibhaba
hlādinī-swarūpa mūla rādhā
candrābalī ādi jata      śrī-rādhāra anugata
keho nāhe rādhā-premerabādha
 
     nitya-siddha - eternally perfect; sakhī - gopīs; saba - all; hlādinīra - of hladini; su-baibhaba - potency;  hlādinī - hladini; swarūpa - forms; mūla - root;rādhā - Rādhā;  candrābalī - Candravali; ādi - beginning with; jata - which;  śrī-rādhāra - of Śrī Rādhā; anugata - followers;kehaḥ - some; 
nāhe - not; rādhā-premera - by love for Śrī Rādhā;bādha - obstacle.
 
     The eternally perfect gopīs (sakhīs) are all manifested  from the hlādinī potency. The root of the hlādinī potency is  Śrī Rādhā. Candrāvalī and the other gopīs are all followers of  Śrī Rādhā. No one can place any obstacle before Śrī Rādhā's love  for Lord Kṛṣṇa.
 

Text 4 
 
premera bicitra gati          prati-dwandwi ho'ye sati
candra kore rādhā-prema puṣṭa
saba sakhīra eka-mana         nānā-kaye nānā-jana
braja-juba-dwandwe kore tuṣṭa
 
     premera - of love; bicitra - wonderful; gati - motion;  prati-dwandwi - rival; ho'ye - is; sati - being so;candra - Candrāvalī;  kore - does; rādhā-prema - Rādhā's love; puṣṭa - increased;
saba - all; sakhīra - of the gopīs; eka-mana - one heart;  nānā - various; kaye - bodies; nānā-jana - various people;  braja-juba-dwandwe - the youthful divine couple of Vraja; kore - do;  tuṣṭa - satisfied.
 
     The way of spiritual love is wonderful. Although she seems  to be a rival, Candrāvalī nourishes Rādhā's love for Lord Kṛṣṇa.  Although they are different persons in different forms, with a  single heart the gopīs please the youthful divine couple of  Vraja. 
 


Song 20
Vraja-gata Madhura-rati-uddīpana
The Uddīpanas (Secondary Causes of Ecstatic Love) in Madhura-rasa in Vraja
 

Text 1
 
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa-bhakta-gaṇa       guṇa nāma su-carita
maṇḍana sambandhi taṭasthādi
bhāba jata agaṇana       e rasera uddīpana
hetu boli' bole rasa-bedi
 
     kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa-bhakta-gaṇa - Kṛṣṇa's devotees; guṇa - qualities; nāma - names; su-carita - pastimes;  maṇḍana - ornaments;  sambandhi - relationship; taṭastha - natural phenomena;  ādi - beginning with; bhāba - bhava; jata - which;agaṇana - uncounted; e - this; rasera - of rasa;  uddīpana - stimulating; hetu - causes; boli' - saying;bole - say;  rasa-bedi - they who know the rasas. 

     They who know the rasas say that Lord Kṛṣṇa's qualities,  names, pastimes, and decorations, other things in relationship to  Kṛṣṇa, and various natural phenomena are among the  numberless  uddīpanas that increase the devotees' love for Lord Kṛṣṇa.
 

Text 2 
 
mānasa bācika punaḥ      kāyikate tina-guṇa
nāma-kṛṣṇa śrī-rādhā-mādhaba
nṛtya baṁśī-gāna gati         go-dohana go-āhuti
aghoddhāra goṣṭhete tāṇḍaba
 
     mānasa - of the mind; bācika - or words; punaḥ - again;  kāyikate - of the body; tina - three; guṇa - qualities;nāma - names;  kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; śrī-rādhā-mādhaba - Śrī Rādhā - Mādhava; nṛtya - dancing; baṁśī-gāna - playing the flute;gati - motions; go-dohana - milking the cows; go-āhuti - calling the  cows; agha - of Aghāsura; uddhāra - deliverance;goṣṭhete - in the  cow pasture; tāṇḍaba - enthusiastic dancing. 

     Lord Kṛṣṇa's qualities of three kinds: those of His mind,  words, and body. Lord Kṛṣṇa has many names, such as Kṛṣṇa and Śrī  Rādhā-Mādhava. Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes include His dancing, playing  the flute, milking the cows, calling the cows by name, delivering  the demon Aghāsura, and enthusiastically dancing with the gopas in  the cow-pastures. 


Text 3 
 
mālyānulepana āra        bāsa bhūṣā ei cāra
prakāra mandana sobhākāra
baṁśī śṛṅga bīṇā raba         gītaśilpa su-saurabha
padāṅka-bhūṣaṇa bādya-swara
 
     mālya - garlands; anulepana - ointments; āra - and;  bāsa - garments; bhūṣā - decorations; ei - these;cāra - four;  prakāra - kinds;  mandana - ornaments; sobhākāra - beautiful; baṁśī - flute; 
śṛṅga - horn; bīṇā - vina; raba - sound; gīta - music;  śilpa - expert skill; su-saurabha - sweet fragrance;  padāṅka - foot;  bhūṣaṇa - ornaments; bādya-swara - sound of musical instruments. 

     Lord Kṛṣṇa's decorations are of four kinds: His flower  garlands, scented ointments, garments, and ornaments. Other  things in relationship with Kṛṣṇa include: the music of His 
flute, buffalo-horn bugle, and vīṇā, His expert singing, sweet  bodily fragrance, anklets, playing musical instruments, . . . 


Text 4 
 
śikhi-puccha gābhī yaṣṭi      beṇu śṛṅga preṣṭha-dṛṣṭi
adri-dhātu nirmālya go-dhūli
bṛndābana tad-aśrīta          gobardhana rabisutā
rāsa ādi jata līlā-sthali
 
     śikhi - peacock; puccha - feather; gābhī - cows;yaṣṭi - stick; benu - flute; śṛṅga - horn; preṣṭha - affectionate;  dṛṣṭi - glances;  adri - mountain; dhātu - minerals; nirmālya - remnants of flowers;  go-dhūli - dust from the cows; bṛndābana - Vṛndāvana; tadaśrīta - they who take shelter of Him;  gobardhana - Govardhana; rabisutā - Yamunā; rāsa - rasa-dance; ādi - beginning; jata - which; līlā-sthali - pastime places. 

 . . . peacock feather, cows, stick, flute, buffalo-horn bugle,  loving glances, mineral pigments from the hills, remnants of  flower-garlands, dust raised by the cows, Vṛndāvana, the holy 
places in Vṛndāvana, the pastime places, such as Govardhana Hill,  the Yamunā, and the rāsa-dance arena, . . . 

 
Text 5 
 
khaga bhṛṅga mṛga kuñja       tulasikā latā-puñja
karṇikāra kadambādi taru
śrī-kṛṣṇa-sambandhi saba      bṛndābana su-baibhaba
uddīpana kore rasa cāru
 
     khaga - birds; bhṛṅga - bees; mṛga - deer and other animals;  kuñja - forest groves; tulasikā - tulasī; latā- puñja - vines; karṇikāra - karnikara; kadamba - kadamba;  ādi - beginning; taru - trees; śrī-kṛṣṇa-sambandhi - inrelationship  with Lord Kṛṣṇa; saba - all; bṛndābana - Vṛndāvana; su- baibhaba - glorious; uddīpana - uddipanas; kore - does;  rasa - rasa; cāru - beautiful. 

 . . . the birds, bees, deer, other animals, forest groves,  tulasī, flowering vines, karṇikāra trees, kadamba trees, other trees, andall the glories of Vṛndāvana are things in  relationship with Lord Kṛṣṇa. These uddīpanas make the rasas  very beautiful.
 

Text 6 
 
jyotsnā ghana saudaminī       śarat-pūrṇa-niśāmaṇi
gandha-bāha āra khaga-coya
taṭasthākhya uddīpana        rasāswāda-bibhābana
kore saba hoiyā sadoya
 
     jyotsnā - moonlight; ghana - clouds; saudaminī - lightning; śarat - autumn; pūrṇa - full; niśāmaṇi - the moon that  is like the jewel of the night; gandha - fragrance; bāha - carrying 
breeze; āra - and; khaga-coya - birds; taṭasthākhya - callednatural  phenomena; uddīpana - uddipanas; rasa - of the rasas;  āswāda - relish; bibhābana - glory; kore - do; saba - all;  hoiyā - being; sadoya - kind. 

     Natural phenomena also become uddīpanas. Thus the  moonlight, clouds, lightning, the autumn full-moon, fragrant  breezes, and birds also kindly increase the taste of the nectar 
rasas. 




Song 21
Anubhāva
Subsequent Ecstasy
 

Text 1
 
bibhābita rati jabe           kriyāpara ho'ye tabe
anubhāba hoya to' udita
citta-bhāba udghāṭiyā         kore bāhya su-bikriyā
jakhana je hoya to' ucita
 
     bibhābita - vibhava; rati - rasa; jabe - when;  kriyā - actions; apara - other; ho'ye - are; tabe - then;  anubhāba - anubhava; hoya - is; to' - indeed; udita - risen; citta- bhāba - the bhava of the heart; udghāṭiyā - revealing;  kore - does; bāhya - external; su-bikriyā - ecstatic symptoms;
jakhana - when; je - what; hoya - is; to' - indeed;ucita - proper.
 
     From vibhāva, anubhāva (subsequent ecstasy) is manifest.  Then the love in the heart is outwardly displayed in various  symptoms.
 

Text 2 
 
nṛtya gīta biluṇṭhana         krośana tanu-moṭana
huṅkāra jṛmbhana ghana-śwāsa
lokanāpekhita mati            lāla-sraba ghūrṇa ati
hikkadoyā aṭṭa aṭṭa hāsa
 
     nṛtya - dancing; gīta - singing; biluṇṭhana - rolling  on the ground; krośana - crying out; tanu-moṭana - stretching the  body; huṅkāra - calling out;  jṛmbhana - yawning; ghana-śwāsa - breathing heavily;  lokanāpekhita - ignoring the people in general; mati  - thought;lāla- sraba - drooling; ghūrṇa - rolling; ati - very;  hikkadoyā - belching; aṭṭa aṭṭa hāsa - very loud laughter.
 
     These symptoms are dancing, singing very loudly, rolling on  the ground, stretching the body, crying loudly, yawning,  breathing very heavily, neglecting the presence of  others, drooling, laughing very, very loudly, wheeling the head,  and belching.
 

Text 3 
 
gātra citta jata saba         alaṅkāra su-bibhāba
nigadita biṁśati prakāra
udbhāswara nāma tāra          dhammilLyā saṁsraṇa āra
phulla ghrāṇa nībyādi bikāra 

      gātra - body; citta - mind; jata - which; saba - all; alaṅkāra - ornaments; su-bibhāba - ecstasy; nigadita - said;  biṁśati - 20; prakāra - kinds; udbhāswara - udbhasvara;nāma - named;  tāra - of that; dhammilLyā - braids; saṁsraṇa - untying;  āra - and; phulla - blossomed; ghrāṇa - smelling;nībya - belt;  ādi - beginning; bikāra - ecstatic symptoms.
 
     There are also twenty ecstatic symptoms that are ornaments  on the body and mind. Of these the symptoms called udbhāsvara  include untying the braids, smelling flowers, and untying the 
belt. 


Text 4 
 
bilāpālāpa samlāpa       pralāpa o anulāpa
apalāpa sandeśātideśa
apadeśa upadeśa          nirdeśa o byapadeśa
bācikānubhābera biśeṣa
 
     bilāpa - vilapa; ālāpa - alapa; samlāpa - samlapa;  pralāpa - pralapa; aḥ - and; anulāpa - anulapa;apalāpa - apalapa;  sandeśa - sandesa; atideśa - atidesa; apadeśa - apadesa;upadeśa - upadesa; nirdeśa - nirdesa; aḥ - and; byapadeśa - vyapadesa;  bācika - words; anubhābera - of anubhava; biśeṣa - specific. 

     Vilāpa, ālāpa, samlāpa, pralāpa, anulāpa, apalāpa,  sandeśa, atideśa, apadeśa, upadeśa, nirdeśa, and vyapadeśa  are the anubhāva ecstatic symptoms manifested in speech.

 


Song 22
Sāttvika-bhāva
Constitutional or Existential Ecstasy
 

Text 1
 
sthāyī bhābābiṣṭa citta       pāiyā bibhāba-bitta
udbhaṭa bhābete āpanāra
prāṇa-bṛtte nyasa kore        prāṇa sei nyāsa-bhore
deha prati bikṛti cālāya


     sthāyī bhāba - sthayi-bhava; ābiṣṭa - entered;citta - heart; pāiyā - attaining; bibhāba-bitta - a wealth of vibhava;  udbhaṭa - extraordinary; bhābete - bhava; āpanāra - own;prāṇa- bṛtte - life; nyasa - placing; kore - does;  prāṇa - life; sei - this; nyāsa-bhore - placing;deha - body;  prati - to; bikṛti - trasfiguration; cālāya - attains.
 
     When sthāyi-bhāva enters, the heart attains a great  treasure of vibhāva. This extraordinary bhāva affects the life- air, which then manifests ecstatic symptoms on the body.
 

Text 2 
 
baibarṇya romañca sweda       stambha kampa swara-bheda
pralayāśru e aṣṭa bikāra
sañcārī je bhābacoya          harṣāmārṣa āra bhoya
biṣāda bismoyādi tāra
 
     baibarṇya - turning pale; romañca - standing erect of  the body's hairs; sweda - perspiration; stambha - being  stunned; kampa - trembling; swara-bheda - choked voice;  pralaya - devastation; aśru - tears; e - this; aṣṭa - eight;  bikāra - ecstatic symptoms; sañcārī - sancari; je - which;  bhābacoya - bhava;  harṣa - joy; āmārṣa - thought; āra - and; bhoya - fear; biṣāda - sadness; bismoya - astonishment; ādi - beginning;tāra - of  that.
 
     The eight ecstatic symptoms of sthāyi-bhāva are: becoming  stunned, perspiring, standing of the hairs on the body, faltering  of the voice, trembling of the body, changing of bodily colors, 
shedding of tears, and devastation.* The ecstatic symptoms of  sañcāri-bhāva include happiness, doubt, apprehension, and  lamentation.
 

Text 3 
 
prabṛtti kāraṇa hoya          līlā-kāle rase loya
āpane koraya anukhaṇa
dhūmayitā ujjwalitā           dīptā āra su-uddīptā
ei cāri abasthālakhaṇa
 
     prabṛtti - actions; kāraṇa - cause; hoya - is; līlā- kāle - in time; rase - rasa; loya - taking; āpane - own;koraya - makes;  anukhaṇa - at every moment; dhūmayitā - smoky;ujjwalitā - blazing; dīptā - shining; āra - and; su-uddīptā - very  brilliantly shining; ei - these; cāri - four;abasthā - states;  lakhaṇa - characterized.
 
     According to the activities, rasa, and time of pastimes,  these ecstatic symptoms may be manifest, moment afetr moment, in  four conditions: dhūmāyita (smokey), ujjvalita (blazing), 
dīpta (shining), and sūddīpta (very brilliantly shining). 


Text 4  

jāra jei adhikāra        sāttwika bikāra tāra
se lakhaṇe hoya to' udoya
mahā-bhāba daśā jathā         su-uddīptā bhāba tathā
anāyāse su-lakhitā hoya
 
     jāra - of whom; jei - which; adhikāra - qualification;  sāttwika - sattvika; bikāra - ecstatic symptoms; tāra - of that;  se - that; lakhaṇe - characteristic; hoya - is; to' - indeed;  udoya - rising; mahā-bhāba - maha-bhava great ecstasy;daśā - state;  jathā - as; su-uddīptā - very brilliantly shining;  bhāba - bhava; tathā - so; anāyāse - easily; su- lakhitā - clearly seen; hoya - is. 

     A person who is qualified will manifest these sāttvika- bhāva ecstasies. The sūddīpta (very brilliantly shining)  ecstatic symptoms are easily seen only when the state of mahā- bhāva is manifested.

 


Song 23
Vyabhicārī vā Sañcāri-bhāva
Agressive Ecstasy
 

Text 1
 
nirbeda biṣāda mada      dainya glāni śramonmāda
garba trāsa śaṅkā apasmṛti
ābega ālasya byādhi      moha mṛtyu jaḍatādi
brīḍā abahitthā āra smṛti
 
     nirbeda-disappointment; biṣāda - lamentation;mada - madness;  dainya - humility; glāni - guilt; śrama - fatigue;  unmāda - intoxication; garba - pride; trāsa - doubt;  śaṅkā - apprehension; apasmṛti - forgetfulnmess; ābega - intense  emotion; ālasya - laziness; byādhi - disease;moha - confusion;  mṛtyu - death; jaḍatā - inertness; ādi - beginning;  brīḍā - bashfulness; abahitthā - concealment; āra - and;  smṛti - remambrance.
 
     There are some bodily symptoms that express overwhelming  ecstatic love (vyabhicāri-bhāva). They are counted at 33 as  follows: disappointment, lamentation, humility, guilt, fatigue,  intoxication, pride, doubt, apprehension, intense emotion,  madness, forgetfulness, disease, confusion, death, laziness,  inertness, bashfulness, concealment, remembrance, . . .
 

Text 2 
 
bitarka cāpalya mati          cintautsukya harṣa dhṛti
ugrālasya nidrāmarṣa supti
bodha hoya ei bhāba-coya      trayas-triṁśat sabe hoya
byabhicārī nāme labhe jñapti
 
     bitarka - argumentativeness; cāpalya - anxiety;mati - thoughtfulness; cinta - anxiety; autsukya - eagerness; harṣa - happiness;  dhṛti - endurance;  ugra - violence; ālasya - laziness; nidrā - sleepiness;  āmarṣa - haughtiness, envy, and impudence; supti - sleep;  bodha - wakefulness; hoya - are; ei - they; bhāba-coya - thebhavas;  trayas-triṁśat - 33; sabe - all; hoya - are;  byabhicārī - vyabhicari; nāme - named; labhe - attain; jnapti - knowledge. 

 . . . argumentativeness, anxiety, thoughtfulness, endurance,  happiness, eagerness, violence, haughtiness, envy, impudence,  dizziness, sleepiness, and inertness.* 
 

Text 3 
 
atulya madhura rase           ugrālasya nā paraśe
āra saba bhābajathājatha
udi' bhābābeśa sukhe          sthāyī-bhābera abhimukhe
biśeṣa āgrahe hoya rata
 
     atulya - peerless; madhura rase - in madhura-rasa;  ugra - violence; ālasya - laziness; nā - not;paraśe - touch;  āra - and; saba - all;  bhāba - bhavas; jathājatha - as appropriate; udi' - rising; 
bhābābeśa - entrance of bhava; sukhe - happily; sthāyī- bhābera - of sthayi-bhava; abhimukhe - in the presence;  biśeṣa - specific; āgrahe - taking; hoya - are;rata - delighted.
 
     Violence and laziness do not touch the peerless madhura- rasa. However all the other sthāyi-bhāvas are all delightfully  present, when the circumstances are appropriate, in madhura-rasa.
 

Text 4 
 
rāgāṅga sattwa āśroye         rasa-joga sañcaroye
jena sthāyi sāgarera ḍheu
nija kārja sādhi' tūrṇa       sāgara koriyā pūrṇa
nibe āra nāhi dekhe keu
 
     rāga - of love; aṅga - parts; sattwa - existence;āśroye - shelter; rasa-joga - in contact with rasa; sañcaroye - come;  jena - as; sthāyi - sthayi-bhava; sāgarera - of the ocean;  ḍheu - waves; nija - own; kārja - duty; sādhi' - taking;tūrṇa - quickly; sāgara - ocean; koriyā -  aking; pūrṇa - full; 
nibe - bring; āra - another; nāhi - not; dekhe - see;keu - something.
 
     These ecstatic emotions are like waves in the ocean of  sthāyi-bhāva. Quickly fulfilling their mission, they fill the  ocean of sthāyi-bhāva, and then they are nowhere to be seen.

 


Song 24
Bhāvāvasthā-prāpta Sthāyi-bhāvera Uttara-daśā
The Final Stage of Sthāyi-bhāva
 

Text 1
 
sādhāraṇi samañjasā      sthāyī lābhe bhāba daśā
kubjā āra mahiṣī pramāṇa
eka braja-debī-gaṇe      mahā-bhāba saṅghaṭane
rūḍha adhirūḍha su-bidhāna
 
     sādhāraṇi - ordinary; samañjasā - good;  sthāyī - sthayi-bhava; lābhe - attain; bhāba - bhavas; 
daśā - states of being; kubjā - Kunja; āra - and;mahiṣī - the  queens; pramāṇa - evidence; eka - one; braja-debī-gaṇe - the goddesses of Vraja;  mahā-bhāba - maha-bhava; saṅghaṭane - happens;  rūḍha - advanced; adhirūḍha - very advanced; su-bidhāna - kinds.
 
     Kubjā and the Dvārakā queens are examples of  sādhāraṇī-sthāyi-bhāva and samañjasā-sthāyi-bhāva  respectively. Only the goddess of Vraja (the gopīs) attain mahā- bhāva, which is divided into rūḍha (advanced) and adhirūḍha  (very advanced).
 

Text 2 
 
nimeṣāsahyatā tāya       hṛn-mathane khinna prāya
kalpa khaṇa saukhye śaṅkākula
ātmābadhi bismaraṇa      khaṇa kalpa bibecana
joge bā bijoge samatula
 
     nimeṣa - an eyeblink; asahyatā - unbreabale; tāya - of  that; hṛt - heart; mathane - churning; khinna - distraught;  prāya - almost; kalpa - kalpa;  khaṇa - moment; saukhye - in happiness; śaṅkā - with fear;  ākula - agitated; ātma - self; ābadhi - up to;bismaraṇa - forgetting; khaṇa - moment;  kalpa - kalpa; bibecana - considering; joge - in meeting;ba - or;  bijoge - in separation; samatula - equal. 

     The ecstatic symptoms of rūḍha mahā-bhāva are:  nimeṣāsahyatā (inability to tolerate the eyes' blinking),  hṛn-mathane khinna (churning of the heart), kalpa-kṣaṇa  (thinking a kalpa like a moment), saukhye śaṅkākula (fear,  while happy, of future sufferings), ātmāvadhi-vismaraṇa  (forgetting everything, even one's own self), and kṣaṇa-kalpa- vivecana (thinking a moment like a kalpa). 


Text 3 
 
adhirūḍha bhābe punaḥ         dwi-prakāra bheda śuna
modana mādana nāme khyāta
biśleṣa daśāte punaḥ          modana hoya mohana
dibyonmāda tāhe hoya jata
 
     adhirūḍha bhābe - adhirudha maha-bhava; punaḥ - again; dwiprakāra - two kinds; bheda - divisions; śuna - please  hear; modana - modana; mādana - madana; nāme - named;khyāta - famous;  biśleṣa - in separation; daśāte - condition; punaḥ - again;modana - modana; hoya - is; mohana - bewilderment;  dibyonmāda - transcendental madness; tāhe - in that; hoya - is;
jata - which. 

     Adhirūḍha mahā-bhāva is of two kinds: modana (joy) and  mādana (wild passion). Please hear of them. In separation from Kṛṣṇa  modana becomes transformed into mohana  bewilderment). Then  divyonmāda (transcendental madness) is manifest.
 

Text 4 
 
dibyonmāda dwi-prakāra        citra-jalpodghūrṇa āra
citra-jalpa bahu-bidha tāya
mohanete śrī-rādhāra          mādanākhya daśā sāra
nitya-līlāmoyī bhāba pāya
 
     dibyonmāda - transcendental madness; dwi-prakāra - two  kinds; citra - wonderful; jalpa - talk;udghūrṇa - agittaion;  āra - and; citra-jalpa - wonderful talk; bahu-bidha - many kinds; 
tāya - in that; mohanete - in mohana; śrī-rādhāra - of Śrī  Rādhā; mādanākhya - named madana; daśā - state;sāra - best;  nitya-līlāmoyī - consisting of eternal pastimes; bhāba - bhava;  pāya - attaining. 

     Divyonmāda is of two kinds: citra-jalpa (wonderful talk) and  udghūrṇa (agitation). Citra-jalpa is of many kinds. When the  state of mohana (bewilderment) Śrī Rādhā attains the state called  mādana (wild passion). These are the ecstasies of Her eternal  pastimes.
 

Text 5 
 
sādhāraṇī dhūmayitā          samañjasā sadā dīpta
rūḍhe tathoddīpta samarthāya
śuddīpta śrī-rādhā-prema         jena ujjwalita hema
modanādi bhābe sadā tāya
 
     sādhāraṇī - sādhāraṇī; dhūmayitā - smokey;  samañjasā - samanjasa; sadā - always; dīpta - blazing;  rūḍhe - in rudha; tathā - so; uddīpta - shining;samarthāya - of the  samartha; śuddīpta - brilliantly shining; śrīrādhā - Rādhā;- prema - love; jena - like; ujjwalita - shining; hema - gold;
modanādi - beginning with modana; bhābe - bhava; sadā - always;  tāya - of Her.
 
     The sādhāraṇī lovers (like Kubjā) manifest ecstatic  love that is dhūmāyita (smokey). The samañjasa lovers (like  the Dvārakā queens) manifest ecstatic love that is dīpta (shining). The samartha lovers (the gopīs) in rūḍha mahā- bhāva manifest ecstastic love that is uddīpta (brilliantly  shining). Śrī Rādhā manifests ecstatic love that is sūddīpta  (very brilliantly shining), love that glistens like gold. In that  love modana and the other bhāvas are always manifest. 




Song 25
Sambhoga o Viprālambha-bhede Dvi-vidha Ujjvala-rasera Vprālambha
Meeting and Separation Are the Two States in Ujjvala-rasa. Separation
 

Text 1
 
śrī ujjwala rasa sāra         swabhābataḥ dwi-prakāra
bipralambha sambhoga ākhyāna
binā bipralambhāśroya         sambhogera puṣṭi noya
tāi bipralambhera bidhāna
 
     śrī ujjwala rasa - beautiful ujjvala-rasa; sāra - the  best; swabhābataḥ - by nature; dwi-prakāra - two kinds;  bipralambha - separation; sambhoga - enjoyment; ākhyāna - called;  binā - without; bipralambha - separation; āśroya - shelter;  sambhogera - of enjoyent; puṣṭi - nourishment; noya - not;  tāi - that; bipralambhera - of vipralambha; bidhāna - way.
 
     Ujjvala-rasa, the best of rasas, is naturally of two kinds:  vipralambha (separation) and samhoga (enjoyment together). The  pleasure in sambhoga is not properly appreciated without 
vipralambha. That is vipralambha's function.
 

Text 2 
 
pūrba-rāga tathā māna         prabāsa baicttya-jñāna
bipralambha cāri to' prakāra
saṅgamera pūrba-rīti          labhe pūrba-rāga khyāti
darśane śrabaṇe janma tāra
 
     pūrba - previous; rāga - love; tathā - so; māna - jealousanger;  prabāsa - journey; baicttya - wonderful; jñāna - knowledge;  bipralambha - separation; cāri - four; to' - indeed;prakāra - kinds;  saṅgamera - of meeting; pūrba-rīti - previous way;  labhe - attain; pūrba-rāga - previous love; khyāti - name;  darśane - in seeing; śrabaṇe - in hearing; janma - birth;tāra - of  that.
 
     Vipralambha is of four kinds: pūrva-rāga (preliminary  attraction), māna (seeming anger), pravāsa (separation by  distance), and vaicittya-jñāna (apprehension). Pūrva-rāga is  love born from seeing or hearing of the beloved before the actual  meeting.
 

Text 3 
 
anurakta dam-patira      abhiṣṭa biśleṣa sthira
darśana birodhi bhāba māna
sa-hetu nirhetu māna          praṇayera pariṇāma
praṇayera bilāsapramāṇa
 
     anurakta dam-patira - of the lovers; abhiṣṭa - desired;  biśleṣa - separation; sthira - steady; darśana - seeing;  birodhi - stopping; bhāba - state; māna - anger; sa-hetu – with reason; 
nirhetu - without reason; māna - anger; praṇayera - of love;  pariṇāma - transformation; praṇayera - of love;  bilāsa - pastime; pramāṇa - evidence.
 
     In māna the lovers voluntarily separate and will not see  each other. This may be with reason (sahetu) or without reason  (nirhetu). The anger manifested in māna is a transformation of  love. These are pastimes of love.
 

Text 4 
 
sāma-bheda kriyā dāne         natyupekhā su-bidhāne
sahetu mānera upaśama
deśa kāla beṇu-rabe      nirhetuka mānotsabe
kore ati śīghra uparama
 
     sāma - pacification; bheda - difference; kriyā - action;dāne - in giving; naty - bowing down; upekhā - indifference; su- bidhāne - in the ways; sahetu - with reason;  mānera - of mana; upaśama - pacification; deśa - place;kāla - time;  beṇu-rabe - flute music; nirhetuka - without reason; māna - of mana; utsabe - effort;  kore - does; ati - very; śīghra - quickly; uparama - stopping. 

     Sahetu māna may be pacified by sweet words, witty jokes,  worship, gifts, bowing down, or indifference. Nirhetu māna may  quickly be pacified by a beautiful place, the passing of time, or 
the sound of flute music. 


Text 5 
 
biccheda āśaṅkā hoite         premera baicittya citte
premera swabhābe upajoya
deśa grāma banāntare          priyā je prabāsa kore
prabāsākhya bipralambha hoya
 
     biccheda - separation; āśaṅkā - fear; hoite - from;  premera - of love; baicittya - apprehension; citte - in the heart;  premera - of love; swabhābe - own nature; upajoya - manifestation;  deśa - country; grāma - village; bana - forest;antare - another;  priyā - beloved; je - who; prabāsa - journey; kore - does; prabāsākhya - called pravasa; bipralambha - vipralambha; hoya - is.
 
     Prema-vaicittya is manifested in the heart because of fear  of separation from the beloved. When the beloved travels to  another country, town, or forest, that is called pravāsa  separation.

 


Song 26
Sambhoga
Meeting
 

Text 1
 
darśana āśleṣanwita      ānukūlya sebāśrīta
ullāse ārūḍha jei bhāba
juba-dwandwa hṛdi mājhe       rasākāre su-birājye
sambhogākhya tāra hoya lābha
 
     darśana - seeing; āśleṣanwita - with embraces;  ānukūlya - favorable; sebā - service; āśrīta - sheltered;  ullāse - meeting; ārūḍha - risen; jei - which;bhāba - bhava; juba- dwandwa - the youthful divine couple; hṛdi - in the heart;mājhe - plunged; rasākāre - form of rasa; su-birājye - manifest;  sambhogākhya - called sambhoga; tāra - of that; hoya - is;  lābha - attainment.
 
     When, gazing at each other, embracing, and serving each  other with love, the divine couple feet ecstatic joy, and when  the personified deity of rasa becomes splendidly manifest in  Their hearts, that attainment is called sambhoga. 


Text 2 
 
mukhya gauṇa dwi-prakāra      sambhogera su-bistāra
tad ubhoya cāriṭi prakāra
saṅkhipta saṅkīrṇa jāna        sampanna samṛddhimāna
pūrba bhābābasthā anusāra
 
     mukhya - direct; gauṇa - indirect; dwi-prakāra - two kinds;  sambhogera - of sambhoga; su-bistāra - greatly; tat - that;  ubhoya - both; cāriṭi - four; prakāra - kinds;saṅkhipta - brief;  saṅkīrṇa - narrow; jāna - know; sampanna - in opulence;  samṛddhimāna - opulent; pūrba - previous; bhāba - ecstasy;  abasthā - condition; anusāra - following.
 
     Sambhoga is of two kinds: direct and indirect. These two  kinds are again manifested in four ways: saṅkṣipta (brief),  sankīrṇa (narrow), sampanna (fortunate), and samṛddhimān 
(opulent). 


Text 3 
 
pūrba-rāgāntare jāhā          saṅkhipta sambhoga tāhā
mānāntare saṅkīrṇa pramāṇe
khudra prabāsābasāne          sampanna samṛddhimāne
su-dūra prabāsa abasāne
 
     pūrba-rāgāntare - in purva-raga; jāhā - what;saṅkhipta - sanksipta; sambhoga - sambhoga; tāhā - that;  mānāntare - in mana; saṅkīrṇa - sankirna; pramāṇe - evidence;  khudra - slight; prabāsa - journey; abasāne - at the end;  sampanna - fortunate; samṛddhimāne - samrddhiman; su- dūra - very far; prabāsa - journey; abasāne - at the end.
 
     Saṅkṣipta-sambhoga occurs after pūrva-rāga. Saṅkīrṇa- sambhoga occurs after māna. Sampanna-sambhoga occurs after a  short journey (pravasa). Samṛddhimān-sambhoga occurs after a very  long jounrey.
 

Text 4 
 
sampanna dwi-bidha bhāba           āgati o prādurbhāba
manohara sambhoga tāhāya
swapne āi saba bhāba          jahe hoya ābirbhāba
tabe gauṇa sambhoga jānāya
 
     sampanna - sampanna; dwi-bidha - two kinds; bhāba - bhava;āgati - arrival; aḥ - and; prādurbhāba - appearance;  manohara - charming; sambhoga - sambhoga; tāhāya - of that; swapne - in  dream; āi - goes; saba - all; bhāba - bhava;jahe - when;  hoya - is; ābirbhāba - appearance; tabe - then;gauṇa - indirect;  sambhoga - sambhoga; jānāya - know. 

     Sampanna-sambhoga is of two kinds: āgati (planned arrival)  and prādurbhāva (accidental appearance). In this way sambhoga  charms the heart. Avirbhāva sometimes occurs in a dream. Then the  samobhoga is indirect.

 


Song 27
Sambhogera Prakāra
Different Kinds of Meeting
 

Text 1

sandarśana saṁsparśana        jalpa bartma-nirodhana
rāsa bṛndābana-līlā bhūri
jala-keli jamunāya       naukā-khelā cauryatāya
ghaṭṭa-līlā kuñje lukocuri
 
     sandarśana - seeing; saṁsparśana - touching;  jalpa - talking; bartma-nirodhana - blocking the path; rāsa - rasa  dance;  bṛndābana-līlā - Vṛndāvana pastimes; bhūri - many; jala- keli - playing in the water; jamunāya - of the Yamunā;  naukā-khelā - boat pastimes;  cauryatāya - theft; ghaṭṭa-līlā - pastimes at the boat- dock; kuñje - in the forest; lukocuri - hide and seek.
 
     The pastimes of sambhoga include: seeing, touching,  conversing, blocking the path, the rasa-dance, the many pastimes  in Vṛndāvana forest, playing in the Yamunā's waters, pastimes in 
a boat, pastimes of theft, pastimes at the boat-dock, playing  hide-and-seek in the forest, . . .
 

Text 2 
 
madhu-pāna badhū-beśa         kapaṭa nidrā-ābeśa
dyūta-krīḍā bastra ṭānāṭāni
cumbāśleṣa nakhārpaṇa         bimbādhara sudhā-pāna
samprajoga ādi līlā māni
 
     madhu-pāna - drinking nectar; badhū-beśa - dressing  as a girl; kapaṭa - prtending; nidrā-ābeśa - to sleep;dyūta- krīḍā - gambling; bastra - garments; ṭānāṭāni - tugging; cumba - kissing; āśleṣa - embraces; nakhārpaṇa - scratching; bimbādhara - bimba fruit lips; sudhā-pāna - drinking nectar;  samprajoga - union; ādi - beginning; līlā - pastimes; māni - Ithink.
 
 . . . drinking nectar, Kṛṣṇa's dressing like a girl, pretended  sleep, gambling, tugging at garments, kissing, embracing,  scratching, drinking the nectar of each other's bimba-fruit lips, 
and lover's union. I meditate on these pastimes.
 

Text 3 
 
sambhoga prakāra saba         sambhogera mahotsaba
līlā hoya sadā su-peśala
sei līlā aparūpa         ujjwala rasera kūpa
tāhe jāra hoya kautūhala
 
     sambhoga - sambhoga; prakāra - kinds; saba - all;  sambhogera - of sambhoga; mahotsaba - great festival;  līlā - pastimes; hoya - are; sadā - always; supeśala - beautiful;  sei - these; līlā - pastimes; aparūpa - wonderful; ujjwala  rasera - of ujjvala-rasa; kūpa - well; tāhe - in that; 
jāra - which; hoya - are; kautūhala - yearning.
 
     All these kinds of sambhoga bring a great festival of  enjoyments. These pastimes are always very beautiful and  wonderful. They are a great well that flows with the nectar of  ujjvala-rasa. Anyone who yearns to attain these pastimes, . . .
 

Text 4 
 
cid-bilāsa rasa-bhore         rati-bhāba rasa dhore
mahā-bhāba parjanta baḍaya
je jība saubhāgyabān          līlā-joge su-sandhān
braje bāsi' satata koraya
 
     cid-bilāsa - spiritual pastimes; rasa-bhore - filled  withthe nectar of rasa; rati-bhāba - rati; rasa - nectar;  dhore - holds; mahā-bhāba - maha-bhava; parjanta - up to;  baḍaya - increases; je - which; jība - soul;saubhāgyabān - very fortunate; līlā-joge - with pastimes; su-sandhān - search;  braje - in Vraja; bāsi' - residing; satata - always; koraya - do.
 
 . . . spiritual pastimes that begin with rati and increase until  they reach mahā-bhāva, is very fortunate. Residing in Vraja, he  always seeks to enter these pastimes.

 
 
Song 28
Ujjvala-rasāśrita-līlā
Pastimes in Ujjvala-rasa
 

Text 1
 
rasa-tattwa nitya jaiche      braja-tattwa nitya taiche
līlā-rasa eka kori' jñāna
kṛṣṇa je sākhāt rasa          sakala-i kṛṣṇera baśa
beda bhāgabate kore gāna
 
     rasa-tattwa - rasa; nitya - eternal; jaiche - as; braja- tattwa - Vraja; nitya - eternal; taiche - so;līlā - pastimes;  rasa - rasa; eka - one; kori' - doing; jñāna - knowledge; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; je - which; sākhāt - directly;rasa - rasa;  sakala-i - all; kṛṣṇera - of Kṛṣṇa; baśa - control;beda - Vedas; 
bhāgabate - Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; kore - do; gāna - song.
 
     The rasas are eternal. Vraja is eternal. Know that Kṛṣṇa's  pastimes and rasas are one. Lord Kṛṣṇa is the rasas directly.  Everything is under Lord Kṛṣṇa's dominion. This the Vedas and 
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam sing.
 

Text 2 
 
śrī-kṛṣṇa parama tattwa        tāra līlā śuddha sattwa
māyā jāra dūra-sthita dāsī
jība prati kṛpā kori'         līlā prokāśilo hori
jībera maṅgala abhilāṣī
 
     śrī-kṛṣṇa - Śrī Kṛṣṇa; parama - supreme;tattwa - truth;  tāra - of Him; līlā - pastimes; śuddha - pure;sattwa - goodness;  māyā - maya;  jāra - of whom; dūra-sthita - staying far away;dāsī - maidservant;  jība - souls; prati - to; kṛpā - mercy; kori' - doing;  līlā - pastimes;  prokāśilaḥ - manifests; hori - Kṛṣṇa; jībera - of the souls;  maṅgala - auspiciousness; abhilāṣī - desiring.
 
     Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Truth. His pastimes are in pure  goodness. Māyā is His maidservant who stays far away. Desiring  the conditioned souls' welfare, and giving His mercy to them,  Lord Kṛṣṇa manifests His pastimes in this world.
 

Text 3 
 
brahmā śeṣe śiba jāra         anweśiyā bāra bāra
tattwa bujhibāre nāhi pāre
brahmera āśroya jini          paramātmāra aṁśī tini
swayaṁ bhagabān boli' jā're
 
     brahmā - Brahma; śeṣe - Sesa; śiba - Siva; jāra - of  whom; anweśiyā - seeing; bāra - again; bāra - and again;  tattwa - truth;  bujhibāre - to understand; nāhi - not; pāre - are able;brahmera - of  Brahma; āśroya - shelter; jini - in whom;  paramātmāra - of the Supersoul; aṁśī - part; tini - in Him; swayam - personally; bhagabān - the Lord; boli' - saying;jā're - to  whom.
 
     Again and again searching for Him, Brahmā, Śeṣa, and Śiva  have no power to understand Him. He is the resting place of  the impersonal Brahman. The Supersoul is a part of Him. He is the  original Supreme Personality of Godhead.
 

Text 4 
 
sei kṛṣṇa doyāmoya       mūla-tattwa sarbāśroya
ananta-līlāra eka khani
nirbiśeṣa līlā bhore          brahmatā prokāśa kore
swīya aṅga kānti guṇa-maṇi
 
     sei - He; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; doyāmoya - merciful; mūla- tattwa - the root; sarbāśroya - shelter of all;ananta - limitless;  līlāra - pastimes; eka - one; khani - jewel mine;  nirbiśeṣa - without variety; līlā - pastiomes; bhore - many;brahmatā - impersonal Brahman; prokāśa - manifest; kore - does; swīya - own; aṅga - limbs; kānti - light; guṇa-maṇi - jewelof  virtues.
 
     Lord Kṛṣṇa is filled with mercy. He is the root of all  existence, the shelter of all. He is a jewel-mine of limitless  transcendental pastimes. Enjoying pastimes of pretending to be  impersonal, He manifests the impersonal Brahman, which is the  effulgence of His own bodily limbs. He possesses the jewels of  all transcendental qualities.
 

Text 5 
 
aṁśa paramātmā ho'ye          baddha-jība-gaṇa lo'ye
karma-cakre līlā kore kota
deba-loke deba-saha      upendrādi ho'ye teha
deba-līlā kore kota śata 
 
     aṁśa - part; paramātmā - Supersoul; ho'ye - is;  baddha - imprisoned; jība-gaṇa - souls; lo'ye - taking;karma - of  karma;  cakre - on the wheel; līlā - pastimes; kore - does; kota - howmany?; 
deba-loke - in Devaloka; deba-saha - with the demigods;  upendrādi - beginning with Vamana; ho'ye - is;  teha - then; deba-līlā - pastimes with the demigods;  kore - does; kota - how many?; śata - hundreds. 

     Manifesting His form as the Supersoul, how many pastimes  does He enjoy with the conditioned souls who move on the wheel of  karma? Manifesting the form of Vāmana and other forms, how many  hundreds of pastimes does He enjoy with the demigods in Devaloka?
 

Text 6 
 
parabyome nārāyaṇa       ho'ye pāle dāsa-jana
deba-deba rāja rājeśwara
sei kṛṣṇa sarbāśroya          braje nara-paricoya
nara-līlā korilo bistāra
 
     parabyome - in the spiritual sky; nārāyaṇa - Narayana;  ho'ye - is; pāle - protects; dāsa-jana - servants; debadeba - the  master of the demigods; rāja - the king; rājeśwara - the king of  kings; sei - He; kṛṣṇa -  Kṛṣṇa; sarbāśroya - the shelterof  all; braje - in Vraja; nara - human; paricoya - identity;nara- līlā - human pastimes; korilaḥ - did; bistāra - many.
 
     In the spiritual sky He is Nārāyaṇa. He protects His  servants. He is the master of the demigods. He is the king of the  kings of the kings. Lord Kṛṣṇa is the shelter of everything. 
Still, in Vraja He pretends to be a human being and He enjoys  humanlike pastimes.

 
 
Song 29
Vraja-līlāra Sarva-śreṣṭhatā
The Pastimes in Vraja Are the Best of All
 

Text 1
 
kṛṣṇera jateka khelā          tāra madhye nara-līlā
sarbottama rasera āloya
e rasa goloke nāi        tabe bolo kothā pāi
braja-dhāma tāhāra niloya
 
     kṛṣṇera - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; jateka - which;khelā - pastimes; tāra - of Him; madhye - in the midst; nara- līlā - humanlike pastimes;  sarbottama - best of all; rasera - of rasa; āloya - the abode;e - this;  rasa - rasa; goloke - in Goloka; nāi - not; tabe - then;bolaḥ - say;  kothā - where?; pāi - I attain; braja-dhāma - the land fo Vraja;  tāhāra - of them; niloya - the abode.
 
     Of all of Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, His humanlike pastimes are  the best. They are the abode of the rasas. These rasas are not  present even in Goloka? Where will I find them, then? Please tell 
me. The land of Vraja is the place where they stay.
 

Text 2 
 
nitya-līlā dwi-prakāra        sāntara o nirantara
jāhe mājhe rasikera mana
janma-bṛddhi daitya-nāśa      mathurā dwārakā-bāsa
nitya-līlā sāntare gaṇana
 
     nitya - eternal; līlā - pastimes; dwi-prakāra - two  kinds; sāntara - manifest at intervals; aḥ - and;nirantara - manifest  without intervals; jāhe - in which;  mājhe - middle; rasikera - of the rasika; mana - heart;janma - birth;  bṛddhi - growth; daitya-nāśa - killing the demons;  mathurā - Mathurā;  dwārakā - and Dvārakā; bāsa - residence; nitya - eternal;  līlā - pastimes; sāntare - at intervals; gaṇana - counting. 

     Lord Kṛṣṇa's eternal pastimes are of two kinds: sāntara  (manifest at intervals) and nirantara (always manifest). The  rasika devotees meditate on these pastimes. Lord Kṛṣṇa's birth,  growing up, killing the demons, and living in Mathurā and  Dvārakā are counted among His sāntara eternal pastimes. 


Text 3 
 
dibā rātra aṣṭa-bhāge         braja-jana anurāge
kore kṛṣṇa-līlā nirantara
tāhāra birāma nāi        sei nitya-līlā bhāi
brahma-rudra-śeṣaagocara
 
     dibā - day; rātra - and night; aṣṭa-bhāge - eight  periods; braja-jana - the people of Vraja; anurāge - anuraga; kore - do;  kṛṣṇa-līlā - Kṛṣṇa's pastimes; nirantara - always; tāhāra - of
that; birāma - stop; nāi - not; sei - this; nitya- līlā - eternal pastimes; bhāi - O brothers; brahma-rudra- śeṣa-agocara - not within the reach of the senses of Brahma,  Siva, and Sesa. 

     With great love Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoys His nirantara pastimes  with the people of Vraja throughout the eight periods of the day  and night. These pastimes never stop. O my brothers, even Brahmā,  Śiva, and Śeṣa cannot see these eternal pastimes.

 
Text 4 
 
jñāna joga koro jata          hoya tāhā dūra-gata
śuddha rāga nayane kebala
sei līlā rākhita hoya         parānanda bitaroya
hoya bhakta-jībana sambala
 
     jñāna - jnana; joga - yoga; koraḥ - do; jata - what;hoya - is; tāhā - that; dūra-gata - gone far away;  śuddha - pure; rāga - love; nayane - with the eyes;kebala - only;  sei - these; līlā - pastimes; rākhita - kept; hoya - are; parānanda - transcendental blias; bitaroya - distribute;  hoya - is; bhakta-jībana - the life of the devotees;  sambala - treasure.
 
     Throw jñāna and yoga far away. With eyes of pure love gaze  on these delightful pastimes, pastimes that are the devotees'  life, pastimes that are the great treasure they keep.

 
 
Part 5 Hankering for Perfection
Song 1
  

Text 1
 
kabe gaura-bane          suradhunī-taṭe
hā rādhā hā kṛṣṇa bole
kāndiyā ber6ā'bo         deho-sukha chār6i'
nānā latā-taru-tale
 
     kabe - when?; gaura-bane - in Lord Caitanya's forest;  suradhunī-taṭe - on the Ganga's bank; hā - O;rādhā - Rādhā; hā - O;  kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; bole - say; kāndiyā - weeping; ber6ā'baḥ - I  will walk; deho-sukha - happiness of the body;chār6i' - abanmdoning;  nānā - various; latā - vines; taru - trees; tale - at the base.
 
      When, rejecting the happiness of this body, calling out,  "O Rādhā! O Kṛṣṇa!", and weeping, will I wander among the  trees and vines in Lord Caitanya's forest by the Gaṅgā's bank?
  

Text 2 
 
śwapaca-gṛhete          māgiyā khāibo
pibo saraswatī-jala
puline puline       garā-gari dibo
kori' kṛṣṇa-kolāhala
 
     śwapaca - of the dogeaters; gṛhete - in the homes;  māgiyā - begging; khāibaḥ - I will eat; pibaḥ - Iwill drink; saraswatī- jala - the water of the Sarasvatī;  puline - on the banks; puline - and banks; gar6āgar6i - rolling on  the ground; dibaḥ - I will give; kori' - I willmake; kṛṣṇa - of 
Kṛṣṇa;  kolāhala - a tumult.
  
     Begging from the homes of the dogeaters, I will eat. I will  drink the Sarasvatī's water. I will roll on the ground by the  riverbank. I will make a great tumult of "Kṛṣṇa!"
  

Text 3 
 
dhāma-bāsī jāne          praṇati koriyā
māgibo kṛpāra leśa
baiṣṇaba-caraṇa-         reṇu gāya mākhi'
dhori' abadhūta-beṣa
 
     dhāma - of the holy abode; bāsī - residing;jāne - people; praṇati - bowing down; koriyā - doing; māgibaḥ - I will beg;kṛpāra - mercy;  leśa - small particle; baiṣṇaba - of the  Vaiṣṇavas; caraṇa - of  the feet; reṇu - the dust; gāya - on the body; mākhi' - anointing; 
dhori' - I will wear; abadhūta-beṣa - the garments of an avadhūta.
  
     Bowing down before the residents of the Lord's holy abode, I  will beg for a small particle of their mercy. I will wear an  avadhūta's garments and anoint my body with dust from the 
Vaiṣṇava's feet. 
  

Text 4 
 
gauḍa-braja-jane         bheda nā dekhibo
hoibo baraja-bāsī
dhāmera swarūpa          sphuribe nayane
hoibo rādhāra dāsī
 
     gauḍa - of Gauḍa-deśa; braja - of Vraja;jane - the people;  bheda - difference; nā - not; dekhibaḥ - I will see; hoibaḥ - will be; baraja- bāsī - a resident of Vraja;  dhāmera - of the holy abode; swarūpa - the true nature;  sphuribe - will be manifest; nayane - on the eyes;hoibaḥ - will be;  rādhāra - of Rādhā;  dāsī - the maidservant.
  
     I will not see any difference between the residents of Vraja  and those of Gauḍa-deśa. I will be transformed into a resident  of Vraja. The true nature of the Lord's abode will appear before 
my eyes. I will become Śrī Rādhā's maidservant.

 
 

Song 2
  

Text 1
 
dekhite dekhite          bhulibo bā kabe
nija-sthūla-paricoya
nayane heribo       braja-pura-śobhā
nitya cid-ānanda-moya
 
     dekhite - looking; dekhite - and looking;bhulibaḥ - I will  forget; bā - or; kabe - will be;nija - own; sthūla - material;  paricoya - identity; nayane - in the eyes; heribaḥ - willbe; braja- pura - of Vrajapura; śobhā - the glory;nitya - eternal;  cit - spiritual; ānanda - bliss; moya - consisting of.
  
     When, gazing and gazing, will I forget my material body?  When will the spiritual, eternal, blissful beauty of Vraja-pura  stand before my eyes?
 
 
Text 2 
 
bṛṣabhānu-pure      janama loibo
jābaṭe bibāha ha'be
braja-gopī-bhāba         hoibe swabhāba
āno-bhāba nā rohibe
 
     bṛṣabhānu - of King Vṛṣabhānu; pure - in the city;  janama - birth; loibaḥ - I will attain; jābaṭe - inJavata-grama;  bibāha - wedding; ha'be - will be; braja-gopībhāba - the  identity of a Vraja-gopī; hoibe - will be;swabhāba - own  identity; ānaḥ - another; bhāba - identity; nā - not; rohibe - will be. 
 
     I will take birth in King Vṛṣabhānu's city. I will be  married in Yāvaṭa-pura. I will be a vraja-gopī. I will have no  other identity.
 
 
Text 3 
 
nija-siddha-deho         nija-siddha-nāma
nija-rūpa-swa-basana
rādhā-kṛpā-bole          lobhibo bā kabe
kṛṣṇa-prema-prakaraṇa
 
     nija - own; siddha - perfect; dehaḥ - body; nija-siddha- nāma - own perfect name; nija-rūpa - own form; swabasana - own  garments;  rādhā - of Śrī Rādhā; kṛpā - of the mercy;bole - by the strength; lobhibo bā kabe      kṛṣṇa- prema - of spiritual love; prakaraṇa - method.
  
     When, by the power of Śrī Rādhā's mercy, will I attain my  original spiritual form, my original name, my original garments,  and my original love for Lord Kṛṣṇa.
 
 
Text 4 
 
jamunā-salila-      āharaṇe giyā
bujhibo jugala-rasa
prema-mugdha ho'ye       pāgalinī-prāya
gāibo rādhāra jaśa
 
     jamunā - of the yamunā; salila - water;āharaṇe - for  taking; giyā - going; bujhibaḥ - I will know; jugala - of the divine  couple; rasa - the nectar; prema - by spirituallove;  mugdha - bewildered; ho'ye - will be; pāgalinīprāya - like  a madwoman; gāibaḥ - I will sing; rādhāra - ŚrīRādhā's; jaśa - glories.
  
     As I go to fetch water from the Yamunā, I will think of the  divine couple's nectar pastimes. Overcome with ecstatic love,  like a madwoman I will sing Śrī Rādhā's glories.

 
 
Song 3 
 
Text 1
 
heno kāle kabe          bilāsa mañjarī
anaṅga mañjarī āra
āmāre heriyā          ati kṛpā kori'
bolibe bacana sāra
 
     henaḥ - like this; kāle - time; kabe - when?; bilāsa  mañjarī - Vilasa-manjari; anaṅga mañjarī - Ananga- manjari; āra - and; āmāre - me; heriyā - seeing;  ati - great; kṛpā - mercy; kori' - doing; bolibe - will say;  bacana - words; sāra - best.
 
     When, seeing me like this, will Vilāsa-mañjarī and Anaṅga- mañjarī kindly speak to me these, the best of words?: 
 
Text 2 
 
eso eso sakhī       śrī-lalitā-gaṇe
jānibe tomāre āja
gṛha-kathā chāḍi'        rādhā-kṛṣṇa bhajo
tyajiyā dharama-lāja
 
     esaḥ - come; esaḥ - come; sakhī - friend; śrī-lalitā- gaṇe - in Śrī Lalitā's group; jānibe - will know; tomāre - ofyou;  āja - now; gṛha - of home;  kathā - talk; chāḍi' - abandoning; rādhā-kṛṣṇa - RādhāKṛṣṇa;  bhajaḥ - worship; tyajiyā - leaving; dharama - of dharma;  lāja - shyness.
 
     "Friend, come. Come with us. We know that you belong  in Lalitā's group. Leaving behind all talk of your home and all  fear of breaking the rules of morality, come and worship Rādhā 
and Kṛṣṇa."
 

Text 3 
 
se madhura bāṇī          śuniyā e jana
se duṅhāra śrī-caraṇe
āśroya loibe        duṅhe kṛpā kori'
loibe lalitā-sthāne
 
     se - these; madhura - sweet; bāṇī - words;  śuniyā - hearing; e - this; jana - person; se - this;duṅhāra - of them  both; śrī - graceful; caraṇe - feet; āśroya - shelter; loibe - I will take; duṅhe - both; kṛpā - mercy;kori' - doing;  loibe - will attain; lalitā-sthāne - Lalitā's place.
 
     Hearing these sweet words, this person will take shelter of  these two gopīs' graceful feet. Then they will mercifully take me  to Lalitā's place.
 

Text 4 
 
lalitā sundarī      sa-doyā hoiyā
koribe āmāre dāsī
swa-kuñja-kuṭire       dibena basati
jāni' sebā-abhilāṣī
 
     lalitā - Lalita; sundarī - beautiful; sa-doyā - merciful; hoiyā - being; koribe - will do; āmāre - me;dāsī - maidservant;  swa - own; kuñja - in the forest grove; kuṭire - in a cottage; dibena - will give; basati - residence; jāni' - knowing;  sebā - service; abhilāṣī - desiring.
 
     Beautiful Lalitā will then make me her maidservant. Aware  that I yearn to serve her, she will give me a home in a cottage  in her forest grove.

 
 
Song 4
 

Text 1
 
pālya-dāsī kari'         lalitā sundarī
āmāre loiyā kabe
śrī-rādhikā-pade         kāle milāibe
ajña-sebā samarpibe
 
     pālya - to be protected; dāsī - maoidservant;kari' - making; lalitā - Lalita; sundarī - beautiful; āmāre - me;  loiyā - accepting; kabe - when?;  śrī-rādhikā-pade - at Śrī Rādhā's feet; kāle - at the time;  milāibe - will meet; ajña - command; sebā - service;  samarpibe - will offer.
 
     When, accepting me as her maidservant to be protected by  her, will beautiful Lalitā place me before Śrī Rādhā's feet and  command me to serve Her?
 

Text 2 
 
śrī rūpa mañjarī         saṅge jabo kabe
rasa-sebā-śikhā-tare
tad-anuga ho'ye          rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭe
rohibe harṣitāntare
 
     śrī rūpa mañjarī - of Śrī Rupa-manjari;  saṅge - in the comany; jabaḥ - which; kabe - when?;rasa - rasa;  sebā - service;  śikhā-tare - instrcution; tad-anuga - her follower; ho'ye - is;rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭe - on the shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa;  rohibe - will stay; harṣitāntare - with a happy heart. 

     When will Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī teach me about rasas and  service? When, now become her follower, will I with a joyful  heart stay with her by the shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa?
 

Text 3 
 
śrī biśākhā pade         saṅgīta śikhibo
kṛṣṇa-līlā rasa-moya
śrī rati mañjarī         śrī rasa mañjarī
hoibe sabe sa-doyā
 
     śrī biśākhā pade - at the feet of Śrī Visakha;  saṅgīta - music; śikhibaḥ - will learn; kṛṣṇa-līlā - Kṛṣṇa's pastimes; rasa-moya - full of nectar; śrī rati manjarī - Śrī Rati-manjari; śrī rasa manjarī - Śrī Rasa-manjari; hoibe - will be; sabe - all; sa- doyā - merciful. 

     When at Śrī Viśākhā's feet will I learn how to sing songs  about Lord Kṛṣṇa's nectar pastimes? When will Śrī Rati-mañjarī andŚrī Rasa-mañjarī be merciful to me?
 

Text 4 
 
parama ānande       sakale miliyā
rādhikā caraṇe raba
ei parākāṣṭha       siddhi kabe habe
pābo rādhā-padāsaba
 
     parama - transcendental; ānande - bliss; sakale - all;  miliyā - meeting; rādhikā - of Śrī Rādhā; caraṇe - feet;raba - stay;  ei - this;  parākāṣṭha       siddhi - highest perfection; kabe - when?;habe - will be; pābaḥ - will attain; rādhā-padāsaba - the nectar of Śrī  Rādhā's feet.
 
     When we all all happily gather at Śrī Rādhā's feet? When  will this highest perfection be? When will I attain the nectar of  Śrī Rādhā's feet?

 
 
Song 5
 

Text 1
 
cintāmaṇi-moya           rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭa
tāhe kuñja śata śata
prabala bidruma-          moya taru latā
muktā-phale abanata
 
     cintāmaṇi-moya - made of cintamani jewels; rādhā- kuṇḍa-taṭa - the lakeshore; tāhe - there; kunja - forests; śata - hundreds; śata - and hundreds; prabala bidruma - coral; moya - made; taru - trees; latā - vines;  muktā-phale - pearls; abanata - bowed down.
 
     By the cintāmaṇi shores of Rādhā-kuṇḍa are hundreds and  hunderds of groves of coral trees and coral vines, all bending  with many pearls.
 

Text 2 
 
swānanda sukhada         kuñja manohara
tāhāte kuṭira śobhe
bāsiyā tathāya      gābo kṛṣṇa-nāma
kabe kṛṣṇa-dāsya lobhe
 
     swānanda sukhada         kuñja - Svananda-sukhada- kunja; manohara - beautiful; tāhāte - there;kuṭira - cottage;  śobhe - beauty; bāsiyā - residing; tathāya - so; gābaḥ - will sing; kṛṣṇa-nāma - Kṛṣṇa's name; kabe - when?;kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa's;  dāsya - service; lobhe - greed.
 
     In a beautiful cottage at beautiful Svānanda-sukhada-kuñja I  will sit and sing Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. I will yearn to serve  Lord Kṛṣṇa.
 

Text 3 
 
emona samoya        muralīra gāna
pasibe e dāsī-kāne
ānande mātibo       sakala bhulibo
śrī-kṛṣṇa-baṁśīra gāne
 
     emona - this; samoya - time; muralīra - of the flute;  gāna - song; pasibe - will enter; e - this; dāsī - of themaidservant;  kāne - the ear; ānande - with bliss; mātibaḥ - will become wild;  sakala - all; bhulibaḥ - will forget; śrī-kṛṣṇa-baṁśīra - ofŚrī  Kṛṣṇa's flute; gāne - in the song.
 
     Then the song of Lord Kṛṣṇa's flute will enter this  maidservant's ear. Hearing the song of Lord's Kṛṣṇa's flute, I  will forget everything. I will become wild with bliss.
 

Text 4 
 
rādhe rādhe boli'        muralī ḍakibe
madīyā īśwarī nāma
śuniyā camaki'           uṭhibe e dāsī
kemona koribe prāṇa
 
     rādhe - Rādhā; rādhe - Navadvīpa; boli' - saying;  muralī - flute; ḍakibe - will call; madīyā - my;īśwarī - queen;  nāma - name;  śuniyā - hearing; camaki' - becoming startled;  uṭhibe - will rise up; e - this; dāsī - maidservant;  kemona - like what?; koribe - will do?;  prāṇa - life.
 
     "Rādhā! Rādhā!", the flute will call. Hearing my  queen's name, this startled maidservant will suddenly stand up.  What will happen to her life then?
 
 


Song 6
 

Text 1
 
nirjana kuṭīre          śrī rādhā caraṇa
smaraṇe thākibo rata
śrī rūpa mañjarī         dhire dhire āsi'
kohibe āmāya kota
 
     nirjana - secluded; kuṭīre - in a cottage; śrī  rādhā caraṇa - Śrī Rādhā's feet; smaraṇe - remembrance;  thākibaḥ - will stay;  rata - devoted; śrī rūpa mañjarī - Śrī Rupa-manjari; 
dhire - slowly; dhire - slowly; āsi' - coming;  kohibewill say; āmāya - to me; kota - something.
 
     Meditating on Śrī Rādhā's feet, I will stay in a secluded  cottage. Then Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī may slowly, slowly approach and  speak to me.
 

Text 2 
 
bolibe o sakhī      ki koro basiyā
dekhoho bāhire āsi'
jugala milana       śobhā nirupama
hoibe caraṇa dāsī
 
     bolibe - will say; aḥ - O; sakhī - friend; ki - why;koraḥ - do;  basiyā - sitting; dekhohaḥ - look; bāhire - outside;āsi' - coming;  jugala - divine couple; milana - meeting; śobhā - beauty;  nirupama - peerless; hoibe - will be; caraṇa - feet;  dāsī - maidservant.
 
     She will say, "O friend, why do you sit down? Look  outside. The peerlessly beautiful divine couple have come. Now  you will be a maidservant at Their feet.
 

Text 3 
 
swārasikī siddhi        braja-gopī-dhana
parama-cañcalā satī
jogīra dheyāna      nirbiśeṣa jñāna
nā pāya ekhane sthiti
 
     swārasikī siddhi - the perfection of rasa; braja- gopī-dhana - the wealth of the vraja-gopīs; parama-cancalā - supremely playful; satī - glorious; jogīra - of the  yogis; dheyāna - the meditation; nirbiśeṣa - impersonal;  jñāna - knowledge;  nā - not; pāya - attain; ekhane - like this; sthiti - situation.
 
     "Here is a great treasure. Here is the perfection of rasa. Here are theplayful and glorious gopīs of Vraja. The  yogīs' meditations and the impersonalists' speculations will  never bring you to this.
 

Text 4 
 
sākhāta darśana          madhyāhna-līlāya
rādhā-pada-sebārthinī
jakhana je sebā          koroho jatane
śrī-rādhā-caraṇe dhani
 
     sākhāta - direct; darśana - sight; madhyāhna- līlāya - midday pastimes; rādhā-pada - Rādhā's feet;  sebā - service; arthinī - yearning; jakhana - which;je - what; sebā - service; korohaḥ -  please do; jatane - with care; śrī- rādhā-caraṇe - at Śrī Rādhā's feet; dhani - a fortunate beautiful 
girl. 

     "O girl who yearns to serve Rādhā's feet, now you  may directly see Śrī Rādhā's midday pastimes. O fortunate  beautiful girl, please carefully serve Śrī Rādhā's feet."

 
 
Song 7
 

Text 1
 
śrī rūpa mañjarī kabe madhura bacane
rādhā-kuṇḍa mahimā barṇibe saṅgopane
 
     śrī rūpa mañjarī - Śrī Rupa-manjari; kabe - when?;  madhura - sweet; bacane - words; rādhā-
kuṇḍa - of Rādhā-kuṇḍa; mahimā - glory; barṇibe - willdescribe;  saṅgopane - in a secluded place.
 
     When will Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī take me to a secluded place and  with sweet words describe the glories of Rādhā-kuṇḍa? 


Text 2 
 
e caudda bhubanopari baikuṇṭha niloya
tad-apekhā mathurā parama śreṣṭha hoya
 
     e - these; caudda - 14; bhubana - worlds; upari - above;  baikuṇṭha - Vaikuṇṭha; niloya - abode; tad-apekhā - above that;  mathurā - Mathurā;  parama - most; śreṣṭha - best; hoya - is.
 
     "Beyond the fourteen worlds is Vaikuṇṭha, and  beyond that is supremely glorious Mathurā.
 

Text 3 
 
mathurā-maṇḍale rāsa-līlā-sthāna jathā
bṛndābana śreṣṭha ati śuno mama kathā
 
     mathurā-maṇḍale - in the circle of Mathurā; rāsa-līlā- sthāna - place of the rasa-dance; jathā - as;  bṛndābana - Vṛndāvana; śreṣṭha - best; ati - most;śunaḥ - please hear;  mama - my; kathā - words. 

     "Within the circle of Mathurā, the best place is  Vṛndāvana forest, the place of the rāsa-dance pastime. Please  hear my words.
 

Text 4 
 
kṛṣṇa-līlā-sthala gobardhana śreṣṭhatara
rādhā-kuṇḍa śreṣṭhatama sarba-śakti-dhara
 
     kṛṣṇa-līlā-sthala - places of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes;  gobardhana - Govardhana; śreṣṭhatara - bettter; rādhā- kuṇḍa - Rādhā-kuṇḍa; śreṣṭhatama - best; sarba-śaktidhara - with  all powers.
 
     "Of the places of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes Govardhana is  superior and Rādhā-kuṇḍa is best. It is glorious with all  potencies."
 

Text 5 
 
rādhā-kuṇḍa mahimā to' koriyā śrabaṇa
lālāyita ho'ye āmi paḍibo takhana
 
     rādhā-kuṇḍa mahimā - the glories of Rādhā-kuṇḍa;  to' - indeed; koriyā - doing; śrabaṇa - hearing;lālāyita - overcome  with yearning; ho'ye - is;  āmi - I; paḍibaḥ - will fall; takhana - then.
 
     Hearing Rādhā-kuṇḍa's glories, and yearning to go there, I  will suddenly fall unconscious.
  

Text 6 
 
sakhīra caraṇe kabe koribo ākuti
sakhī kṛpā kori' dibe swārasikī sthiti
 
     sakhīra - of a sakhī; caraṇe - the feet; kabe - when;koribaḥ - I  will do; ākuti - fervent prayer; sakhī - sakhi;kṛpā - mercy;  kori' - doing; dibe - will give; swārasikī sthiti - a place in the  rasas.
 
     When will I fervently pray at a sakhī's feet? When will that  sakhī mercifully give me my proper place in the spiritual rasas? 
 


Song 8
 

Text 1
 
baraṇe taḍit       bāsa tārābalī
kamala mañjarī nāma
sāḍe bāra barṣa         bayasa satata
swānanda-sukhada-dhāma
 
     baraṇe - in color; taḍit - lightning; bāsa - garments;  tārābalī - a host of stars; kamala mañjarī - Kamala- manjari;  nāma - name; sāḍe - and a half; bāra - twelve;barṣa - years; bayasa - age; satata - eternally; swānanda- sukhada-dhāma-the abode of Svananda-sukhada .
 
     My color will be lightning, my garments a host of stars, my  name Kamala-mañjarī, my age eternally twelve and a half years,  my home Svānanda-sukhada. 
 

Text 2 
 
śrī karpūra-sebā         lalitāra gaṇa
rādhā jutheśwarī hana
mameśwarī-nātha          śrī-nanda-nandana
āmāra parāṇa dhana
 
     śrī karpūra - camphor; sebā - service; lalitāra - of  Lalitā; gaṇa - group; rādhā - Rādhā; jutheśwarī - thequeen of the  group; hana - is; mama - of me; īśwarī - of the queen;nātha - the master; śrī-nanda-nandana - Nanda's son; āmāra - of me;  parāṇa - of the life; dhana - the treasure. 

     My service will be preparing camphor. I will be among  Lalitā's followers. The queen of my group will be Rādhā. My  queen's master will be Nanda's son. He will be the treasure of my 
life.
 

Text 3 
 
śrī rūpa mañjarī         prabhṛtira sama
jugala sebāya āśā
abaśya se-rūpa      sebā pabo āmi
parākāṣṭha su-biśwāsa
 
     śrī rūpa mañjarī - Śrī Rupa-manjari;  prabhṛtira - beginning; sama - like; jugala - of the divine couple;  sebāya - service; āśā - desire; abaśya - inevitable; serūpa - like that; sebā - service; pabaḥ - I will attain; āmi - I;  parākāṣṭha - greatest; su-biśwāsa - faith.
 
     I yearn to serve the divine couple as Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī and  the other mañjarīs do. With great faith I will serve Them in  that way. 

 
Text 4 
 
kabe bā e dāsī      saṁsiddhi labhibe
rādhā-kuṇḍe bāsa kori'
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sebā         satata koribe
pūrba smṛti parihori'
 
     kabe - when?; bā - or; e - this; dāsī - maidservant; saṁsiddhi - perfection; labhibe - will attain; rādhā-kuṇḍe - at  Rādhā-kuṇḍa; bāsa - residence; kori' - doing;  rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sebā - service at Rādhā-kuṇḍa;  satata - always; koribe - will do; pūrba - previous;smṛti - memory; 
parihori' - leaving.
 
     When will this maidservant attain this perfection? When,  residing at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and forgetting my previous lives,  will I serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa eternally?

 
 
Song 9
  

Text 1
 
bṛṣabhānu-sutā-          caraṇa-sebane
hoibo je pālya-dāsī
śrī-rādhāra sukha        satata sādhane
rohibo āmi prayāsī
 
     bṛṣabhānu - of King Vṛṣabhānu; sutā - of thedaughters;  caraṇa - feet; sebane - in service; hoibaḥ - willbe; je - which; pālya - to  be protected; dāsī - maidservant; śrī-rādhāra - ofŚrī Rādhā; 
sukha - happiness; satata - always; sādhane - inspiritual  activities; rohibaḥ - will stay; āmi - I; prayāsī - endeavoring. 
 
     I will always serve Śrī Rādhā's feet. I will be a gopī  always protected by Her. I will always try to please Her. 
 

Text 2 
 
śrī-rādhāra sukhe        kṛṣṇera je sukha
jānibo manete āmi
rādhā-pada chār6i'        śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅgame
kabhu nā hoibo kāmī
 
     śrī-rādhāra - of Śrī Rādhā; sukhe - the happiness;  kṛṣṇera - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; je - which;sukha - happiness; jānibaḥ - I will  know; manete - in the heart;  āmi - I; rādhā-pada - Śrī Rādhā's feet; chār6i' - abandoning;  śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅgame - in Śrī Kṛṣṇa's association;  kabhu - ever; nā - not; hoibaḥ - will be;kāmī - desiring. 
 
     In my heart I will know that Lord Kṛṣṇa's finds His pleasure  in Śrī Rādhā's pleasure. Therefore I will never desire to leave  Śrī Rādhā's feet and stay alone with Lord Kṛṣṇa.
 
 
Text 3 
 
sakhī-gaṇa mama          parama-suhṛt
jugala-premera guru
tad-anuga ho'ye          sebibo rādhāra
caraṇa-kalapa-taru
 
     sakhī-gaṇa - the sakhīs; mama - of me; parama- suhṛt - the best well-wishers; jugala - of the divine couple;  premera - of love; guru - the guru; tad-anuga - thefollower of them;  ho'ye - will be; sebibaḥ - I will serve; rādhāra - ofŚrī  Rādhā; caraṇa - of the feet; kalapa-taru - the kalpavṛkṣa tree. 
 
     Śrī Rādhā's friends will be my well-wishers, teaching me of  the divine couple's spiritual love. Following them, I will serve  the kalpa-vṛkṣa tree of Śrī Rādhā's feet.
 
 
Text 4 
 
rādhā-pakha chār6i'       je-jana se-jana
je bhabe se bhabe thāke
āmi to' rādhikā-         pakha-pātī sadhā
kabhu nāhi heri tā'ke
 
     rādhā - of Rādhā; pakha - the party;chār6i' - leaving; je- jana se-jana - whoever; je - who; bhabe - nature; se - that; bhabe - nature;  thāke - is; āmi - I; to' rādhikā - of ŚrīRādhā; pakha-
pātī - in the party; sadā - always; kabhu - ever; nāhi - not; heri - I  see; tā'ke - stay.
  
     I will always stay with Śrī Rādhā. Never will I leave Her  and stay among her rivals, whoever they are. 
 
 
Song 10
  
Text 1
 
śrī-kṛṣṇa-birahe         rādhikāra dāsa
āmi to' sahite nāri
jugala-milana-      sukhera kāraṇa
jībana chāḍite pāri
 
     śrī-kṛṣṇa - from Śrī Kṛṣṇa; birahe - in separation;  rādhikāra - of Śrī Rādhā; daśā - condition of life;āmi - I;  to' - indeed; sahite - to tolerate; nāri - am not able;  jugala - the divine couple; milana - meeting; sukhera - happiness;  kāraṇa - cause; jībana - life; chāḍite - to renounce;pāri - I  am able.
 
     I have no power to bear Śrī Rādhā's condition separated from  Lord Kṛṣṇa. For the happy reunion of the divine couple I am  prepared to give up my life.
 

Text 2 
 
rādhikā-caraṇa           tyajiyā āmāra
khaṇeke praloya hoya
rādhikāra tare           śata-bāra mari
se duḥkha āmāra soya
 
     rādhikā - of Rādhā; caraṇa - the feet;  tyajiyā - leaving; āmāra - of me; khaṇeke - for a moment;  praloya - devastation; hoya - is;  rādhikāra - of Rādhā; tare - to rescue; śata-bāra - a 
hundred times; mari - I will die; se - that;duḥkha - suffering;  āmāra - of me;  soya - bearing.
 
     For a moment leaving Rādhā's feet, I would be at once  devastated. For Rādhā's sake I will die a hundred times. I gladly  accept that suffering.
 

Text 3 
 
e heno rādhāra      caraṇa-jugale
paricarjā pā'bo kabe
haha braja-jana          more doyā kori'
kabe braja-bane lo'be
 
     e - this; henaḥ - like; rādhāra - of Rādhā; caraṇajugale - at  the two feet; paricarjā - service; pā'baḥ - will attain;kabe - when?;  hāhā - O! O!;  braja - of Vraja; jana - people; more - to me; doyā - mercy;  kori' - doing; kabe - when?; braja-bane - in Vraja's forest;  lo'be - will take.
 
     When will I serve Rādhā's feet? O people of Vraja, when will  you be compassionate and take me to the forests of Vraja? 


Text 4 
 
bilāsa mañjarī      anaṅga mañjarī
śrī rūpa mañjarī āra
āmāke tuliyā        loho nija pade
deho' more siddhi sāra
 
     bilāsa mañjarī - Vilasa-manjari; anaṅga mañjarī - Ananga-manjari; śrī rūpa  mañjarī - Śrī Rupa-manjari; āra - and; āmāke - me;tuliyā - lifting; lohaḥ - please take; nija - own; pade - at the feet;  deho' - please give; more - to me; siddhi - perfection;sāra - best.
 
     O Vilāsa-mañjarī! O Anaṅga-mañjarī! O Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī!  Please pick me up and place me at your feet. Please give me the  best of perfections.


