Folio Archives
Gitavali

Part 1 Aruoṇdaya-kīrtana (Kīrtana at Dawn)


Song 1

Text 1

udilo aruṇa pūraba bhāge
dwija-maṇi gorā amani jāge
bhakata-samūha loiyā sāthe
     gele nāgara-braje

     udilaḥ - rises; aruṇa - the morning sun; pūraba - in the east; bhāge - part; dwija-maṇi - the jewel of the twice-born; gorā - Lord Caitanya; amani - like that; jāge - awakened; 
bhakata - devotees; samūha - group; loiyā - laike; sāthe - in the company; gele - went; nāgara-braje - to the towns.

     As the morning sun rose in the east, Lord Gaura, the jwwel of the twice-born, awakened. Taking His devotees with Him, He visited the towns and villages.
Text 2 

tāthaī tāthaī bājalo khol
ghana ghana tāhe jāñjhera rol
prema ḍhala ḍhala soṇāra aṅga
     caraṇe nūpura bāje

     tāthaī tāthaī - tathai tathai; bājalaḥ - sounded; khol - thekholas; ghana ghana - again and again; tāhe - He;jāñjhera - cymbals; rol - sound; prema - love; ḍhala ḍhala - in ecstasy; soṇāra - golden;aṅga - form; caraṇe - on the feet; nūpura - anklets; bāje - sound.

     "Tāthāi tāthāi", the drums say. The cymbals chime again and again. The anklets sound. Lord Caitanya's golden form is overcome with ecstatic love.
 

Text 3 
 
mukunda mādhaba jādaba hari
bole re bolo re badana bhori'
miche nida-baśe gelo re rāti
     dibasa śarīra-sāje
 
     mukunda - Mukunda; mādhaba - Madhava; jādaba - Yādava;hari - Hari; bolaḥ - say; re - O; bolaḥ - say; re - O;badana - mouths; bhori' - filling; miche - false; nida - sleep; baśe - control; gelaḥ - go; re - O;rati - night; dibasa - day; śarīra - of the body; sāje - dressing and decorating.
 
     He said, "Chant! Filling your mouths, chant, `Mukunda! Mādhava! Yādava! Hari!' You spend your nights uselessly sleeping and your days decorating your bodies.
 

Text 4 
 
emona durlabha mānaba-deho
paiyā ki koro bhābanā keho
ebe na bhojile jaśodā-suta
     carame poribe lāje
 
     emona - this; durlabha - rare; mānaba - human;dehaḥ - body; paiyā - attaining; ki - what?; koraḥ - do;bhābanā - thinking; kehaḥ - someone; ebe - now; na - not; bhojile - worship; jaśodā-suta - Yasoda's son; carame - at the end; poribe - will fall; lāje - in embarrassment.
 
     "What will you do, now that you have attained the rare human body? What is your idea? If now you not worship Yaśodā's son, at the end you will fall into embarrassment.
 

Text 5 
 
udita tapana hoile asta
dina gelo boli' hoibe byasta
tāhe keno ebe alasa hoy
     na bhajo hṛdoya-rāje
 
     udita - risen; tapana - sun; hoile - is; asta - the western horizon; dina - day; gelaḥ - gone; boli' - saying; hoibe - will be;byasta - wasted; tahe - in this; kenaḥ - someone; ebe - now; alasa - lazy; hoy - is; na - not;bhajaḥ - worship; hṛdoya - of the heart; rāje - the king.
 
     "The sun rises and then sets. Another day passes. Don't be lazy. Worship the Lord of the heart.
 

Text 6 
 
jībana anitya jānoha sār
tāne nānā-bidha bipada-bhār
nāmāśroya kori' jatane tumi
     thākona āpana kāje
 
     jībana - life; anitya - temporary; jānoha - please know;sāḥ - the best; tāne - manifests; nānā-bidha - various kinds; bipadabhāḥ - of calamities; nāma - of the holy name; āśroya - shelter; kori' - doing;jatane - with enthusiasm; tumi - you; thākona - stay; āpana - in your own; 
kāje - work.
     "Please know that this life is brief and filled with many troubles. Perform your present duties, but also take shelter of the holy name.
 

Text 7 
 
jībera kalyāṇa-sādhana-kām
jagate āsi' e madhura nām
abidyā timira-tapana-rūpe
     hṛd-gagane birāje
 
     jībera - of the souls; kalyāṇa - auspiciousness; sādhana - attainment; kām - desiring; jagate - in the world; āsi' - coming; e - this; madhura - sweet; nām - name; abidyā - of ignorance; timira - darkness; tapana - of the sun; rūpe - in the form; hṛt - of the heart; gagane - in the sky; birāje - shines.
 
     "Desiring to bring auspiciousness to the conditioned souls, the sweet holy name has come to this world. Assuming the form of a sun to burn away the darkness of ignorance, it shines in the sky of the heart.
 

Text 8 
 
kṛṣṇa-nāma-sudhā koriyā pān
jur6āo bhakatibinoda prāṇ
nāma binā kichu nāhika āra
caudda-bhubana-mājhe
 
     kṛṣṇa - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāma - of the holy name; sudhā - thenectar; koriyā - doing; pān - drinking; jur6āaḥ - pleasecool; bhakatibinoda - of Bhaktivinoda; prāṇ - the life; nāma - the name; binā - without; kichu - something; nāhika - isnot; āra - other; caudda-bhubana-mājhe - in the fourteen worlds.
 
     Please drink the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa's names and cool the burning life of Bhaktivinoda. In the fourteen worlds nothing is like the holy name.

  
Song 2
 

Text 1
 
jīv jāgo jīv jāgo gauracandra bole
kota nidrā jā-o māyā piśācera kole
 
     jīv - souls; jāgaḥ - wake up; jīv - souls; jāgaḥ - wakeup; gauracandra - Lord Caitanya; bole - says; kota - how long?; nidrā - to sleep; jā-aḥ - you will go; māyā - Māyā; piśācera - of the witch; kole - in the lap.
 
     "Souls, wake up! Souls, wake up!", Lord Caitanya says. "How long will you sleep on the lap of the Māyā witch?
 

Text 2 

 bhojībo boliyā ese soṁsāra-bhitore
bhuliyā rohile tumi abidyāra bhore
 
     bhojībaḥ - I will worship; boliyā - saying; ese - in this; somsāra-bhitore - material world; bhuliyā - forgetting;rohile - stay; tumi - you; abidyāra - by ignorance; bhore - bewildered.
 
     "You promised, `I will engage in devotional service.' Now you forget. Bewildered by ignorance, you stay in the world of birth and death.
 

Text 3 
 
tomāre loite āmi hoinu avatāra
āmi binā bandhu āra ke āche tomāra
 
     tomāre - you; loite - to take; ami - I; hoinu - am;avatāra - descended; āmi - I; binā - without; bandhu - friend; āra - other;ke - who?; āche - is; tomāra - of you.
 
     "I have descended just to save you. But for Me, who is your friend?

 
Text 4 
 
enechi auṣadhi māyā nāśibāro lāgi'
hari-nāma mahā-mantra lao tumi māgi'
 
     enechi auṣadhi - the medecine; māyā - Maya; nāśibāraḥ - to destroy; lāgi' - bringing; hari-nāma - the holy name of LordKṛṣṇa; mahā - great; mantra - mantra; laaḥ - please take; tumi - you; māgi' - ask.
 
     "I have brought a great mantra of Lord Kṛṣṇa's names, a mantra that is a medicine to cure material illusion. Ask, and you may take that medicine."
 

Text 5 
 
bhakatibinoda prabhu-caraṇe por6iyā
sei hari-nāma mantro loilo māgiyā
 
     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; prabhu-caraṇe - at the feet of the Lord; poriyā - falling; sei - this; hari-nāma - holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa; mantraḥ - mantra; loilaḥ - takes; māgiyā - requesting.
 
     Falling at Lord Caitanya's feet, Bhaktivinoda asks for the medicine that is the mantra of Lord Kṛṣṇa's names. Now he takes that medicine.

  
Part 2 Arati-kīrtana




Song 1
Śrī Gaura-Govinda-ārati
Arati for Lord Caitanya and Lord Kṛṣṇa
 

Text 1
 
bhāle gaurā-gadādharera ārati nehāri
nadīyā-pūraba-bhābe jāu bolihāri
 
     bhāle - glorious; gaurā-gadādharera - of Śrī Śrī Gaura-Gadādhara; ārati - the arati; nehāri - gazing;nadīyā - Nadīyā; pūraba - before; bhābe - in ecstasy; jāu - attain; bolihāri - being stunned withwonder.
 
     Gazing at the beautiful ārati of Śrī Śrī Gaura-Gadādhara, I enter the pastimes They enjoyed before coming to Nadīyā. I am stunned with wonder. 
 

Text 2 
 
kalpataru-tale ratna-siṁhāsanopari
sabu-sakhī-beṣṭita kiśora-kiśorī
 
     kalpataru - of a kalpataru tree; tale ratna-siṁhāsanopari - at the base; sabu - all; sakhī - by the gopīs;beṣṭita - surrounded; kiśora-kiśorī - the youthful divine couple.
 
     Surrounded by the gopīs, the youthful divine couple sit on a jewel throne under a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree.
 

Text 3 
 
puraṭa-jar6ita kota maṇi-gajamati
jhamaki' jhamaki' labhe prati-aṅga-jyotiḥ
 
     puraṭa - gold; jar6ita - studded; kota - how many?;maṇi - jewels; gajamati - elephant pearls; jhamaki' - shinign; jhamaki' - shining; labhe - attains; prati - of every; aṅga - limb;jyotiḥ - splendor.
 
     How many are Their ornaments of gold, jewels, and elephant-pearls? Their every limb glistens and glistens.
 

Text 4 
 
nīla nīrada lāgi' bidyut-mālā
duhuṁ aṅga mili' śobhā bhubana-ujālā
 
     nīla - dark; nīrada - raincloud; lāgi' - taking;bidyut - of lightning flashes; mālā - garland; duhum - two;aṅga - bodies; mili' - meeting; śobhā - beauty; bhubana - the three worlds; ujālā - splendor.
 
     They are splendid like a dark raincloud and garland of lightning flashes. Their beauty and glory fills the three worlds.
 

Text 5 
 
śaṅkha bāje ghaṇṭā bāje bāje karatāla
madhura mṛdaṅga bāje parama rasāla
 
     śaṅkha - conchshell; bāje - sounds; ghaṇṭā - bell; bāje - sounds; bāje - sounds; karatāla - karatalas;madhura - sweet; mṛdaṅga - mrdangas; bāje - sound; parama - very;rasāla - relishable.
 
     The conchshell sounds. The bells sound. The karatālas sound. The sweet mṛdaṅgas sound. It is very relishable and sweet.
 

Text 6 
 
biśākhādi sakhī-bṛnda duhuṅ guṇa gāowe
priya-narma-sakhī-gaṇa cāmara ḍhulāowe
 
     biśākhā - Viśākhā; ādi - beginning with; sakhī - ofgopīs; bṛnda - multitude; duhun - the couple; guṇa - virtues;gāowe - sing; priya - pleasing; narma - joking; sakhī - friends; gaṇa - multitudes; cāmara - camaras;ḍhulāowe - wave.
 
     Viśākhā and the sakhīs sing the glories of the divine couple. With cāmara whisks the priya-narma-sakhīs fan the divine couple.
 

Text 7 
 
anaṅga mañjarī cuyā-candana deowe
mālatīra mālā rūpa mañjarī lāgāowe
 
     anaṅga mañjarī - Ananga-manjari; cuyā - fragrances; candana - and sandal paste; deowe - give; mālatīra - ofjasmineflowerrs; mālā - garlands; rūpa mañjarī - Rupa-manjari; lāgāowe - offers.
 
     Anaṅga-mañjarī offers the divine couple fragrances and sandal paste. Rūpa-mañjarī offers Them jasmine garlands.
 

Text 8 
 
pañca-pradīpe dhori' karpūra-bāti
lalitā-sundarī kore jugala-ārati

      pañca - five; pradīpe - lamps; dhori' - holding; karpūra - camphor; bāti - lamp; lalitā - Lalitā;sundarī - beautiful; kore - does; jugala - of the divine couple; ārati - arati.
 
     Offering a five-fold lamp and a camphor lamp, beautiful Lalitā offers ārati to the divine couple.
 

Text 9 
 
debī-lakṣmī-śruti-gaṇa dharaṇī laṭāowe
gopī-jana-adhikāra raowata gāowe
 
     debī - Parvati; lakṣmī - Lakṣmī; śruti-gaṇa - the personified Vedas; dharaṇī - on the ground; laṭāowe - rollabout; gopī-jana - the gopīs; adhikāra - glory; raowata - stand; gāowe - sing.
 
     Lakṣmī, Pārvatī, and the Personified Vedas stand and sing the glories of the gopīs. Then they fall down and roll on the ground in ecstasy.
 

Text 10 
 
bhakatibinoda rohi' surabhī ki kuñje
ārati-daraśane prema-sukha bhuñje
 
     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; rohi' - staying; surabhī ki kuñje - at Surabhi-kunja; ārati - of the arati; daraśane - in the sight; prema - of love; sukha - hapiness; bhuñje - enjoys.
 
     Staying in Surabhi-kuñja and gazing at this ārati, Bhaktivinoda feels great love and bliss.

 
 

Song 2
Śrī Gaura-ārati
Arati for Lord Caitanya
 

Text 1
 
jaya jaya goracander āratiko śobhā
jāhnabī-taṭa-bane jaga-mana-lobhā
 
     jaya - glory; jaya - glory; goracandeḥ - of Lord Caitanya;āratikaḥ - the arati; śobhā - beauty; jāhnabī-taṭa-bane - in theforest by the Gaṅgā's bank; jaga - of the world; mana - the hearts; lobhā - attraction.
 
     The ārati ceremony that is going on on the banks of the Gaṅgā to receive Lord Caitanya is so beautiful that it is all-attractive to the minds of all the people in the world.*
 

Text 2 
 
dakhiṇe nitāicanda bāme gadādhara
nikaṭe adwaita śrīnibāsa chatra-dhara
 
     dakhiṇe - on the right; nitāicanda - Lord Nityānanda; bāme - onthe left; gadādhara - Gadādhara; nikaṭe - nearby;adwaita - Advaita; śrīnibāsa - Śrīvāsa; chatra - umbrella; dhara - holding.
 
     Advaita Prabhu is nearby. Śrīvāsa is nearby. Śrīvāsa is bearing the umbrella on Lord Caitanya's head.*
 

Text 3 
 
bosiyāche gorācanda ratna-siṁhāsane
ārati koren brahmā-ādi deva-gaṇe
 
     bosiyāche - sits; gorācanda - Lord Caitanya; ratna-siṁhāsane - on a jewel throne; ārati - arati; koren - does; brahmā - Brahmā; ādi - beginning; deva - of demigods; gaṇe - multitude.
 
     To offer ārati-reception to Lord Caitanya, all the demigods have come down, headed by Lord Brahmā.*
 

Text 4 
 
narahari-ādi kori' cāmara ḍhulāya
sañjaya-mukunda-bāsughoṣa-ādi gāya
 
     narahari - with Narahari; ādi - beginning; kori' - doing; cāmara - camara; ḍhulāya - waving; sañjaya-mukunda - SañjayaMukunda; bāsughoṣa - Vāsu Ghoṣa; ādi - beginning; gāya - sing.
 
     Narahari and other devotees fan the Lord with cāmaras. Sañjaya-Mukunda, Vāsu Ghoṣa, and other devotees sing.
 

Text 5 
 
śaṅkha bāje ghaṇṭā bāje bāje karatāla
madhura mṛdaṅga bāje parama rasāla
 
     śaṅkha - the conchshell; bāje - sounds; ghaṇṭā - bells; bāje - sound; bāje - sound; karatāla - karatalas;madhura - sweet; mṛdaṅga - mṛdaṅga; bāje - sounds; parama - very;rasāla - relishable.
 
     The conchshell is sounding. Different kinds of bells are also ringing. Cymbals and bells sound all together. The mṛdaṅga vibration is very sweet to hear, very relishable. All these 
sounds taken together when vibrated are very relishable to hear.*
 

Text 6 
 
bahu-koṭi candra jini' badana ujjwala
gala-deśe bana-mālā kore jhalamala
 
     bahu - many; koṭi - millions; candra - moons;jini' - defeating; badana - face; ujjwala - splendor; gala-deśe - on the neck;bana - forest; mālā - garland; kore - does; jhalamala - splendor.
 
     The Lord's glorious face defeats many millions of moons. The forest-flower garland on His neck is very glorious.
 

Text 7 
 
śiba śuka nārada prema gadagada
bhakatibinoda dekhe gorāra sampada
 
     śiba - Śiva; śuka - Śuka; nārada - Nārada; prema - withlove; gadagada - with choked up voices; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; dekhe - sees; gorāra - of Lord Caitanya; sampada - the glory and opulence.
 
     Śiva, Śukadeva, and Nārada find their voices choked with love. Bhaktivinoda gazes at the glory and opulence of Lord Caitanya.

 

Song 3
Śrī Jugala-ārati
Arati for the Divine Couple
 

Text 1
 
jaya jaya rādhā-kṛṣṇa jugala-milana
ārati karowe lalitādi sakhī-gaṇa
 
     jaya - glory; jaya - glory; rādhā-kṛṣṇa - Śrī Śrī Rādhā Kṛṣṇa; jugala-milana - meeting; ārati - arati; karowe - do; lalitādi - headed by Lalita; sakhī-gaṇa - the gopīs.
 
     Glory, glory to the ārati Lalitā and the gopīs offer to Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa!
 

Text 2 
 
madana-mohana rūpa tri-bhaṅga-sundara
pītāmbara sikhi-puccha-cūr6ā-manohara
 
     madana - than Kamadeva; mohana - more charming; rūpa - form; tri-bhaṅga - threefold bending; sundara - handsome; pītāmbara - yellow garments; sikhi-puccha-cūr6ā - peacock feather crown; manohara - charming.
 
     Wearing yellow garments and a charming peacock-feather crown, threefold-bending Kṛṣṇa is more handsome than Kāmadeva.
 

Text 3 
 
lalita-mādhaba-bāme bṛṣabhānu-kanyā
sunīla-basanā gaurī rūpe guṇe dhanyā
 
     lalita - charming; mādhaba - Kṛṣṇa; bāme - on the left;bṛṣabhānu-kanyā - Śrī Rādhā; sunīla - blue;basanā - garments; gaurī - fair; rūpe - form; guṇe - in virtue;dhanyā - glorious.
 
     Dressed in blue garments, Her complexion fair, and Her virtues glorious, King Vṛṣabhānu's daughter is on playful Kṛṣṇa's left.
 

Text 4 
 
nānā-bidha alaṅkāra kore jhalamala
hari-mano-bimohana badana ujjwala
 
     nānā-bidha - various; alaṅkāra - ornaments; kore - does;jhalamala - splendor; hari-mano-bimohana - charming Lord Kṛṣṇa'sheart; badana - face; ujjwala - splendor.
 
     Her many ornaments glisten. Her splendid face charms Kṛṣṇa's heart.
 

Text 5 
 
biśākhādi sakhī-gaṇa nānā rāge gāya
priya-narma-sakhī jata cāmāra ḍhulāya
 
     biśākhādi - headed by Visakha; sakhī-gaṇa - gopī; nānā - various; rāge - ragas; gāya - saing; priya-narma-sakhī - dear joking friends; jata - which; cāmāra - camara; ḍhulāya - wave.
 
     Viśākhā and the other sakhīs sing songs in many rāgas. With cāmaras the priya-narma-sakhīs fan the divine couple.
 

Text 6 
 
śrī-rādhā-mādhaba-pada-sarasija-āśe
bhakatibinoda sakhī-pade sukhe bhāse
 
     śrī-rādhā-mādhaba - of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; pada - feet;sarasija - lotus; āśe - hope; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; sakhī-pade - at the sakhis' feet; sukhe - in happiness;bhāse - floats.
 
     Yearning to attain the lotus feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Bhaktivinoda floats in happiness at the gopīs' feet.

 

Song 4
Śrī Bhoga-ārati
Arati for Offering Food
 

Text 1
 
bhaja bhakata-batasala śrī-gaura-hari
śrī-gaura-hari sohi goṣṭha-bihārī nanda-jaśomatī-citta-hārī
 
     bhaja - please worship; bhakata - the devotees; batasala - who loves; śrī-gaura-hari - Lord Caitanya; śrī-gaura-hari - Lord Caitanya; sohi goṣṭha-bihārī - who enkoys pastimes in Vraja; nanda-jaśomatī - of Nanda and Yaśodā; citta - the heart; hārī - enchanting.
 
     Please worship Lord Caitanya, who is Lord Kṛṣṇa with a fair complexion, Lord Kṛṣṇa who loves His devotees, who plays in Vraja, and who charms Nanda's and Yaśodā's hearts.
 

Text 2 
 
bela ho'lo dāmodara aisa ekhana
bhoga-mandire basi' karaho bhojana
 
     bela - late; ho'laḥ - is; dāmodara - O Kṛṣṇa; aisaekhana - one; bhoga-mandire - in the dining room; basi' - sitting; karahaḥ - do; bhojana - meal.
 
     "Kṛṣṇa! It's late! Sit down in the dining room and eat."
 

Text 3 
 
nandera nideśe baise giri-bara-dhārī
baladeba saha sakha baise sāri sāri
 
     nandera - of Nanda; nideśe - by the order; baise - sit;giri-bara-dhārī - Kṛṣṇa,the liufter of Govardhana Hill; baladeba - Balarāma; saha - with; sakha - friends; baise - sit; sāri - in rows;sāri - and rows.
 
     By Nanda's order, Kṛṣṇa sits next to Balarāma. Their friends sit in row after row.
 

Text 4 
 
śukatā-śākādi bhāji nālitā kusmaṇḍa
ḍāli ḍālnā dugdha-tumbī dadhi mocā-khaṇda
 
     śukatā - sukta; śāka - āśka; ādi - beginning with;bhāji - fried vegetables; nālitā - jute-leaf salad; kusmaṇḍa - pumpkin; ḍāli - baskets of fruit; ḍālnā - dāl-cakes; dugdha - in milk; tumbī - squash;dadhi - yogurt; mocā-khaṇda - banana flowers.
 
     There are śuktā, śāka, and other vegetables, fried things, jute-leaves, pumpkin, fruit-baskets, dāl-cakes, squash cooked in milk, yogurt, banana flowers, . . .
 

Text 5 
 
mugdha-bor6ā māṣa-bor6ā roṭikā ghṛtānna
śaṣkulī piṣṭaka khīra puli pāyasānna
 
     mugdha-bor6ā - mung-dal cakes; māṣa-bor6ā - urad dal cakes; roṭikā - capatis; ghṛtānna - rice cooked in ghee;śaṣkulī - sesame sweets; piṣṭaka - rice-flour sweets; khīra - milk-pudding; puli - cakesfloating in milk; pāyasānna - sweet-rice.
 
 . . . mung-dāla cakes, urad-dāl cakes, capātis, rice with ghee, sesame sweets, rice sweets, milk-pudding, cakes floating in milk, sweet-rice, . . .
 

Text 6 
 
karpūra amṛta-keli rambhā khīra-sāra
amṛta rasālā amla dwādaśa prakāra
 
     karpūra - with camphor; amṛta-keli - amrta-keli;rambhā - banana; khīra-sāra - cream; amṛta - nectar; rasālā - mangoes; amla - sour; dwādaśa - twelve; prakāra - kinds.
 
 . . . camphor amṛta-keli, bananas, cream, nectar, mangoes, twelve kinds of sour foods, . . .
 

Text 7 
 
luci cini sarapurī laḍḍu rasābali
b"P1hojana korena kṛṣṇa ho'ye kutūhali
 
     luci - puris; cini - sugar; sarapurī - sarapuris;laḍḍu - laddus; rasābali - rasavali; bhojana - meal; korena - does;kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; ho'ye - is; kutūhali - happy.
 
 . . . puris, sugar, cream puris, laḍūs, and rasāvalis. Enjoying this meal, Kṛṣṇa is happy.
 

Text 8 
 
rādhikāra pakka anna bibidha byañjana
parama ānande kṛṣṇa korena bhojana
 
     rādhikāra - by Śrī Rādhā; pakka - cooked; anna - rice; bibidha - various; byañjana - vegetables; parama - great; ānande - with bliss; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; korena - deoes; bhojana - eating..
 
     Kṛṣṇa very happily eats the rice and different vegetables Rādhā cooked.
 

Text 9 
 
chale bale laḍḍu khāya śrī-madhumaṅgala
bagala bājāya āra deya hari bolo
 
     chale - tricks; bale - by force; laḍḍu - laddus;khāya - eats; śrī-madhumaṅgala - Śrī Madhumaṅgala; bagala - armpits; bājāya - sounding; āra - also; deya - does; haribolaḥ - Haribol!
 
     By tricks or by force Śrī Madhumaṅgala eats laḍḍus. Then he slaps his armpits and calls out, "Haribol!^"
 

Text 10 
 
rādhikādi gaṇe heri' nayanera koṇe
tṛpta ho'ye khāya kṛṣṇa jaśodā-bhabane
 
     rādhikā - Rādhā; ādi - beginning; gaṇe - the multitude; heri' - gazing; nayanera - of the eyes; koṇe - from the corners;tṛpta - pleased; ho'ye - become; khāya - eats; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; jaśodā-bhabane - in Yaśodā's home.
 
     In Yaśodā's home Kṛṣṇa eats until He is satisfied. From the corners of their eyes, Rādhā and the gopīs gaze at Him.
 

Text 11
 
bhojanānte piye kṛṣṇa subāsita bāri
sabe mukha prakhāloya ho'ye sāri sāri
 
     bhojana - the meal; ante - at the end; piye - sips;kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; subāsita - scented; bāri - water; sabe - all; mukha - mouths; prakhāloya - washing; ho'ye - do; sāri - row; sāri - after row.
 
     At the meal's end Kṛṣṇa sips scented water. In row after row everyone rinses his mouth.

 
Text 12 
 
hasta-mukha prakhāliyā jata sakha-gaṇe
ānande biśrāma kore baladeba-sane
 
     hasta - hands; mukha - and mouth; prakhāliyā - washing; jata - which; sakha-gaṇe - friends; ānande - happily;biśrāma - rest; kore - do; baladeba-sane - with Balarāma.
 
     After washing their hands and mouths, Kṛṣṇa's friends take a nap with Balarāma.
 

Text 13 
 
jāmbula rasāla āne tāmbūla-masālā
tāhā kheye kṛṣṇacandra sukhe nidrā gelā
 
     jāmbula - Jāmbula; rasāla - and Rasāla; āne - bring; tāmbūla - betelnuts; masālā - and spices; tāhā - that;kheye - chewing; kṛṣṇacandra - Kṛṣṇa; sukhe - happily; nidrā - to sleep;gelā - goes.
 
     Jāmbula and Rasāla bring betelnuts and spices. Chewing that, Kṛṣṇa happily goes to sleep.
 

Text 14 
 
bilāsaka śikhi-puccha-cāmara ḍhulāya
apūrba śayyāya kṛṣṇa sukhe nidrā jāya
 
     bilāsaka - Vilāsaka; śikhi-puccha-cāmara - a peacock-feather fan; ḍhulāya - waves; apūrba - peerless; śayyāya - on a bed; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; sukhe - happily;nidrā - to sleep; jāya - goes.
 
     As Vilāsaka moves a peacock-feather fan, Kṛṣṇa happily sleeps on a wonderful bed.
 

Text 15 
 
jaśomatī-ājñā pe'ye dhaniṣṭha-ānīto
śrī-kṛṣṇa-prasāda rādhā bhuñje ho'ye prīto
 
     jaśomatī - of Mother Yaśodā; ājñā - the command; pe'ye - attaining; dhaniṣṭha-ānītaḥ - brought by Dhaniṣṭhā; śrī-kṛṣṇa - of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; prasāda - the prasadam; rādhā - Rādhā; bhuñje - eats;ho'ye - becomes; prītaḥ - pleased.
 
     By Mother Yaśodā's command, Rādhā happily eats the Kṛṣṇa-prasādam Dhaniṣṭhā brings.
 

Text 16 
 
lalitādi sakhī-gaṇa abaśeṣa pāya
mane mane sukhe rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa gāya
 
     lalitā - Lalitā; ādi - beginning with; sakhī-gaṇa – the gopīs; abaśeṣa - remnants; pāya - attaining; mane mane - in theirhearts; sukhe - happy; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa - the glories of Śrī Śrī r-Kṛṣṇa;gāya - sing.
 
     Honoring the remnants of that meal, with happy hearts Lalitā and the gopīs sing Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's glories.
 

Text 17 
 
hari-līlā eka-mātra jāhāra pramoda
bhogārati gāya ṭhākur bhakatibinoda
 
     hari - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; līlā - pastimes; eka - one;mātra - only; jāhāra - of whom; pramoda - joy; bhoga - of a meal;ārati - arati; gāya - sings; ṭhākur bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda \Thākura.
 
     Bhaktivinoda \Thākura, whose only joy is Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, sings this ārati of the Lord's meal.

 
 

Part 3 Prasāda-sebāya



Song 1
 

Text 1
 
bhāi re 
śarīra abidyā-jāl         jodendriya tahe kāl
jībe phele biṣaya-sāgore
tā'ra madhye jihwā ati         lobhamoya su-durmati
tā'ke jeta kaṭhina somsāre
 
     bhāi - brothers; re - O; śarīra - this material body;abidyā - of ignorance; jāl - a trap; joḍa - material; indriya - senses; tāhe - this; kāl - time; jībe - the soul; phele - throws; biṣaya - of material sense enjoyment; sāgore - into an ocean; tā'ra - of that; madhye - in the midst;jihwā - tongue; ati - very; lobhamoya - greedy; su-durmati - wicked; ta'ke - that; jeta - to control; kaṭhina - difficult; somsāre - in the material world.
 
     O my brothers, this material body is a lump of ignorance, and the senses are a network of paths to death. Somehow we have fallen into this ocean of material sense enjoyment, and of all 
the senses the tongue is the most voracious and uncontrollable. It is very difficult to conquer the tongue in this world.*
 

Text 2 
 
kṛṣṇa bor6o doyāmoy       karibāre jihwā joy
swa-prasādānna dilo bhāi
sei annāmṛta khāo        rādhā-kṛṣṇa guṇa gāo
preme ḍāko caitanya-nitāi
 
     kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; bor6aḥ - very; doyāmoy - kind;karibāre - to do; jihwā - tongue; joy - conquest; swa - own; prasāda - mercy; anna - food; dilaḥ - gives; bhāi - O brothers; sei - this; anna - food; amṛta - nectar; khāaḥ - eat; rādhā-kṛṣṇa - Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa;guṇa - virtues; gāaḥ - sing; preme - with love; ḍākaḥ - call out; caitanyanitāi - Caitanya - Nitāi.
 
     But You, dear Kṛṣṇa, are very kind to us and have given us such nice prasādam just to control the tongue. Now let us take this prasādam to our full satisfaction and glorify You, Śrī Śrī 
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and in love call out for the help of Lord Caitanya and Nityānanda.*

 

Song 2
 

Text 1
 
bhāi re 
eka-dina śāntipure         prabhu adwaitera ghare
dui prabhu bhojane bosilo
śāka kori' āswādana      prabhu bole bhakta-gaṇa
ei śāka kṛṣṇa āswādilo
 
     bhāi - brothers; re - O; eka-dina - on day; śāntipure - atSantipura; prabhu - Lord; adwaitera - of Advaita; ghare - at thehome; dui-the two; prabhu - the Lords; bhojane - to eat; bosilaḥ - sat; śāka - śāka; kori' - did; āswādana - tasting; prabhu - the Lord;bole - said; bhakta-gaṇa - O devotees; ei - thisd; śāka - śāka;kṛṣṇa - Lord Kṛṣṇa; āswadilaḥ - tasted.
 
     O my brothers, one day, at Lord Advaita's home in Śāntipura, the two Lords sat down to eat. Tasting the śāka, Lord Caitanya said to the devotees, "Lord Kṛṣṇa has tasted this śāka.
 

Text 2 
 
heno śāka āswādane       kṛṣṇa-prema aise mane
sei preme koro āswādana
jaḍa buddhi parihari'         prasāda-bhojana kori'
hari hari bolo sarba-jana
 
     henaḥ - like this; śāka - śāka; āswādane - in tasting; kṛṣṇa-prema - pure love for Lord Kṛṣṇa; aise - ayyains; mane - inthe heart; sei - that; preme - love; koraḥ - do; āswādana - tasting; jaḍa - material; buddhi - conceptions;parihari' - defeating; prasāda-bhojana - eating prasadam; kori'      - doing; hari hari - Hari! Hari!; bolaḥ -  - say; sarba-jana -  - everyone.
 
     "Tasting śāka like this makes pure love for Kṛṣṇa rise in the heart. Please taste that love. Renouncing all material misconceptions, everyone please taste prasādam and chant, `Hari! 
Hari!' "

 

Song 3
 

Text 1
 
bhāi re 
śacīra aṅgane kabhu        mādhabendra purī prabhu
prasādānna korena bhojana
khāite khāite tā'ra      ailo prema su-durbāra
bole śuno sannyāsīra gaṇa
 
     bhāi - brothers; re - O; śacīra - of Scai; aṅgane - in thecourtyard; kabhu - when; mādhabendra purī - Madhavendra Puri;prabhu - the Lord; prasādānna - prasadam food; korena - did; bhojana - eating;khāite - to eat; khāite - to eat; tā'ra - of that; ailaḥ - was; prema - love; su-durbāra - irresistable; bale - by the power; śunaḥ - please hear; sannyāsīra - of sannyasis; gaṇa - O host.
 
     O my brothers, O sannyāsīs, please listen. When, eating and eating, he honored the Lord's prasādam in Mother Śacī's courtyard, Mādhavendra Purī became overwhelmed with ecstatic 
love.
 

Text 2 
 
mocā-ghaṇṭa phula-bor6i        ḍāli ḍālnā caccor6i
śacī mātā korilo randhana
ta'ra śuddha bhakti heri'          bhojana korilo hari
sudhā-sama e anna-byañjana
 
     mocā-ghaṇṭa - banana flowers; phula-bor6i - dal cakes; ḍāli - baskets of fruit; ḍālnā - dal cakes; caccor6i - spicy vegetables; śacī - Śacī; mātā - Mother; korilaḥ - did; randhana - coking; ta'ra - of that; śuddha - pure;bhakti - devotion; heri' - seeing; bhojana - eating; korilaḥ - did; hari - Lord Kṛṣṇa; sudhā-sama - like nectar; e - this; anna - rice; byañjana - andvegetables.
 
     Mother Śacī cooked banana flowers, dāl cakes, and caccor6i spicy vegetables. Seeing her pure devotion, Lord Kṛṣṇa ate her rice and vegetables, which were delicious like nectar.
 

Text 3 
 
joge jogī pāya jāhā      bhoge āja ha'be tāhā
hari boli' khao sabe bhāi
kṛṣṇera prasāda-anna          tri-jagata kore dhanya
tripurāri nāce jāhā pāi
 
     joge - by yoga; jogī - the yogis; pāya - attaining;jāhā - whom; bhoge - by eating; āja - now; ha'be - will be; tāhā - of that; hari - Hari!; boli' - saying; khaaḥ - please eat;sabe - everyone; bhāi - O my brothers; kṛṣṇera - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; prasāda-anna - the prasadam food; tri-jagata - the three worlds; kore - does; dhanya - glory; tripurāri - Lord Śiva;nāce - dances; jāhā - which; pāi - attaining.
 
     What the yogīs obtain by practicing yoga will today be obtained by eating. O my brothers, please chant "Hari!" and eat Kṛṣṇa-prasādam. The three worlds glorify Kṛṣṇa-prasādam. When he obtains it, Lord Śiva dances.

 
 

Song 4
 

Text 1
 
bhāi re 
śrī-caitanya nityānanada        śrībāsādi bhakta-bṛnda
gaurīdāsa paṇḍitera ghare
luci cini khīra sāra          miṭhāi pāyasa āra
piṭhā-pānā āswādana kore
 
     bhāi - brothers; re - O; śrī-caitanya - Śrī Caitanya; nityānanada - Nityānanda; śrībāsa - Śrīvāsa; ādi - beginning; bhakta - devotees; bṛnda - multitude; gaurīdāsa paṇḍitera - of gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita; ghare - at the home; luci - puris; cini - sugar; khīra - milk; sāra - cream; miṭhāi - sweets; pāyasa - sweet-rice; āra - and;piṭhā - sweet cakes; pānā - nectar drinks; āswādana - tasted; kore - did.
 
     Lord Caitanya, Lord Nityānanda, Śrīvāsa, and a host of devotees enjoyed puris, sugar, milk, cream, sweet-rice, sweet-cakes, sweets, and nectar drinks at Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita's home.
 

Text 2 
 
mahāprabhu bhakta-gaṇe        parama-ānanda-mane
ājñā dilo korite bhojana
kṛṣṇera prasāda-anna          bhojane ho-iyā dhanya
kṛṣṇa boli' ḍāke sarba-jana
 
     mahāprabhu - Lord Caitanya; bhakta-gaṇe - with the devotees; parama-ānanda-mane - blissful at heart;ājñā - order; dilaḥ - gave; korite - top do; bhojana - eating; kṛṣṇera - ofLord Kṛṣṇa; prasāda-anna - the prasadam food; bhojane - eating; ho-iyā - doing; dhanya - fortunate; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;boli' - saying; ḍāke - called out; sarba-jana - everyone.
 
     With a joyful heart Lord Caitanya commanded the devotees to eat. Eating the Kṛṣṇa-prasādam food, the fortunate devotees called out, "Kṛṣṇa!"

 

Song 5
 

Text 1
 
bhāi re 
eka-dina nīlācale          prasāda-sebana-kāle
mahāprabhu śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya
bolilena bhakta-gaṇe          khecarānna śuddha-mane
sebā kori' hao āja dhanya
 
     bhāi - brothers; re - O; eka-dina - one day; nīlācale - inJagannatha Puri; prasāda - prasadam; sebana - of honoring;kāle - at the time; mahāprabhu - Mahāprabhu; śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya - Śrī KṛṣṇaCaitanya; bolilena - said; bhakta-gaṇe - to the devotees; khecarānna - khicari; śuddha-mane - with a pure heart; sebā - honor; kori' - doing; haaḥ - may be; āja - today; dhanya - fortunate and glorious.
 
     O my brothers, one day, in Jagannātha Purī, at the time of honoring prasādam, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu said to the devotees, "By honoring this khicari with pure hearts, you 
have today become fortunate and glorious.
 

Text 2 
 
khecarānna piṭhā-pāna         apūrba prasāda nānā
jagannātha dilo tomā sabe
ākaṇṭha bhojana kori'         bolo mukhe hari hari
abidyā-durita nāhi rabe
 
     khecarānna - khicari; piṭhā - sweets; pāna - nectar drinks; apūrba - wonderful; prasāda - prasadam; nānā - various; jagannātha - Lord Jagannātha; dilaḥ - has given; tomā - to you; sabe - all; ākaṇṭha - up to the necks; bhojana - eating;kori' - doing; bolaḥ - say; mukhe - with the mouth; hari - Hari; hari - Hari;abidyā - ignorance; durita - and sin; nāhi - not; rabe - speak.
 
     "Lord Jagannātha has given you this kichari and these wonderful sweets, nectar drinks, and other wonderful kinds of prasādam. Eat up to your necks and chant "Hari! Hari!" Then sin and illusion will not say to you a single word.
 

Text 3 
 
jagannātha-prasādānna         biriñci-śambhura manya
khāile prema hoibe udoya
emona durlabha dhana          paiyācho sarba-jana
jaya jaya jagannātha jaya
 
     jagannātha - of Lord Jagannātha; prasāda - prasadam; anna - food; biriñci - by Brahmā; śambhura - and Śiva;manya - honored; khāile - eat; prema - love; hoibe - will be; udoya - arisal; 
emona - this; durlabha - rare; dhana - wealth;paiyāchaḥ - attained; sarba - all; jana - people; jaya - glory; jaya - glory;jagannātha - to Lord Jagannātha; jaya - glory.
 
     "Brahmā and Śiva worship Lord Jagannātha's prasādam. When a person eats it, ecstatic spiritual love rises within him. Now all of you have attained this rare treasure. Glory, glory, glory to Lord Jagannātha!"

 

Song 6
 

Text 1
 
bhāi re 
rāma-kṛṣṇa go-caraṇe        jaibena dūra bane
eta cinti' jaśodā rohiṇī
khīra sāra chānā nanī         du'jane khāowano āni'
bātsalye ānanda mane gaṇi'
 
     bhāi - brothers; re - O; rāma-kṛṣṇa - Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa; gaḥ - the cows; caraṇe - herding; jaibena - went; dūra - faraway; bane - in the forest; eta - this; cinti' - thinking; jaśodā - Yaśodā; rohiṇī - and Rohiṇī;khīra - milk; sāra - cream; chānā - curds; nanī - butter; du'jane - two people; khāowanaḥ - feed; āni' - bringing; bātsalye - out of parental love; ānanda - bliss; mane - withheart; gaṇi' - considering.
 
     O my brothers, thinking, "Herding the cows, Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa have gone far into the forest," with joyful hearts Yaśodā and Rohiṇī brought milk, cream, curds, and butter for 
Them to eat.
 

Text 2 
 
bayasya rākhāla-gaṇe          khāya rāma-kṛṣṇa-sane
nāce gāya ānanda-antore
kṛṣṇera prasāda khāya         udara bhoriyā jāya
āra deo āre deo kore
 
     bayasya - friends; rākhāla-gaṇe - cowherd boys; khāya - eating; rāma-kṛṣṇa-sane - with Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa; nāce - dance; gāya - singing; ānanda-antore - with joyful hearts; kṛṣṇera - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; prasāda - the prasādam; khāya - eating; udara - belly; bhoriyā - filling; jāya - glory; āra - more; deaḥ - give; āre - more; deaḥ - give; kore - do.
 
     Accompanied by Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa, with joyful hearts the cowherd friends eat, sing, and dance. Eating Lord Kṛṣṇa's prasādam, the boys fill their bellies. Then they say,  “Give us more. Give us more."




Part 4 Śrī Nāgara-kīrtana



Song 1
 

Text 1
 
nadīyā-godrume nityānanda mahājana
pātiyāche nāma-haṭṭa jībera karaṇa
 
     nadīyā - in Nadīya; godrume - in Godruma; nityānanda - Nityānanda; mahājana - the great soul; pātiyāche – has established; nāma - of the holy name; haṭṭa - a marketplace; jībera - the souls; karaṇa - for thepurpose.
 
     In Nadīyā's Godruma the great soul Lord Nityānanda has opened a marketplace to sell the holy name to the conditioned souls.
 

Text 2 
 
(śraddhābān jana he śraddhābān jana he)
prabhura ājñāya bhāi māgi ei bhikhā 
bolo kṛṣṇa bhajo kṛṣṇa koro kṛṣṇa-śikhā
 
     śraddhābān - faithful; jana - people; he - O; śraddhābān - faithful; jana - people; he - O; prabhura - of theLord; ājñāya - by the order; bhāi - O my brothers; māgi - I be;ei - this; 
bhikhā - charity; bolaḥ - please chant; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;bhajaḥ - worship; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; koraḥ - do; 
kṛṣṇa - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; śikhā - learning and teaching.
 
     (O faithful people, O faithful people,) O my brothers, by the Lord's command I ask this charity of you: Please chant,  Kṛṣṇa!", worship Kṛṣṇa, and learn and teach about Kṛṣṇa.
 

Text 3 
 
aparādha-śūnya ho'ye loha kṛṣṇa-nāma
kṛṣṇa mātā kṛṣṇa pitā kṛṣṇa dhana prāṇa
 
     aparādha - offenses; śūnya - without; ho'ye - doing;loha - accept; kṛṣṇa-nāma - the holy names of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;mātā - mother; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; pitā - father; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; dhana - wealth;prāṇa - life.
 
     Chant Kṛṣṇa's name without offense. Accept Kṛṣṇa as your mother. Accept Kṛṣṇa as your father. Accept Kṛṣṇa as your wealth and your life.

 
Text 4 
 
kṛṣṇera soṁsāra koro chār6i' anācāra
jībe doyā kṛṣṇa-nāma sarba-dharma-sāra
 
     kṛṣṇera - of Kṛṣṇa; soṁsāra - world; koraḥ - do; chār6i' - renmouncing; anācāra - sins; jībe - to the souls;doyā - mercy; kṛṣṇa - of Kṛṣṇa; nāma - the holy name; sarba-dharam-sāra – the essence of all religion.
 
     Give up all sins. Make Kṛṣṇa your whole world. Be merciful to all souls. Chant Kṛṣṇa's names. That is the essence of all religion.

 

Song 2
 

Text 1
 
gāya gorā madhur sware 
hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare
hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare
 
     gāya - singing; gorā - Lord Caitanya; madhuḥ - sweet;sware - voice; hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa 
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare - the mahā-mantra.
 
     With a sweet voice Lord Caitanya sings, "Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare."
 

Text 2 
 
gṛhe thāko, bane thāko, sadā hari bole ḍāko
sukhe duḥkhe bhulo nā'ko, badane hari-nām koro re
 
     gṛhe - at home; thāko, - stay; bane - in the forest;thāko, - stay; sadā - always; hari - Hari; bole - say; ḍākaḥ - out loud; sukhe - in happiness; duḥkhe - in distress; bhulaḥ - forget; nā'ko, - don't;badane - on the mouth; hari-nām - the name of Lord Hari; koraḥ - do; re - Oh.
 
     Stay at home or stay in the forest, but always call out, "Hari!" Either in happiness or distress, never forget to place in your mouth Lord Hari's holy names.
 

Text 3 
 
māyā-jāle baddha hoye, ācho miche kāja lo'ye
ekhona cetana pe'ye, rādhā-mādhaba nām bolo re
 
     māyā - of illusions; jāle - in the trap; baddha - bound;hoye - is; āchaḥ - is; miche - false; kāja - work; lo'ye - accept;ekhona - one; cetana - consciousness; pe'ye, - attaining; rādhā-mādhaba - Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; nām - names; bolaḥ - chant; re - Oh.
 
     You were caught in Māyā's trap. Your work was only illusion. Aware of that, please chant Rādhā and Mādhava's names.
 

Text 4 
 
jībana hoilo śeṣa, na bhojilo hṛṣīkeśa
bhaktibinodopadeśa, ek-bār nām-rase māto re
 
     jībana - life; hoilaḥ - is; śeṣa, - at the end;na - not; bhojilaḥ - worshiped; hṛṣīkeśa - Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhaktibinoda - of Bhaktivinoda; upadeśa - the teaching; ek-bāḥ - onetime; nām-rase - the nectar of the holy name;mātaḥ - intoxicated; re - Oh.
 
     Your life is ending. You did not worship Kṛṣṇa, the master of the senses. Bhaktivinoda's teaching is: "Just once become drunk on the nectar of the holy name."

 

Song 3
 

Text 1
 
ek-bār bhābo mane 
āśā-baśe bhrami' hethā, pā'be ki sukha jībane
ke tumi kothāy chile, ki korite hethā ele
kibā kāj kore' gele, jā'be kothā śarīra-patane
 
     ek - one; bāḥ - time; bhābaḥ - think; mane - in yourheart; āśā - of desire; baśe - under the control; bhrami' - wandering;hethā, - here; pā'be - will attain; ki - what?; sukha - happiness; jībane - inlife; ke - who?; tumi - you; kothāy - from where?; chile, - come;ki - what; korite - to 
do; hethā - here; ele - come; kibā - what?;kāj - work; kore' - does; gele, - gone; jā'be - will go; kothā - where?; śarīra - whenthe body; patane - falls.
 
     Just once, think in your heart. As you wander in this life in the grip of material desires, what happiness do you find? Who are you? From where have you come? How did you come here? How will you leave. When this body falls away, where will you go?
 

Text 2 
 
keno sukha duḥkha bhoya, ahamtā-mamatā-moya
tuccha jaya-parajaya, krodha hiṁsā dweṣa anya-jane
bhakatibinoda koya, kori gorā-padāśroya
cid-ānanda-rasa-moya, hao rādhā-kṛṣṇa-nāma-gāne
 
     kenaḥ - why?; sukha - happiness; duḥkha - distress;bhoya, - fear; ahamtā - false ego; mamatā - false possessiveness;moya - consisting; tuccha - insignificant; jaya - victory; parajaya - and defeat; krodha - anger; hiṁsā - violence;dweṣa - hatred; anya-jane - for other people; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda;koya, - says; kori - taking; gorā - of Lord Caitanya; pada - of the feet; āśroya - shelter; cid-ānanda-rasa-moya, - full of blissful spiritual nectar; haaḥ - please do; rādhā-kṛṣṇa - of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; nāma - the names; gāne - songs.
 
     Why do you experience pleasure, pain, fear, pathetic victory and defeat, anger, violence, and hatred for others? All these come from material thoughts of "I" and "mine". Bhaktivinoda says: Please take shelter of Lord Caitanya's feet and become filled with the nectar of spiritual bliss as you sing the names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

 

Song 4
 

Text 1
 
rādhā-kṛṣṇa bol bol bolo re sobhāi 
(ei) śikhā diyā          saba nadīyā
phirche nece' gaur-nitāi
(miche) māyāra bośe      jāccho bese'
khaccho hābuḍubu bhāi
 
     rādhā-kṛṣṇa - Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; bol - chant; bol - chant; bolaḥ - chant; re - O; sobhāi - everyone; ei - this; śikhā - teaching;diyā - giving; saba - all; nadīyā - Nadīyā; phirche -  - go; nece' - dance; gaur-nitāi - Gaura-Nitāi; miche - false; māyāra - of Maya;bośe - under the control; jāccho bese'      khaccho hābuḍubu - tossed to and fro by the waves; bhāi - O brothers.
 
Please chant, "Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa!"

     Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanada, while dancing in the streets of Nadīyā, said, "All of you please chant: Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa! Why are you washed away by the waves of Māyā? The whole 
day and night you are full of anxieties. Why are you struggling in the ocean of Māyā, sometimes drowning and sometimes coming up?*
 

Text 2 
 
(jīb) kṛṣṇa-dās          e biśwās
korle to' ar duḥkho nāi
(kṛṣṇa) bolbe jabe       pulak habe
jhorbe āṅkhi boli tāi
 
     jīb - the individual soul; kṛṣṇa-dāḥ - a servant of Lord Kṛṣṇa; e - this; biśwāḥ - faith; korle - do;to' - that; aḥ - or; duḥkhaḥ - suffering; nāi - not; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; bolbe - say; jabe - when; pulak - hairsstanding erect; habe - will be; jhorbe - flowing of tears; āṅkhi - in the eyes;boli - say; tāi - that.
 
     "Believe that you are servants of Lord Kṛṣṇa. As soon as you come to that point, immediately all your troubles will cease.* Chant `Kṛṣṇa!' Tears will fill your eyes, and the hairs of your body will stand erect.
 

Text 3 
(rādhā) kṛṣṇa bolo       saṅge colo
ei-mātra bhikhā cāi
(jaya) sakala bipoda          bhaktibinoda
bole jakhona o-nāma gāi
     
rādhā - Rādhā; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; bolaḥ - say;saṅge - in association; colaḥ - go; ei-mātra - this only;bhikhā - charity; cāi - I wish; jaya - victory; sakala - all; bipoda - calamity; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; bole - says; jakhona - what; onāma - the holy names; gāi - saing.

     "Whenever I chant `Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa!' I become free of all kinds of dangers. Simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and follow me, so your struggle for existence in this material world will cease."* This Bhaktivinoda says. 




Song 5
 

    

Text 1
 
gāya gorācanda jībera tore
hare kṛṣṇa hare 
hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare
hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare

 To deliver the conditioned souls, Lord Caitanya sings,  Hare! Kṛṣṇa! Hare!" 
     He sings, "Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare."
  
Text 2 
 
eka-bāra bolo rasanā uccaiḥ-sware
(bolo) nandera nandana        jaśodā-jībana
śrī-rādhā-ramaṇa prema-bhare
 
     eka - one; bāra - time; bolaḥ - chant; rasanā - tongue; uccaiḥ-sware - with a loud voice; (bolo) - cvhant; nandera - of Nanda;nandana - the son; jaśodā-jībana - the life of Yaśodā; śrī-rādhā-ramaṇa - the lover of Rādhā; prema-bhare - with great love.
 
     "Just once with great love make your tongues loudly chant: `Nanda-nandana (son of Nanda)! Yaśodā-jīvana (life of Yaśodā)! Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa (lover of Śrī Rādhā)! 
 

Text 3 
 
(bolo) śrī-madhūsudana gopī-prāṇadhana
muralī-badana nṛtya kore
(bolo) agha-nisūdana          pūtanā-ghātana
brahma-vimohana ūrdhwa-kore
 
     bolaḥ - chant; śrī-madhūsudana - killer of Madhu; gopī-prāṇadhana - life of the gopīs; muralī-badana - flutist; nṛtya - dance; kore - do; (bolo) - chant; agha-nisūdana – killer of Agha; pūtanā-ghātana - killer of Putana; brahma-vimohana - bewilderer of Brahmā; ūrdhwa-kore - raising your hands.
 
     "Raising your hands, chant: `Śrī Madhūsudana (killer of Madhu)! Gopī-prāṇadhana (life of the gopīs)! Muralī-vadana(flute-player)!', and dance. Chant, `Agha-nisūdana (killer of Agha)! Pūtanā-ghātana (killer of Pūtanā)! Brahma-vimohana (bewilderer of Brahmā)! 
 

Song 6
 

Text 1
 
aṅga-upaṅga-astra-pārṣada-saṅge
nāco-i bhāba-mūrati gorā raṅge
 
     aṅga - associates; upaṅga - servitors; astra - weapons; pārṣada - confidential companions; saṅge - in the association of; nāco-i - dances; bhāba - of ecstatic love; mūrati - the form;
gorā - Lord Caitanya; raṅge - with joy.
 
     Accompanied by His associates, servants, weapons, and confidential companions, Lord Caitanya, who is ecstatic love personified, joyfully danced.
 

Text 2 
 
gā-ota kali-yuga-pābana nāma
bhrama-i śacī-suta nadīyā-dhāma
 
     gā-ota - sings; kali-yuga-pābana - the purifier of the Kali-yuga; nāma - name; bhrama-i - wanders; śacī-suta - Śacī'sson; nadīyā-dhāma - in the abode of Nadiya.
 
     Wandering in the abode of Nadiyā, Lord Caitanya, who is Saci's son and the purifier of the Kali-yuga, sings:

Text 3 
(hare) haraye namaḥ kṛṣṇa yādabāya namaḥ
gopāla govinda rāma śrī-madhusūdana

     "Hare Haraye Namaḥ Kṛṣṇa Yādavāya Namaḥ Gopāla Govinda Rāma Śrī Madhusūdana!"




Song 7


Text 1

nitāi ki nāma eneche re
(nitāi) nāma eneche nāmera hāṭe
śraddhā-mūlye nāma diteche re

     nitāi - Lord Nityānanda; ki - what?; nāma - name;eneche - brought; re - O; (nitāi) - Lord Nityānanda; nāma - name;eneche - brought; nāmera - of the name; hāṭe - in the marketplace; 
śraddhā - of faith; mūlye - for the price; nāma - the name; diteche - gives; re - Oh.

     What name did Nityānanda bring? Nityānanda brought a name to the marketplace. Asking only the price of faith, He sells that name. 

Text 2 

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare
hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare

     "Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare."

Text 3 
(nitāi) jībera daśā         malina dekhe
nāma eneche braja theke re
e nāma siba jape pañca-mukhe re
(madhura e hari-nāma)
e nāma brahmā jape catur-mukhe re
(madhura e hari-nāma)
e nāma nārada jape bīṇā-tantre re
(madhura e hari-nāma)
e nāmābhāse ajāmilo baikuṇṭhe gelo re
e nāma bolte bolte braje calo re
(bhaktibinoda bole)

     nitāi - Lord Nityānanda; jībera - of the souls; daśā - thecondition; malina - sinful; dekhe - sees; nāma - name; eneche - brings; braja - Vraja; theke - from; re - O; e - this;nāma - name; siba - Śiva; jape - chants; pañca-mukhe - five mouths; re - O;(madhura - sweet; e - thus; hari - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāma - name; e - O; nāma - name; brahmā - Brahmā;jape - chants; catur-
mukhe - four mouths; re - O; (madhura - sweet; e - this;hari-nāma) - name of Lord Kṛṣṇa; 
e - this; nāma - name; nārada - Nārada; jape - chants;bīṇā-tantre - with his vina; re - O; (madhura - sweet; e - thuis; harināma) - name of Lord Kṛṣṇa; e - this; nāma - of the name; ābhāse - the reflection;ajāmilaḥ - Ajāmila; baikuṇṭhe - in Vaikuṇṭha; gelaḥ - went; re - O; e - this; nāma - name; bolte - chants; bolte - chants; braje - in Vraja; calaḥ - go; re - O;(bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; bole - says.

    Seeing the sinful state of the fallen souls, Lord Nityānanda brought the holy name from the realm of Vraja. With his five mouths Śiva chants this holy name. (Lord Kṛṣṇa's name is sweet!) With his four mouths Brahmā chants this holy name. (Lord Kṛṣṇa's name is sweet!) Playing his vīṇā, Nārada chants this holy name. (Lord Kṛṣṇa's name is sweet!) By chanting a dim reflection of this holy name, Ajāmila went to Vaikuṇṭha. (Lord Kṛṣṇa's name is sweet!) (Bhaktivinoda says,) "Chant this holy name and go to the spiritual world of Vraja."




Song 8


     
Text 1
hari bole modera gaura elo
elo re gaurāṅgacānda preme elothelo
nitāi-adwaita-saṅge godrume paśilo
     
elaḥ - went; re - Oh; gaurāṅgacānda - Lord Caitanya;preme - with love; elothelaḥ - overcome; nitāi-adwaita-saṅge - in the company ofNityānanda and Advaita; godrume - Godruma; paśilaḥ - entered.

Joyfully chanting, "Hari!", Lord Caitanya came.
     Overcome with ecstatic love, Lord Caitanya entered Godruma with Nityānanda and Advaita.

Text 2 
saṅkīrtana-rase mete nāma bilāilo
nāmera hāṭe ese preme jagat bhāsāilo

     saṅkīrtana - of saṅkīrtana; rase - with the nectar; mete - intoxicated; nāma - the name; bilāilaḥ - gave;nāmera - of the name; hāṭe - in the marketplace; ese - this; preme - love; jagat - the world; bhāsāilaḥ - made float.

     Intoxicated by tasting the nectar of the holy name, He entered the martketplace of the holy name and gave the holy name away for free. He made the whole world float in ecstatic love.

Text 3 
godruma-bāsīra āja duḥkha dūre gelo
bhakta-bṛnda-saṅge āsi' hāṭa jagailo

     godruma - of Godruma; bāsīra - of the residents; āja - now; duḥkha - sufferings; dūre - far away; gelaḥ - gone; bhaktabṛnda-saṅge - in the association of ther devotees; āsi' - coming; hāṭa - the marketplace; jagailaḥ - awakened.

     Today the sufferings of Godruma's people have fled far away. Accompanied by His devotees, the Lord has awakened the marketplace of the holy name.

Text 4 
nadīyā bhramite gorā elo nāmera hāṭe
gaura elo hāṭe saṅge nitāi elo hāṭe

     nadīyā - in Nadīyā; bhramite - wandering; gorā - LordCaitanya; elaḥ - goes; nāmera - of the holy name; hāṭe - the marketplace; gaura - Lord Caitanya; elaḥ - went; hāṭe - in the marketplace;
saṅge - in the company; nitāi - Lord Nityānanda; elaḥ - goes;hāṭe - in the marketplace.

     Wandering in Nadīyā, Lord Caitanya entered the marketplace of the holy name. When Lord Caitanya entered that marketplace, Lord Nityānanda entered the marketplace with Him.

Text 5 
nāce mātoyārā nitāi godrumera māṭhe
jagat mātāya nitāi premera mālasāṭe

     nāce - dance; mātoyārā - wild; nitāi - Lord Nityānanda; godrumera - of Godruma; māṭhe - in the fileds and pastures;jagat - the world; mātāya - making wild; nitāi - Lord Nityānanda; premera - of love; mālasāṭe - slapping His arms.

     Wild with ecstasy, Lord Nityānanda dances in Godruma's pastures and fields. Clapping His arms in ecstatic love, Lord Nityānanda makes the whole universe wild with ecstasy.

Text 6 
(torā dekhe jā're) 
adwaitādi bhakta-bṛnda nāce ghāṭe ghāṭe
palāya duranta kali por6iyā bibhrāṭe

     tora - you; dekhe - look; jā're - whom; adwaitādi – headed by Advaita Acārya; bhakta-bṛnda - the devotees; nāce - dance;ghāṭe - at ghata; ghāṭe - after ghata; palāya - flees; duranta - ferocious;kali - Kali; por6iyā - falling; bibhrāṭe - into calamity.

     (Everyone come and look!) Led by Advaita, the devotees dance at ghāṭa after ghāṭa. Finding himself in grave danger, ferocious Kali-yuga has fled far away.

Text 7 

ki sukhe bhāsilo jība gorācandera nāṭe
dekhiyā śuniyā pāśaṇḍīra buke phāṭe

     ki - why?; sukhe - in bliss; bhāsilaḥ - float; jība - thesouls; gorācandera - of Lord Caitanya; nāṭe - the dancing;dekhiyā - seeing; śuniyā - hearing; pāśaṇḍīra - of the blasphemers; buke - the 
heart; phāṭe - breaks.

     Why did every soul float in bliss? Seeing and hearing of Lord Caitanya's dancing, even the blasphemers found their hearts break with ecstatic love.




Part 5 Śrīman Mahāprabhura śata-nāma



Song 1


Text 1
nadīyā-nagare nitāi nece' nece' gāya re
jagannātha-suta mahāprabhu biśwambhara
māyāpura-śaśī nabadwīpa-sudhākara

Dancing and dancing in Nadīyā's towns, Lord Nityānanda sang:
O Lord Caitanya, O son of Jagannātha Miśra (Jagannātha-suta), O great Lord (Mahāprabhu), O maintainer of the worlds (Viśvambhara), O moon of Mayapura (Māyāpura-śaśī), O nectar 
moon of Navadvīpa (Navadvīpa-sudhākara)!

Text 2 
śacī-suta gaura-hari nimāi-sundara
rādhā-bhāba-kānti-ācchādita naṭa-bara

O son od Śacī (Śacī-suta), O fair Kṛṣṇa (Gaura-hari), O handsome Nimāi (Nimāi-sundara), O Lord covered by the splendor of Rādhā's ecstatic love (Rādhā-bhāva-kānti-ācchādita), O best of dancers (Naṭa-vara)!

Text 3 
nāmānanda capala bālaka mātṛ-bhakta
brahmāṇḍa-badana tarkī kautukānurakta

O Lord who finds bliss in the holy names (Nāmānanda), O Lord who was a restless child (Capala-bālaka), O Lord devoted to Your mother (Mātṛ-bhakta), O Lord who held the universe in Your mouth (Brahmāṇḍa-vadana), O best of logicians (Tarkī), O playful Lord (Kautukānurakta)!



Text 4 
bidyārthi-ur6upa caura-dwayera mohana
tairthika-sarbaswa grāmya-bālikā-krīḍana

O moon of scholars (Vidyārthi-uḍupa), O Lord who bewildered two thieves (Caura-dwayera mohana), O treasure of a pilgrim (Tairthika-sarvasva), O child who teased the village girls 
(Grāmya-bālikā-krīḍana)!

Text 5 
lakṣmī prati bora-dātā uddhata bālaka
śrī-śacīra pati-putra-śoka-nibāraka

0 Lord who gave a great blessing to Goddess Lakṣmī (Lakṣmī prati bora-dātā), O mischievous child (Uddhata-bālaka), O Lord who removed Śacī's grief at the loss of her 
husband and son (Śrī Śacīra pati-putra-śoka-nibāraka)!

Text 6 
lakṣmī-pati pūrba-deśa-sarba-kleśa-hara
digbijayi-darpa-hārī biṣṇupriyeśwara

O husband of Lakṣmī (Lakṣmī-pati), O Lord who removed all sufferings from the land of East Bengal (Pūrva-deśa-sarva-kleśa-hara), O Lord who removed the Digvijayī Paṇḍita's pride 
(Digvijayi-darpa-hārī), O Lord of Viṣṇupriyā (Viṣṇupriyeśvara)!



Text 7 
ārja-dharma-pāla pitṛ-gayā-piṇḍa-dātā
purī-śiṣya madhwācārja-sampradāya-pātā

O protector of the true religion (Arya-dharma-pāla), O Lord who at Gayā offered piṇḍa for Your father (Pitṛ-gayā-piṇḍa-dātā), O disciple of Iśvara Purī (Purī-śiṣya), O protector of Madhvācārya's sampradāya (Madhvācārya-sampradāya-pātā.

Text 8 
kṛṣṇa-nāmonmatta kṛṣṇa-tattwa-adhyāpaka
nāma-saṅkīrtana-juga-dharma-prabartaka

O Lord wild by chanting Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names (Kṛṣṇa-nāmonmatta), O teacher of the truth about Lord Kṛṣṇa (Kṛṣṇa-tattvādhyāpaka), O Lord who preaches Nāma-saṅkīrtana, the 
religion of the age (Nāma-saṅkīrtana-yuga-dharma-pravartaka)!

Text 9 


adwaita-bāndhaba śrīnibāsa-gṛha-dhana
nityānanda-prāṇa gadādharera jībana

O friend of Advaita (Advaita-bāndhava), O wealth of Śrīvāsa's home (Śrīnivāsa-gṛha-dhana), O life of Nityānanda (Nityānanda-prāṇa), O life of Gadādhara (Gadādhara-jīvana)!



Text 10 
antardwīpa-śaśadhara sīmanta-bijoya
godruma-bihārī madhyadwīpa-lilāśroya

O moon of Antardvīpa (Antardvīpa-śaśadhara), O glory of Sīmantadvīpa (Sīmanta-vijaya), O Lord who enjoys pastimes in Godruma (Godruma-vihārī), O Lord who enjoys pastimes in 
Madhyadvīpa (Madhyadvīpa-lilāśraya)!

Text 11 
koladwīpa-pati ṛtudwīpa-maheśwara
jahnu-modadruma-rudradwīpera īśwara

O master of Koladvīpa (Koladvīpa-pati), O master of \Rtudvīpa (\Rtudvīpa-maheśvara), O master of Jahnudvīpa, Modadrumadvīpa, and Rudradvīpa (Jahnu-modadruma-rudradvīpeśvara)!

Text 12 
navakhaṇda-raṅganātha jāhnabī-jībana
jagāi-mādhāi-ādi-durbṛtta-tāraṇa

O master of the nine islands of Navadvīpa (Navakhaṇda-raṅganātha), O life of Goddess Gaṅgā (Jāhnavī-jīvana), O deliverer of the sinners beginning with Jagāi and Mādhāi (Jagāi-
mādhāi-ādi-durbṛtta-tāraṇa)!



Text 13 
nagara-kīrtana-siṁha kājī-uddharaṇa
śuddha-nāma-pracāraka bhaktārti-haraṇa

O lion of kīrtana in the city (Nagara-kīrtana-siṁha), O deliverer of the Kazi (Kājī-uddharaṇa), O preacher of the pure holy name (Śuddha-nāma-pracāraka), O Lord who removes the devotees' sufferings (Bhaktārti-haraṇa)!

Text 14 
nārāyaṇī-kṛpā-sindhu jībera niyantā
adhama-par6uyā-daṇḍī bhaktadoṣa-hantā

O Lord who was an ocean of mercy to Nārāyaṇī (Nārāyaṇī-kṛpā-sindhu), O master of all souls (Jībera niyantā), O Lord who punished the degraded students (adhama-par6uyā-daṇḍī), O 
Lord who removes the devotees' faults (Bhakta-doṣa-hantā)!

Text 15 
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanyacandra bhāratī-tāraṇa
paribrāja-śiromaṇi utkala-pābana

O Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanyacandra (Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanyacandra), O deliverer of Keśava Bhāratī (Bhāratī-tāraṇa), O crest-jewel of parivrājaka-sannyāsīs (Parivrāja-śiromaṇi), O purifier of 
Orissa (Utkala-pāvana)!



Text 16 
ambu-liṅga-bhūbaneśa-kapoteśa-pati
khīra-cora-gopāla-darśana-sukhī jati

O master of Ambuliṅga, Bhuvaneśvara, and Kapoteśvara (Ambu-liṅga-bhūvaneśa-kapoteśa-pati), O Lord delighted to see Kṣīracora-Gopāla (Kṣīra-cora-gopāla-darśana-sukhī), O best of sannyāsīs (yati)!

Text 17 
nirdaṇḍi-sannyāsī sārbabhauma-kṛpāmoya
swānanda-āswādānandī sarba-sukhāśroya

O Lord whose sannyāsa-daṇḍa was broken (Nirdaṇḍi-sannyāsī), O Lord merciful to Sārvabhauma (Sārvabhauma-kṛpāmaya), O Lord who taste You own transcendental bliss 
(Svānandāsvādānandī), O resting place of all bliss (Sarva-sukhāśraya)!

Text 18 
puraṭa-sundara bāsudeva-trāṇa-kartā
rāmānanda-sakhā bhaṭṭa-kula-kleśa-hartā

O handsome Lord splendid like gold (Puraṭa-sundara), O deliverer of Vāsudeva (Vāsudeva-trāṇa-kartā), O joy of Rāmānanda (Rāmānanda-sakhā), O Lord who removed all troubles from Bhaṭṭa's family (Bhaṭṭa-kula-kleśa-hartā.



Text 19 
bauddha-jaina-māyābādi-kutarka-khaṇḍana
dakhiṇa-pābana bhakti-granthauddharaṇa

O Lord who breaks into pieces the illogical arguments of the Buddhists, Jains, and Māyāvādīs (Bauddha-jaina-māyāvādi-kutarka-khaṇḍana), O Lord who delivered the southern provinces 
(Dakṣiṇa-pāvana), O Lord who rescued some important scriptures describing devotional service (Bhakti-grantha-uddharaṇa)!

Text 20 
ālāla-darśanānandī rathāgra-nartaka
gajapati-trāṇa debānanda-uddhāraka

O Lord delighted to see Alālanātha (Alāla-darśanānandī), O Lord who danced before the Rathayātrā chariot (Rathāgra-nartaka), O deliverer of Mahārāja Pratāparudra (Gajapati-
trāṇa), O deliverer of Devānanda (Devānanda-uddhāraka)!

Text 21 
kuliyā-prakāśe duṣṭa par6uyāra trāṇa
rūpa-sanātana-bandhu sarba-jība-prāṇa

O Lord who, appearing in Kulīyā-grāma, delivered the wicked students (Kuliyā-prakāśe duṣṭa par6uyāra trāṇa), O friend of Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs (Rūpa-sanātana-bandhu), O life of all living entities (Sarva-jīva-prāṇa)!



Text 22 
bṛndābanānanda-mūrti balabhadra-saṅgī
jabana-uddhārī bhaṭṭa-ballabhera raṅgī

O Lord whose form is the bliss of Vṛndāvana (Vṛndāvanānanda-mūrti), O companion of Balabhadra (Balabhadra-saṅgī), O deliverer of the yavanas (Yavana-uddhārī), O Lord 
pleased with Vallabha Bhaṭṭa (Bhaṭṭa-vallabhera raṅgī)!

Text 23 
kāśī-bāsi-sannyāsī-uddhārī prema-dātā
markaṭa-bairāgī-daṇḍī ā-caṇḍāla-trātā

O Lord who delivered the sannyāsīs of Vārāṇasī (Kāśī-vāsi-sannyāsī-uddhārī), O giver of spiritual love (Prema-dātā), O Lord who punished the monkey-like pseudo-sannyāsīs 
(Markaṭa-vairāgi-daṇḍī), O Lord who delivered everyone, even down to the caṇḍālas (\Acaṇḍāla-trātā)!

Text 24 


bhaktera gauraba-kārī bhakta-prāṇa-dhana
haridāsa-raghunātha-swarūpa-jībana

O Lord who honors the devotees (Bhaktera gauraba-kārī), O life and treasure of the devotees (Bhakta-prāṇa-dhana), O life of Haridāsa, Raghunātha dāsa, and Svarūpa Dāmodara (Haridāsa-
raghunātha-svarūpa-jīvana)!

Text 25 
nadīyā-nāgare nitāi nece' nece gāya re
bhakatibinoda tā'ra par6e rāṅgā-pāya re
     nadīyā-nāgare - in the twons of Nadīyā; nitāi - Lord Nityānanda; nece' - dancing; nece - and dancing;gāya - sang; re - O; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; tā'ra - of Him; par6e - falls down; rāṅgā-pāya - at the reddishfeet; re - Oh.
     Dancing and dancing in Nadīyā's towns, Lord Nityānanda sang these names. Bhaktivinoda falls down before His reddish feet.



Song 2

Text 1
jaya godruma-pati gorā
nitāi-jībana        adwaitera dhana
bṛndābana-bhāba-bibhora
gadādhara-prāṇa          śrībāsa-śaraṇa 
kṛṣṇa-bhakta-mānasa-corā

Glory to Lord Caitanya, who is the master of Godruma (Godruma-pati), fair (Gorā), the life of Nityānanda (Nitāi-jībana), the wealth of Advaita (Adwaitera dhana), overcome with the ecstatic love of Vṛndāvana (Bṛndābana-bhāba-bibhorā), the life of Gadādhara (Gadādhara-prāṇa), the shelter of Śrīvāsa (Śrīvāsa-śaraṇa), and the thief who has stolen the Kṛṣṇa-
devotees' hearts (Kṛṣṇa-bhakta-mānasa-corā).



Song 3

Text 1
kali-yuga-pābana biśwambhara
gauḍa-citta-gagana śaśadhara

Lord Caitanya is the purifier of the Kali-yuga (Kali-yuga-pāvana), the maintainer of the worlds (Viśvambhara), the moon in the sky of the hearts of the people of Gauḍa-deśa (Gauḍa-citta-gagana śaśadhara), . . .

Text 2
kīrtana-bidhātā          para-prema-dātā
śacī-suta puraṭa-sundara

...The original author of saṅkīrtana (Kīrtana-vidhātā), the giver of spiritual love (Para-prema-dātā), Śacī's son (Śacī-suta), and splendid like gold (Puraṭa-sundara).



Song 4

Text 1
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya adwaita prabhu nityānanda
gadādhara śrīnibāsa murāri mukunda
swarūpa-rūpa-sanātana purī rāmānanda

Glory to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, Lord Advaita, Lord Nityānanda, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa, Murāri Gupta, Mukunda, Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Iśvara Purī, and Rāmānanda Raya!




Part 6 Śrī Kṛṣṇera Viṁśottara-śata-nāma



Song 1




Text 1
nagare nagare gorā gāya
jaśomatī-stanya-pāyī śrī-nanda-nandana
indranīla-maṇi braja-janera jībana

In town after town Lord Caitanya sings:
O infant who drank at Yaśodā's breast (Yaśomatī-stanya-pāyī), O son of Nanda (Śrī Nanda-nandana), O Lord splendid like sapphires (Indranīla-maṇi), O life of Vraja's people (Braja-
janera jībana)!

Text 2 
śrī-gokula-niśācarī-pūtanā-ghātana
duṣṭa-tṛṇābarta-hantā śakaṭa-bhañjana

O Lord who killed the Pūtanā witch in Gokula (Śrī Gokula-niśācarī-pūtanā-ghātana), O killer of the Tṛṇāvarta demon (Duṣṭa-tṛṇābarta-hantā), O Lord who broke the cart 
(Śakaṭa-bhañjana)!

Text 3 
nabanīta-cora dadhi-haraṇa-kuśala
jamala-arjuna-bhañjī gobinda gopāla

O butter-thief (Navanīta-cora), O child expert at stealing yogurt (Dadhi-haraṇa-kuśala), O child who broke the Yamala-arjuna trees (Yamalārjuna-bhañjī), O Lord who pleases the cows, 
land and senses (Govinda), O protector of the cows (Gopāla)!



Text 4 


dāmodara bṛndābana-go-batsa-rākhāla
batsāsurāntaka hari nija-jana-pāla

O child whose belly was bound by a rope (Dāmodara), O protector of the cows and calves in Vṛndāvana (Bṛndābana-go-batsa-rākhāla), O killer of Vatsāsura (Vatsāsurāntaka), O Lord who takes away all that is inauspicious (Hari), O Lord who protect Your devotees (Nija-jana-pāla)!

Text 5 
baka-śatru agha-hantā brahma-bimohana
dhenuka-nāśana kṛṣṇa kāliya-damana

O enemy of Bakāsura (Baka-śatru), O killer of Aghāsura (Agha-hantā), O Lord who bewildered Brahmā (Brahma-vimohana), O killer of Dhenukāsura (Dhenuka-nāśana), O all-attractive Lord (Kṛṣṇa), O Lord who subdued Kāliya (Kāliya-damana)!

Text 6 
pītāmbara śikhi-piccha-dhārī beṇu-dhara
bhāṇḍīra-kānana-līla dābānala-hara

O Lord dressed in yellow garments (Pītāmbara), O Lord who wears a peacock-feather (Śikhi-piccha-dhārī), O Lord who plays the flute (Veṇu-dhara), O Lord who enjoys pastimes in 
Bhāṇḍīravana (Bhāṇḍīra-kānana-līla), O Lord who swallowed a forest-fire (Dāvānala-hara)!



Text 7 
naṭa-bara guhā-cara śarata-bihārī
ballabī-ballabha deba gopī-bastra-hārī

O best of dancers (Naṭa-vara), O Lord who wanders in caves (Guhā-cara), O Lord who enjoys pastimes in autumn (Śarata-bihārī), O beloved of the gopīs (Ballavī-vallabha), O splendid 
and playful Supreme Personality of Godhead (Deva), O Lord who stole the gopīs' garments (Gopī-vastra-hārī)!

Text 8 
jagya-patnī-gaṇa-prati karuṇara sindhu
gobardhana-dhṛk mādhaba braja-bāsi-bandhu

O ocean of mercy for the yajña-patnīs (Yajña-patnī-gaṇa-prati karuṇara sindhu), O lifter of Govardhana Hill (Govardhana-dhṛk), O husband of the goddess of fortune (Mādhava), O friend of Vraja's residents (Vraja-vāsi-bandhu)!

Text 9 


indra-darpa-hārī nanda-rakhitā mukunda
śrī-gopa-ballabha rāsa-krīḍa pūrṇānanda

O Lord who removed Indra's pride (Indra-darpa-hārī), O protector of Nanda (Nanda-rakṣitā), O giver of liberation (Mukunda), O beloved of the gopas (Śrī Gopa-vallabha), O Lord who enjoys the rāsa-dance pastime (Rāsa-krīḍa), O Lord filled with bliss (Pūrṇānanda)!



Text 10 
śrī-rādhā-ballabha rādhā-mādhaba sundara
lalitā-biśākhā-ādi-sakhī-prāṇeśwara

O beloved of Rādhā (Śrī Rādhā-vallabha), O husband of Rādhā (Rādhā-Mādhava), O handsome Lord (Sundara), O master more dear than life for Lalitā, Viśākhā, and the other sakhīs (Lalitā-Viśākhā-ādi-sakhī-prāṇeśvara)!

Text 11 
naba-jaladhara-kānti madana-mohana
bana-mālī smera-mukha gopī-prāṇa-dhana

O Lord splendid like a new raincloud (Nava-jaladhara-kānti), O Lord more charming than Kāmadeva (Madana-mohana), O Lord decorated with a forest-garland (Vana-mālī), O smiling 
Lord (Smera-mukha), O life of the gopīs (Gopī-prāṇa-dhana)!

Text 12 
tri-bhaṅgī muralī-dhara jāmuna-nāgara
rādhā-kuṇḍa-raṅga-netā rasera sāgara

O Lord whose form bends in three places as You dance (Tri-bhaṅgī), O player of the flute (Muralī-dhara), O hero who enjoys pastimes by the Yamunā (Yāmuna-nāgara), O Lord who 
enjoys pastimes by Rādhā-kuṇḍa (Rādhā-kuṇḍa-raṅga-netā), O ocean of nectar (Rasera sāgara)!



Text 13 
candrābalī-prāṇa-nātha kautukābhilāṣī
rādhā-māna-sulampaṭa milana-prayāsī

O master more dear than life for Candrāvalī (Candrāvalī-prāṇa-nātha), O playful Lord (Kautukābhilāṣī), O rake who makes Rādhā jealous and angry (Rādhā-māna-sulampaṭa), O Lord 
who meets Rādhā (Milana-prayāsī)!



Text 14 
mānasa-gaṅgāra dānī prasūna-taskara
gopī-saha haṭha-kārī braja-baneśwara

O Lord who gave the gift of the Mānasa-gaṅgā (Mānasa-gaṅgāra dānī), O thief of flowers (Prasūna-taskara), O rake who teases the gopīs (Gopī-saha haṭha-kārī), O master of 
Vraja's forests (Vraja-vaneśwara)!

Text 15 
gokula-sampada gopa-duḥkha-nibāraṇa
durmada-damana bhakta-santāpa-haraṇa

O wealth of Gokula (Gokula-sampada), O Lord who removes the gopas' sufferings (Gopa-duḥkha-nibāraṇa), O Lord who subdues the wicked (Durmada-damana), O Lord who removes the devotees' sufferings (Bhakta-santāpa-haraṇa)!



Text 16 
sudarśana-mocana śrī-śaṅkhacūḍāntaka
rāmānuja śyāma-cānda muralī-bādaka

O Lord who delivered the vidyādhara Sudarśana (Sudarśana-mocana), O killer of Śaṅkhacūḍa (Śrī Śaṅkhacūḍāntaka, O younger brother of Balarāma (Rāmānuja), O dark moon of Vraja (Śyāma-candra), O Lord who plays the flute (Muralī-bādaka)!

Text 17 
gopī-gīta-śrotā madhusūdana murāri
ariṣṭa-ghātaka rādhā-kuṇḍādi-bihārī

O Lord who hears the gopīs' songs (Gopī-gīta-śrotā), O killer of the Madhu demon (Madhusūdana), O enemy of the Mura demon (Murāri), O killer of Ariṣṭāsura (Ariṣṭa-ghātaka), 
O Lord who enjoys pastimes at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and other places (Rādhā-kuṇḍādi-vihārī)!

Text 18 
byomāntaka padma-netra keśi-nisūdana
raṅga-krīḍa kaṁsa-hantā malla-praharaṇa

O killer of Vyomāsura (Vyomāntaka), O lotus-eyed Lord (Padma-netra), O killer of Keśī (Keśi-nisūdana), O playful Lord (Raṅga-krīḍa), O killer of Kaṁsa (Kaṁsa-hantā), O killer of Kaṁsa's wrestlers (Malla-praharaṇa)!


Text 19 
basudeba-suta bṛṣṇi-baṁśa-kīrti-dhwaja
dīna-nātha mathureśa debakī-garbha-ja

O son of Vasudeva (Vasudeva-suta), O flag that proclaims the glory of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty (Vṛṣṇi-vaṁśa-kīrti-dhvaja), O master of the poor (Dīna-nātha), O master of Mathurā 
(Mathureśa), O Lord born from Devakī's womb (Devakī-garbha-ja)!

Text 20 
kubjā-kṛpāmoya biṣṇu śauri nārāyaṇa
dwārakeśa naraka-ghna śrī-jadu-nandana

O Lord merciful to Kubjā (Kubjā-kṛpāmaya), O all-pervading Lord (Viṣṇu), O descended of King Śūrasena (Śauri), O resting-place of all living entities (Nārāyaṇa), O master of Dvārakā (Dvārakeśa), O killer of Narakāsura (Naraka-ghna), O descendent of King Yadu (Śrī Yadu-nandana)!

Text 21 
śrī-rukmiṇī-kānta satyā-pati sura-pāla
pāṇḍaba-bāndhaba śiśupālādira kāla

O beloved of Śrī Rukmiṇī (Śrī Rukmiṇī-kānta), O husband of Satyā (Satyā-pati), O protector of the demigods (Sura-pāla), O kinsman of the Pāṇḍavas (Pāṇḍaba-bāndhava), O all-devouring time for Śiśupāla and the demons (Śiśupālādira kāla.



Text 22 
jagadīśa janārdana keśabārta-trāṇa
sarba-abatāra-bīja biśwera nidāna

O master of the worlds (Jagadīśa), O Lord who removes the devotees' sufferings (Janārdana), O master of Brahmā and Śiva (Keśava), O Lord who saves the devotees from distress (Arta-
trāṇa), O seed of all incarnations (Sarvāvatāra-bīja), O origin of the universes (Viśva-nidāna)!

Text 23 
māyeśwara jogeśwara brahma-teja-dhāra
sarbātmāra ātmā prabhu prakṛtira pāra

O master of Māyā (Māyeśvara), O master of yoga (Yogeśvara), O master of spiritual power (Brahma-teja-dhāra), O soul of all souls (Sarvātmātmā), O supreme master (Prabhu), O 
Lord beyond the material world (Prakṛti-pāra)!



Text 24 
patita-pābana jagannātha sarbeśwara
bṛndābana-candra sarba-rasera ākara

O purifier of the fallen (Patita-pāvana), O master of the universes (Jagannātha), O controller of all (Sarveśvara), O moon of Vṛndāvana (Vṛndāvana-candra), O mine that produces the 
jewels of all the rasas (Sarva-rasākara)!

Text 25 
nagare nagare gorā gāya
bhakatibinoda tachu pāya
     nagare - in town; nagare - after town; gorā - Lord Caitanya; gāya - sings; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; tachu - of Him;pāya - at the feet.
     In town after town Lord Caitanya sings these names. Bhaktivinoda falls at His feet.




Song 2

Text 1
kṛṣṇa gobinda hare
gopī-ballabha śaure

O all-attractive Lord (Kṛṣṇa), O Lord who pleases the cows, land, and senses (Govinda), O Lord who removes all that is inauspicious (Hari), O beloved of the gopīs (Gopī-vallabha), O 
descendent of King Śūrasena (Śauri)!

Text 2 
śrīnibāsa dāmodara śrī-rāma murāre
nanda-nandana mādhaba nṛsiṁha kaṁsāre

O resting-place of Goddess Lakṣmī (Śrīnivāsa), O child whose belly was bound with a rope (Dāmodara), O supreme enjoyer (Śrī Rāma), O killer of the demon Mura (Murāri), O son of Nanda (Nanda-nandana), O husband of Goddess Lakṣmī (Mādhava), O half-man half-lion (Nṛsiṁha), O enemy of Kaṁsa (Kaṁsāri)!




Song 3

Text 1
rādhā-ballabha mādhaba śrī-pati mukunda
gopinātha madana-mohana rāsa-rasānanda
anaṅga-sukhada-kuñja-bihārī gobinda

O beloved of Rādhā (Rādhā-vallabha), O husband of the goddess of fortune (Mādhava and Śrī-pati), O giver of liberation (Mukunda), O master of the gopīs (Gopinātha), O Lord more 
charming than Kāmadeva (Madana-mohana), O Lord who happily tastes the nectar of the rāsa-dance (Rāsa-rasānanda), O Lord who enjoys amorous pastimes in the forest (Anaṅga-sukhada-kuñja-vihārī), O Lord who pleases the cows, land, and senses (Govinda)!;




Song 4

Text 1
rādhā-mādhaba kuñja-bihārī
gopī-jana-ballabha giri-bara-dhārī
jaśodā-nandana braja-jana-rañjana
jamunā-tīra-bana-cārī

Srī Rādhā-Mādhava have Their loving pastimes in the groves of Vṛndāvana (Kuñja-vihārī). "Gopī-jana-vallabha" means "one who attracts and reciprocates loving pastimes with the gopīs". "Giri-vara-dhārī" is Kṛṣṇa's name in the pastime of lifting Govardhana Hill. "Yaśodā-nandana" is the son of Yaśodā. "Vraja-jana-rañjana" means  the attractive darling of the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana ". He is always playing in the groves (vana) of the bank (tīra) of the Yamunā River. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is also known as "Yāmuna-tīra-vana-cārī".;




Song 5

Text 1
rādhā-ballabha rādhā-binoda
rādhā-mādhaba rādhā-pramoda

O beloved of Rādhā (Rādhā-vallabha), O Lord who enjoys pastimes with Rādhā (Rādhā-vinoda), O husband of Rādhā (Rādhā-mādhava), O delight of Rādhā (Rādhā-pramoda)!

Text 2 
rādhā-ramaṇa        rādhā-nātha
rādhā-baraṇāmoda
rādhā-rasika        rādhā-kānta
rādhā-milana-moda

O lover of Rādhā (Rādhā-ramaṇa), O master of Rādhā (Rādhā-nātha), O delight of Rādhā (Rādhā-varaṇāmoda), O Lord delighted by Rādhā (Rādhā-rasika), O beloved of Rādhā 
(rādhā-kānta), O Lord who enjoys meeting Rādhā (rādhā-milana-moda)!




Song 6

Text 1
jaya jaśodā-nandana kṛṣṇa gopāla gobinda
jaya madana-mohana hare ananta mukunda

O son of Yaśodā (Yaśodā-nandana), O all-attractive Lord (Kṛṣṇa), O protector of the cows (Gopāla), O pleasure of the cows land, and senses (Govinda), glory to You! O Lord more 
charming than Kāmadeva (Madana-mohana), O Lord who takes away all that is inauspicious (Hari), O limitless Lord (Ananta), O giver of liberation (Mukunda), glory to You!

Text 2
jaya acyuta mādhaba rāma bṛndābana-candra
jaya muralī-badana śyāma gopī-janānanda

O infallible Lord (Acyuta), O husband of the goddess of fortune (Mādhava), O supreme enjoyer (Rāma), O moon of Vṛndāvana (Vṛndāvana-candra), glory to You! O flute-player (Muralī-vadana), O dark Lord (Śyāma), O bliss of the gopīs (Gopī-janānanda), glory to You!




Part 7 Śrī Nāma-kīrtana




Song 1

Text 1
jaśomatī-nandana         braja-baro-nāgara
gokula-rañjana kāna
gopī-parāṇa-dhana        madana-mano-hara
kāliya-damana-bidhāna

O son of Yaśodā (Yaśomatī-nandana), O great hero of Vraja (Vraja-vara-nāgara), O delight of Gokula (Gokula-rañjana), O Kṛṣṇa (Kāna), O life and wealth of the gopīs (gopī-prāṇa-dhana), O Lord more charming than Kāmadeva (Madana-mano-hara), O subduer of Kāliya (Kāliya-damana-vidhāna)!

Text 2 
amala-hari-nāma amiya bilāsa
bipina-purandara         nabīna nāgara-bora
baṁśī-badana su-bāsā

O Lord whose holy name is splendid and pure (Amala-hari-nāma), O Lord whose pastimes are nectar (Amiya-bilāsa), O king of the forest (Vipina-purandara), O best of youthful heroes 
(Navīna-nāgara-vara), O Lord who plays the flute (Vaṁśī-vadana), O Lord dressed in splendid garments (Suvāsā)!

Text 3 
braja-jana-pālana        asura-kula-nāśana
nanda-godhana-rākho-wālā
gobinda mādhaba nabanīta-taskara
sundara nanda-gopālā

O protector of Vraja's people (Vraja-jana-pālana), O killer of the demons (Asura-kula-nāśana), O protector of Nanda's cows (Nanda-godhana-rākho-wālā), O Lord who pleases the cows, land, and senses (Govinda), O husband of of the goddess of fortune (Mādhava), O butter-thief (Navanīta-taskara), O handsome Lord (Sundara), O cowherd son of Nanda (Nanda-gopālā)!

Text 4 
jāmuna-taṭa-cara         gopī-basana-hara
rāsa-rasika kṛpāmoya
śrī-rādhā-ballabha       bṛndābana-naṭa-bara
bhakatibinoda-āśroya

O Lord who walks on the Yamunā's banks (Yāmuna-taṭa-cara), O thief of the gopīs' garments (gopī-vasana-hara), O enjoyer of the nectar rāsa-dance (Rāsa-rasika), O merciful Lord 
(Kṛpāmaya), O beloved of Śrī Rādhā (Śrī Rādhā-vallabha), O Lord who dances in Vṛndāvana (Vṛndāvana-naṭa-vara), O shelter of Bhaktivinoda (Bhaktivinodāśraya)!




Song 2

Text 1
doyāl nitāi caitanya bole nāca re āmāra mana
nāca re āmāra mana nāca re āmāra mana
     doyāl - merciful; nitāi - Nityānanda; caitanya - Caitanya; bole - say; nāc - dance; re - O; āmāra - my; mana - heart.
     Chanting, "Merciful Caitanya and Nityānanda!", dance, O my heart! Dance, O my heart! Dance, O my heart! 
 
Text 2 
(emon doyāl to nāi he māra kheye prema deya)
(ore) aparādha dūre jābe pā'be prema-dhana
(o nāme aparādha-bicāra to nāi he)
(takhon) kṛṣṇa-nāme ruci ha'be ghucibe bandhana
     emon - this; doyāl - merciful; taḥ - that; nāi - not; he - O; māra - a beating; kheye - experiences; prema - love; deya - gives;ore - Oh; aparādha - offense; dūre - far away; jābe - goes; pā'be - will attain; prema - ofecstatic love; dhana - the trewasure; aḥ - and; nāme - in the name; aparādha - offense; bicāra - consideration; taḥ - of You;nāi - not; he - Oh takhon - then; kṛṣṇa-nāme - holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa;ruci - love; ha'be - will be; ghucibe - will destroy; bandhana - bondage.
     (O my heart, no one is merciful like Caitanya and Nityānanda. Even when attacked, They gave ecstatic spiritual love to Their attackers.) 
     (O heart,) soon your offenses will flee far away. Soon you will attain a great treasure of spiritual love. 
     (Caitanya and Nityānanda do not take offenses seriously.)
     (Then) you will fall in love with Kṛṣṇa's name. Your bonds to this material world will be broken. 

Text 3 
(kṛṣṇa-nāme anurāga to ha'be he)
(takhona) anāyāse sa-phala ha'be jībera jībana
(kṛṣṇa-rati binā jībana to miche he)
(śeṣe) bṛndābane rādhā-śyāmera pā'be daraśana 
(gaura-kṛpā ha'le he)
     kṛṣṇa - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāme - for the name;anurāga - love; taḥ - you; ha'be - will be; he - Oh; takhona - then;anāyāse - easily; sa-phala - successful; ha'be - will be; jībera - of the soul; jībana - the life;kṛṣṇa-rati - love for Lord Kṛṣṇa; binā - without; jībana - life;taḥ - you; miche - false; he - Oh; śeṣe - at the end; bṛndābane - inVṛndāvana; rādhā-śyāmera - of Śrī Śrī r-Kṛṣṇa; pā'be - you will attain; daraśana - thesight; gaura - of Lord Caitanya; kṛpā - the mercy; ha'le - will be; he - Oh!
     (O heart, you will fall in love with Kṛṣṇa's name.)
     (Then) you will easily attain the goal of life.
     (O heart, without love for Kṛṣṇa, life is false.)
     (At the end) you will see Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana.
     (O heart, you will attain Lord Caitanya's mercy.)




Song 3

Text 1
hari bolo hari bolo hari bolo bhāi re
hari-nāma aniyāche gauraṅga-nitāi re
(modera duḥkho dekhe re)
     hari - Hari!; bolaḥ - chant; bhāi - brotjers; re - O;hari-nāma - the naems of Lord Hari; aniyāche - brought; gauraṅga-nitāi - Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda; re - Oh; modera - of us; duḥkhaḥ - the sufferings; dekhe - saw; re - Oh.
     Chant, "Hari!" Chant, "Hari!" Chant,  Hari!", O my brothers.
     Ah! Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda brought us the holy name of Lord Hari.
     (Ah! They saw our sufferings.)

Text 2 
hari-nāma binā jībera anya dhana nāi-re
hari-nāme śuddha ha'lo jagāi-mādhāi re
(bar6o pāpī chilo re)
     hari-nāma - the holy name of Lord Hari; binā - without; jībera - of the soul; anya - another; dhana - wealth; nāi-re - isnot; hari-nāme - the holy name of Lord Hari; śuddha - pure; ha'laḥ - is; jagāi-mādhāi - Jagai and Madhai; re - ah!;bar6aḥ - great; pāpī - sinners; chilaḥ - were; re - Ah!
     Ah! For the soul nothing is a precious treasure but the names of Lord Hari.
     Ah! The holy names of Lord Hari purified even Jagāi and Mādhāi.
     (Ah! They were great sinners.)

Text 3 
miche māyā-baddha ho'ye jībana kāṭāi re
(āmi āmāra bole re)
āśā-baśe ghure ghure āra kothā jāi re
(āśāra śeṣa nāi re)
     miche - false; māyā - by Māyā; baddha - bound; ho'ye - Iam; jībana - life; kāṭāi - cut; re - O; āmi - I; āmāra - mine; bole - says; re - Oh; āśā - of desires; baśe - under the control;ghure - going; ghure - and going; āra - other; kothā - where?; jāi - I go; re - Oh; āśāra - of desires; 
śeṣa - end; nāi - not; re - Oh.
     Ah! I am shackled by Māyā. My life will soon be cut off.
     (Ah! StillI declare, "It is I." and "It is mine.".)
     Ah! In the grip of many desires, I wander and wander in circles. Where will I go now?
     (Ah! My desires have no end.)

Text 4 
hari bo'le deo bhāi āśāra mukhe chāi re
(nirāśa to sukho re)
bhoga-mokha-bāñchā cār6i' hari-nāma gāi re
(śuddha-sattwa ho'ye re)
     hari - Hari; bole - chant; deaḥ - give; bhāi - O my brothers; āśāra - of material desires; mukhe - in the face; chāi - a pile of ashes; re - Oh; nirāśa - freedom from material desires;taḥ - that; 
sukhaḥ - happiness; re - Oh; bhoga - for sense gratification; mokha - and liberation; bāñch - ṭhe desire;a -  cār6i' - renouncing; hari-nāma - the holynames of Lord Hari; gāi - I sing; re - Oh; śuddha - pure; sattwa - goodness; ho'ye - I am; re - Oh.
     Chant, "Hari!", O my brothers. Material desires are worthless like a pile of ashes.
     (Ah! Real happiness is freedom from material desires.)
     Ah! Turning away from desires for sense pleasure or impersonal liberation, I chant the names of Lord Hari.
     (Ah! Now I stand in pure goodness.)

Text 5 
nāceye-o nāmera guṇe o saba phala pāi re
(tuccha phale prayāsa cher6e re)
binoda bole jāi lo'ye nāmera bālāi re
(nāmera bālāi cher6e re)
     nāceye-aḥ - I dance; nāmera - of the name; guṇe – the virtues; aḥ - and; saba - all; phala - results; pāi - I attain;re - Oh; tuccha - insignificant; phale - results; prayāsa - struggle; cher6e - I stop; re - Oh;binoda - Bhaktivinoda; bole - says; jai - I go; lo'ye - I take; nāmera - of the holyname; bālāi - obstacles; re - Oh; nāmera - of the name; bālāi - obstacles; cher6e - I renounce;re - Oh.
     Ah! Inspired by the glory of the holy name, I dance. Now I attain all that is good.
     (Ah! I renounce the struggle to gain pathetic, worthless things.)
     Bhaktivinoda says: Ah! Now I remove all obstacles that stop the holy name.
     (Ah! I renounce all obstacles to the holy name.)




Song 4

Text 1
bolo hari bolo (3 times)
manera ānande bhāi bolo hari bolo
bolo hari bolo (3 times)
janame janame sukhe bolo hari bolo
     bolaḥ - chant; hari - Hari; manera - of the heart;ānande - in bliss; bhāi - O brothers; janame janame - birth after birth; sukhe - happily.
     Chant, "Hari!" Chant! (3 times)
     O my brothers, with joy in your hearts chant, "Hari!" Chant!
     Chant, "Hari!" Chant! (3 times)
     Birth after birth happily chant, "Hari!" Chant!

Text 2 
bolo hari bolo (3 times)
mānaba-janma pe'ye bhāi bolo hari bolo
bolo hari bolo (3 times)
sukhe thāko duḥkhe thāko bolo hari bolo
     mānaba - human; janma - birth; pe'ye - attained; bhāi - O mybrothers; sukhe - in happiness; thākaḥ - stay; duḥkhe - indistress; thākaḥ - stay.
     Chant, "Hari!" Chant! (3 times)
     O my brothers, now that you have attained this human birth, chant, "Hari!" Chant! 
     Chant, "Hari!" Chant! (3 times)
     In happiness or in suffering, chant, "Hari!" Chant!

Text 3 
bolo hari bolo (3 times)
sampade bipade bhāi bolo hari bolo
bolo hari bolo (3 times)
gṛhe thāko bane thāko bolo hari bolo 
kṛṣṇera soṁsāre thāki' bolo hari bolo
     sampade - in prosperity; bipade - in calamity;bhāi - brothers; bolaḥ - chant; gṛhe - at home; thākaḥ - stay; bane - in theforest; thākaḥ - stay; kṛṣṇera - of Kṛṣṇa; soṁsāre - in the world; 
thāki' - staying.
     Chant, "Hari!" Chant! (3 times)
     O my brothers, in good fortune or in calamity, chant,  Hari!" Chant!
     Chant, "Hari!" Chant! (3 times)
     Stay at home, or stay in the forest,but chant, "Hari!" Chant!     As long as you stay in this world that belongs to Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, chant, "Hari!" Chant!

Text 4 
bolo hari bolo (3 times)
asat-saṅga chār6i' bhāi bolo hari bolo
bolo hari bolo (3 times)
baiṣṇaba-caraṇe por6i' bolo hari bolo
     asat-saṅga - bad association; chār6i' - shunning;bhāi - brothers; baiṣṇaba-caraṇe - feet of the Vaisnavas; por6i' - falling down.
     Chant, "Hari!" Chant! (3 times)
     Shun the wicked, O my brothers, and chant, "Hari!" Chant!
     Chant, "Hari!" Chant! (3 times)
     Bow down before a true Vaiṣṇava's feet and chant,  Hari!" Chant! 

Text 5 
bolo hari bolo (3 times)
gaura-nityānanda bolo (3 times)
gaura-gadādhara bolo (3 times)
gaura-adwaita bolo (3 times)

     Chant, "Hari!" Chant! (3 times)
     Chant, "Gaura-Nityānanda!" (3 times)
     Chant, "Gaura-Gadādhara!" (3 times)
     Chant, "Gaura-Advaita!" (3 times)




Song 5

Text 1
(hare) haraye namaḥ kṛṣṇa jādabāya namaḥ
jādabāya mādhabāya keśabāya namaḥ
gopāla gobinda rāma śrī-madhusūdana
rādhā-gobinda bolo (4 times)
     hare - Hari; haraye - to Lord Hari; namaḥ - obeisances;kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; jādabāya - to the descendent of King Yadu; namaḥ - obeisances; mādhabāya - to the husband of the goddess of fortune; keśabāya - to the master of Brahmā and Śiva; namaḥ - obeisances; gopāla - O protector of the cows; gobinda - O delight of the cows, land, and senses; rāma - O supreme enjoyer; śrī-madhusūdana - O killer of Madhu; rādhā-gobinda - O Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; bolaḥ - chant.
     (Hari!) Obeisances to Lord Hari! Obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the descendent of Mahārāja Yadu! Obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is the husband of the goddess of fortune, the master of Brahmā and Śiva, and the descendent of Mahārāja Yadu!      O Gopāla! O Govinda! O Rāma! O Śrī Madhusūdana!     Chant, "Rādhā-Govinda!" (4 times)

Text 2 
gobinda gobinda gobinda bolo 
rādhā-gobinda bolo (4 times)
guru-kṛpā jale nāśi' biṣaya-anala
rādhā-gobinda bolo (4 times)
     gobinda - Govinda; bolaḥ - chant; rādhā-gobinda – Rādhā Govinda; guru - of the spiritual master; kṛpā - the mercy; jale - with the water; nāśi' - destroying; biṣaya - of materialistic life; 
anala - the fire.
     Chant, "Govinda! Govinda! Govinda!"
     Chant, "Rādhā-Govinda!" (4 times)
     With the water of the spiritual master's mercy, extinguish the blazing fire of materialism!
     Chant, "Rādhā-Govinda!" (4 times)

Text 3 
kṛṣṇete arpiyā deha-gehādi sakala
rādhā-gobinda bolo (4 times)
ananya-bhābete citta koriyā sarala
rādhā-gobinda bolo (4 times)
     kṛṣṇete - to Kṛṣṇa; arpiyā - offering; dehagehādi - beginning with body and home; sakala - all; rādhā-gobinda – Rādhā Kṛṣṇa; bolaḥ - chant; ananya-bhābete - with pure love; citta - heart; 
koriyā - doing; sarala - sincere.
     Surrender to Lord Kṛṣṇa your body, home, and all else!
     Chant, "Rādhā-Govinda!" (4 times)
     In your heart love Him purely and truly!
     Chant, "Rādhā-Govinda!" (4 times)

Text 4 
rūpānuga baiṣṇabera piyā pada-jala
rādhā-gobinda bolo (4 times)
daśa aparādha tyaji' bhukti-mukti-phala
rādhā-gobinda bolo (4 times)
     rūpānuga - a follower of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; baiṣṇabera - of a Vaiṣṇava; piyā - drinking; pada - from thefeet; jala - the water; daśa - ten; aparādha - kinds fo offenses; tyaji' - renouncing; bhukti - of material sense gratification; mukti - and impersonal liberation; phala - the fruits.
     Drink water that has washed the feet of a pure Vaiṣṇava 
follower of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī!
     Chant, "Rādhā-Govinda!" (4 times)
     Turn from the ten offenses! Turn from material sense gratification and impersonal liberation!
     Chant, "Rādhā-Govinda!" (4 times)

Text 5 
sakhīra caraṇa-reṇu koriyā sambola
rādhā-gobinda bolo (4 times)
swarūpete braja-bāse hoiyā śītala
rādhā-gobinda bolo (4 times)
     sakhīra - of the gopīs; caraṇa - of the feet; reṇu – the dust; koriyā - doing; sambola - wealth; swarūpete - in the originalform; braja - in Vraja; bāse - in residence; hoiyā - being;śītala - cool.
     Make the dust of the gopīs' feet Your treasure and your wealth.
     Chant, "Rādhā-Govinda!" (4 times)
     Extinguish the blazing fire of materialism. Cool and refreshed, manifest your original spiritual form, and live always in Vraja!
     Chant, "Rādhā-Govinda!" (4 times)




Part 8 Śrī Nāmāṣṭaka



Song 1

(Lalita-rāga, Eka-tālā and Daśakuśī)

Text 1
śrī-rūpa-badane śrī-saci-kumāra
swa-nāma-mahimā koralo pracāra
     śrī-rūpa - of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; badane - through the mouth; śrī-saci-kumāra - Lord Caitanya; swa - own; nāma – of the holy name; mahimā - the glory; koralaḥ - did; pracāra - preaching.
     Through Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's mouth Lord Caitanya preached the glories of His own holy names.

Text 2 
jo nāma so hari kachu nāi bheda
so nāma satya-miti gāyati beda
     jaḥ - which; nāma - name; saḥ - that; hari - LordKṛṣṇa; kichu - something; nāi - not; bheda - different; saḥ - that; nāma - nmae;satya - true; miti - knowledge; gāyati - sing; beda - the Vedas.
     Lord Kṛṣṇa is not different from His name. This truth the Vedas sing.

Text 3 
sabu upanisaḍa      ratna-mālā-dyuti
jhakamaki' caraṇa-samīpe
maṅgala-ārati       koro-i anukhaṇa
dwi-guṇita-pañca-pradīpe
     sabu - all; upanisaḍa - the Upaniṣads; ratna - jewels; mālā - necklaces; dyuti - splendor; jhakamaki' - shine;caraṇa - feet; samīpe - near; maṅgala-ārati - maṅgala-ārati; koro-i - do; 
anukhaṇa - at every moment; dwi-guṇita - doubled; pañca - five; pradīpe - with lamps.
     With two times five lamps, moment after moment the Upaniṣads, glistening like jewel necklaces, offer maṅgala-ārati to the feet of the holy name.



Text 4 
caudda bhūbana māha      deba-nara-dānaba
bhāga jākora balabāna
nāma-rasa-pīyūṣa         pibo-i anukhaṇa
chor6ata karama-geyāna
     caudda - fourteen; bhūbana - worlds; māha - within; deba - demigods; nara - humans; dānaba - demons; bhāga - goodfortune; jākora - of whom; balabāna - powerful; nāma - of the name;rasa-
pīyūṣa - nectar; pibo-i - drink; anukhaṇa - moment after moment; chor6ata - turning away; karama - from karma; geyāna - and jñāna.
     Turning away from karma (fruitive work) and jñāna (impersonal speculation), the most fortunate demigods, humans, and demons in the fourteen worlds drink the nectar of the holy  
name moment after moment.

Text 5 
nitya mukta punaḥ       nāma-upāsanā
satata koro-i sāma-gāne
goloke baiṭhata         gā-owe nirantara
nāma-biraha nāhi jāne
     nitya - eternal; mukta - liberated; punaḥ - again; nāma-upāsanā - worship of the holy name; satata - always; koro-i - do; sāma - of the Sāma Veda; gāne - with songs; goloke - in Goloka; 
baiṭhata - staying; gā-owe - sing; nirantara - always; nāma - from the name; biraha - separation; nāhi - not;jāne - know.
     Singing songs from the Sāma Veda, the eternally liberated souls always worship the holy name in Goloka. They never know separation from the holy name.

Text 6 
sabu-rasa-ākara          hari iti dwy-akhara
sabu-bhābe karoluṅ āśroya
nāma caraṇe par6i         bhaktibinoda kohe
tuyā pade māgohuṅ niloya
     sabu - all; rasa - nectar; ākara - source; hari - Ha-ri; iti - thus; dwy - two; akhara - syllables; sabu - all;bhābe - love; karolun - I do; āśroya - shelter; nāma - the holy name; caraṇe - at the feet;par6i - I fall; bhaktibinoda - bhaktivinoda; kohe - says; tuyā - of You; pade - at the feet; māgohun - I beg; niloya - residence.

     With all love I take shelter of the two syllables  Ha-ri", which are a spring from which all nectar flows. Falling at the feet of the holy name, Bhaktivinoda says, "I beg for a home at Your feet."




Song 2

Text 1
jaya jaya hari-nāma      cid-ānandāmṛta-dhāma
para-tattwa akhara-ākāra
nija-jane kṛpā kori'          nāma-rūpe abatori'
jībe doyā korile apāra
     jaya - glory; jaya - glory; hari-nāma - Oname of Lord Hari;cit - spiritual; ānanda - bliss; amṛta - nectar;dhāma - abode; para-tattwa - supreme truth; akhara - of syllables; ākāra - in the form; nija-jane - to Your own people; kṛpā - mercy; kori' - doing; nāma-rūpe - in the formof the name; 
abatori' - descending; jībe - to the conditioned souls; doyā - mercy; korile - does; apāra - limitless.
     O holy name of Lord Hari, O abode of the nectar of spiritual bliss, O Supreme Truth manifest in a form of syllables, glory, glory to You! O Lord, being kind to the devotees, You descended to this world. You give limitless mercy to the fallen souls.

Text 2 
jaya hari kṛṣṇa rāma          jaga-jana-su-biśrāma
sarba-jana-mānasa-rañjana
muni-bṛnda nirantara          je nāmera samādara
kori' gāya bhoriyā badana
     jaya - glory; hari - Hari; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;rāma - Rāma; jaga - of the universe; jana - of the people; su-biśrāma - relief; sarba-jana - all people; mānasa - hearts; rañjana - delighting; muni-bṛnda - sages;nirantara - always; je - which; nāmera - of the name; samādara - worship; kori' - doing; gāya - sing;bhoriyā - filling; badana - mouths.
     "O Hari! O Kṛṣṇa! O Rāma! O shelter of the world's people! O delight of every heart! Glory to You!" Filling their mouths, the sages worship and praise the holy name in this way.

Text 3 
ohe kṛṣṇa-nāmakhara      tumi sarba-śakti-dhara
jībera kalyāṇa-bitaraṇe
tomā binā bhaba-sindhu        uddhārite nāhi bandhu
āsiyācho jība-uddharaṇe
     ohe - O; kṛṣṇa - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāma - of the holy name; akhara - syllables; tumi - You; sarba-śakti-dhara - possessing all power; jībera - of the souls; kalyāṇa - auspiciousness; 
bitaraṇe - giving; tomā - of You; binā - without; bhaba - ofmaterial life; sindhu - from the ocean; uddhārite - to deliver; nāhi - not; bandhu - friend; āsiyāchaḥ - is; jība - the conditioned souls; 
uddharaṇe - for delivering.
     O syllables of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy name, You have all power to bless the conditioned souls. No one but You can deliver the souls from the ocean of birth and death.

Text 4 
āche tāpa jībe jata      tumi saba koro hata
helāya tomāre eka-bāra
ḍāke jadi kono jana         ho'ye dīna-akiñcana
nāhi dekhi' anya pratikāra
     āche - is; tāpa - suffering; jībe - to the souls;jata - which; tumi - You; saba - all; koraḥ - do; hata - destroyed;helāya - disrespectfully; tomāre - to You; eka - one; bāra - time; ḍāke - calls out; jadi - if;konaḥ - certain; jana - person; ho'ye - is; dīna - poor; akiñcana - without anything; nāhi - not; dekhi' - I see; anya - another; pratikāra - remedy.
     If a poor person once chants Your syllables, even disrespectfully, You kill all his sufferings. I do not see any remedy but You.

Text 5 
taba swalpa-sphūrti pāya      ugra-tāpa dūre jāya
liṅga-bhaṅga hoya anāyāse
bhakatibinoda koya       jaya hari-nāma joya
par6e thāki tuyā pada āse
     taba - of You; swalpa - very slight; sphūrti - manifestation; pāya - attaining; ugra - horrible; tāpa - sufferings; dūre - faraway; jāya - go; liṅga - subtle body; bhaṅga - breaking; hoya - is; anāyāse - easily; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; koya - is; jaya - glory; harināma - O holy name of Lord Hari; joya - glory; par6e - I fall; thāki - I stay; tuyā - of You; pada - at the feet; āse - go.
     When You are even only slightly manifest, the most horrible sufferings flee far away, and the subtle body, which keeps the soul bound in the material world, is easily broken. Bhaktivinoda 
says, "O holy name of Lord Hari, glory to You! Glory to You!" I approach Your feet and bows down before them. There I stay.




Song 3

(Bibhāsa-rāga, Eka-tālā)

Text 1
biśwe udita         nāma-tapana
abidyā-bināśa lāgi'
chor6ata saba        māyā-bibhaba
sādhu tāhe anurāgī

     biśwe - in the world; udita - risen; nāma - of the holy name; tapana - the sun; abidyā - ignroance;bināśa - destruction; lāgi' - accepting; chor6ata - abandoning; saba-all; māyā - of Māyā; bibhaba - power; sādhu - devotee; tāhe - in Him; anurāgī - love.

     Rising in this world, the sun of the holy name destroys all ignorance. Turning from māyā's glories, the saintly devotees fall in love with the holy name.

Text 2 
hari-nāma-prabhākara          abidyā-timira-hara
tomāra mahimā kebā jāne
ke heno paṇḍita-jana          tomāra māhātmya-gaṇa
uccaiḥ-sware sakala bākhāne

     hari - of Lord Hari; nāma - of the holy name; prabhākara - the sun; abidyā - of ignorance; timira - the darkness; hara - removing; tomāra - of You; mahimā - glory; kebā - who?; jāne - knows; ke - who?;henaḥ - like; paṇḍita-jana - learned person; tomāra - of You; māhātmya-gaṇa - the many glories; uccaiḥ-sware - with a loud voice; sakala - all; bākhāne - explain.

     O sun of Lord Hari's holy name, O destroyer of darkness and ignorance, who knows Your glories? Who is the learned person able to loudly explain all Your glories?

Text 3 
tomāra ābhāsa pahilohi bhāya
e bhaba-timira kabalita-prāya

     tomāra - of You; ābhāsa - the reflection; pahilohi - first; bhāya - shines; e - this; bhaba - of material existence; timira - darkness; kabalita - devours; prāya - almost.

     O sun of the holy name, when You first dimly appear on the horizon, the darkness of repeated birth and death is almost completely devoured.

Text 4 
acire timira nāśiyā prajñāna
tattwāndha-nayane korena bidhāna

     acire - quickly; timira - darkness; nāśiyā - destroying;prajñāna - knowledge; tattwa - truth; andha - blind;nayane - eyes; korena - does; bidhāna - arrangement.

     Quickly destroying the darkness, You place transcendental knowledge on eyes that had been blind to the truth. 

Text 5 
sei to' prajñāna biśuddha bhakati
upajāya hari-biṣayiṇī mati

     sei - that; to' - You; prajñāna - knowledge; biśuddha - pure; bhakati - devotion; upajāya - is born; hari - to Lord Hari; biṣayiṇī - in relation; mati - thoughts.

     That knowledge gives birth to pure devotional service and to meditation on Lord Hari.

Text 6 
e adbhuta-līlā satata tomāra
bhakatibinoda jāniyāche sāra

     e - this; adbhuta - wonderful; līlā - pastimes;satata - always; tomāra - of You; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda;jāniyāche - explains; sāra - the essence.

     Bhaktivinoda again and again explains Your wonderful pastimes.




Song 4

Text 1
jñānī jñāna-joge         koriyā jatane
brahmera sākhāt kore
brahma-sākhāt-kāra       aprārabdha-karma
sampūrṇa jñānete hare

     jñānī - a jnani; jñāna-joge - by jnana-yoga; koriyā - doing; jatane - with great struggle; brahmera – of Brahman; sākhāt - direct; kore - does; brahma-sākhāt-kāra - direct appearance of Brahman; aprārabdha-karma - karmic reactions that have not yet manifested results; sampūrṇa - full; jñānete - knowledge; hare - removes.

     Performing jñāna-yoga with a great struggle, a jñānī may come to realize impersonal Brahman. That perfect knowledge of Brahman removes from the jñānī all past karmic reactions that had not yet begun to bear fruit.

Text 2 
tabu to' prārabdha       nāho hoya khāya
phala-bhoga binā kabhu
brahma-bhūta jība        phala-bhoga lāgi'
janama-maraṇa labhu

     tabu to' - then; prārabdha - begun to bear fruit; nāhaḥ - not; hoya - is; khāya - destruction; phala - fruit; bhoga - experiencing; binā - without; kabhu - when; brahma-bhūta - realizing Brahman; jība - the soul; phala-bhoga - experiencing the fruits; lāgi' - accaepting; janama - birth; 
maraṇa - and death; labhu - attains.

     However, the karmic reactions that had begun to bear fruit are not destroyed by realizing Brahman, Those karmic reactions are destpyed only by experiencing the results they bring. Thus, to experience those karmic results, the Brahman-realized soul must take birth and die again and again.

Text 3 
kintu ohe nāma      tabe sphūrti ha'le
ekānti janera āro
prārabdhāprarabdha       kichu nāhi thāke
bede gāya baro baro

     kintu - however; ohe - O; nāma - holy name; tabe – of You; sphūrti - the manifestation; ha'le - is; ekānti - one whose onlygoal; janera - of a person; āraḥ - another; prārabdha - begun; aprarabdha - not begun; kichu - something; nāhi - not; thāke - stays; bede - the Vedas; gāya - sing;baro baraḥ - again and again.

     However, O holy name, the moment You appear before a sincere devotee, his karmic reactions, whether or not they have begun to bear fruit, can no longer stay with him. This the Vedas sing again and again.

Text 4 
tomāra udoye        jībera hṛdoya
sampūrṇa śodhita hoya
karma-jñāna-bandha       saba dūre jāya
anāyāse bhāba-khoya

     tomāra - of You; udoye - in the manifestation; jībera - of the soul; hṛdoya - in the heart; sampūrṇa - completely; śodhita - purified; hoya - is; karma-jñāna-bandha - the bonds of karma and jnana; saba - all; dūre - far away; jāya - go; anāyāse - easily; bhāba - of material existence; khoya - destruction.

     O sun of the holy name, when You rise on the horizon, the living entity's heart is at once purified, the shackles of karma (fruitive work) and jñāna (impersonal speculation) are thrown far away, and the repetition of birth and death is easily destroyed.

Text 5 
bhakatibinoda        bahu tule' koya
nāmera niśāna dharo
nāma-ḍaṅka-dhwani      koriyā jāibe
bheṭibe muralī-dharo

     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; bāhu - arms; tule' - raising;koya - does; nāmera - of the holy name; niśāna - the flag; dharaḥ - holding; nāma - of the holy name; ḍaṅka - of the drum; dhwani - the sound; koriyā - doing;jāibe - you will go; bheṭibe - you will meet; muralī-dharaḥ - He who plays the flute.

     Raising his arms, Bhaktivinoda says, "Take up the banner of the holy name. Sound the drum of the holy name. In this way you will meet the flute-player Kṛṣṇa."




Song 5

(Lalita-Bibhāsa-rāga, Eka-tālā)

Text 1
hari-nāma tuyā aneka swarūpa
jaśodā-nandana      ānanda-bardhana
nanda-tanoya rasa-kūpa

     hari-nāma - O holy name of Lord Hari; tuyā - of You; aneka - many; swarūpa - forms.

     O holy name of Lord Hari, You have many forms, such as: Yaśodā-nandana (the son of Yaśodā), Ananda-bardhana (full of bliss), Nanda-tanaya (Nanda's son), Rasa-kūpa (a reservoir of nectar), . . .

Text 2 
pūtanā-ghātana      tṛṇābarta-hāna
śakaṭa-bhañjana gopāla
muralī-badana       agha-baka-mardana
gobardhana-dhārī rākhāla

 . . . Pūtanā-ghātana (the killer of Pūtanā), Tṛṇāvarta-hāna (the killer of Tṛṇāvarta), Śakaṭa-bhañjana (the breaker of the cart), Gopāla (protector of the cows), Muralī-vadana (flute-player), Agha-baka-mardana (killer of Agha and Baka), Govardhana-dhārī (lifter of Govardhana Hill), Rākhāla (cowherd boy), . . .

Text 3 
keśi-mardana        brahma-bimohana
surapati-darpa-bināśī
ariṣṭa-pātana       gopī-bimohana
jāmuna-pulina-bilāsī

 . . . Keśi-mardana (killer of Keśī), Brahma-vimohana (who bewildered Brahmā), Surapati-darpa-bināśī (who destroyed Indra's pride), Ariṣṭa-pātana (killer of Ariṣṭa), Gopī-vimohana 
(who charms the gopīs), Yāmuna-pulina-vilāsī (who enjoys pastimes on the Yamunā's banks), . . .

Text 4 
rādhikā-rañjana          rāsa-rasāyana
rādhā-kuṇḍa-kuñja-bihārī
rāma kṛṣṇa hari          mādhaba narahari
matsyādi-gaṇa-abatārī

 . . . Rādhikā-rañjana (who delights Rādhā), Rāsa-rasāyana (who enjoys the rāsa dance), Rādhā-kuṇḍa-kuñja-vihārī (who enjoys pastimes in the forests surrounding Rādhā-kuṇḍa), Rāma (the supreme enjoyer), Kṛṣṇa (all-attractive), Hari (He who removes all that is inauspicious), Mādhava (the goddess of fortune's husband), Narahari (He who manifested a form of half-man half-lion), Matsyādi-gaṇāvatārī (the origin of Matsya and a host of other incarnations), . . .

Text 5 
gobinda bāmana      śrī-madhusūdana
jādaba-candra bana-mālī
kāliya-śātana       gokula-rañjana
rādhā-bhajana-sukha-śālī

 . . . Govinda (He who delights the cows, land, and senses), Vāmana (the dwarf-incarnation), Śrī Madhusūdana (the killer of Madhu), Yādava-candra (the moon of the Yādavas), Vana-mālī (He who wears a forest garland), Kāliya-śātana (the subduer of Kāliya), Gokula-rañjana (the delight of Gokula), Rādhā-bhajana-sukha-śālī (the blissful object of Śrī Rādhā's worship), . . .

Text 6
ity-ādika nāma      swarūpe prakāma
bār6uka mora rati rāge
rūpa-swarūpa-pada        jāni' nija-sampada
bhaktibinoda dhori' māge

     ity - yhus; ādika - beginning; nāma - names; swarūpe - original form; prakāma - enough; bār6uka - mayincrease; mora - my; rati - love; rāge - with love; rūpa-swarūpa-pada - at the feet of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī; jāni' - knowing; nijasampada - own good fortune; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; dhori' - grasping; māge - begs.

     Fully aware of what is for his own benefit, Bhaktivinoda grasps the feet of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī and begs, "I pray that I may fall more and more 
deeply in love with these holy names of the Lord."



Song 6

(Bibhāsa-rāga, Jhāmpi-lophā)

Text 1
bācya o bācaka dui swarūpa tomāra
bācya taba śrī-bigraha cid-ānandākāra

     bācya - the person indicated by the name; aḥ - and; bācaka - thename itself; dui - two; swarūpa - forms; tomāra - of You; bācya - vacya; taba - of You; śrī-bigraha - the form; cid-ānandākāra - spiritual, eternal, and blissful.

     O Lord, "vācya" and "vācaka" are Your two natures. "Vācya" is Your spiritual, eternal, blissful form.

Text 2 
bācaka swarūpa taba śrī-kṛṣṇādi nāma
barṇa-rūpī sarba-jība-ānanda-biśrāma

     bācaka - vbacaka; swarūpa - form; taba - of You; śrī-kṛṣṇādi - beginning with Śrī k; nāma - names; barṇarūpī - consisting of syllables; sarba-jība - all souls; ānanda - of bliss; biśrāma - delight.

     "Vācaka" refers to Your many holy names, which have the name Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the first amongst them. Consisting of various syllables, these names delight the living entities.

Text 3 
ei dui swarūpe taba ananta prokāśa
doyā kori' deya jībe tomāra bilāsa

     ei - these; dui - two; swarūpe - natures; taba - of You; ananta - limitless; prokāśa - manifestations; doyā - mercy;kori' - doing; deya - to be giuve; jībe - to the souls; tomāra - of You;bilāsa - the pastimes.

     Manifesting these two natures in endless ways, You mercifully give Your pastimes to the conditioned souls.

Text 4 
kintu jāniyāchi nātha bācaka-swarūpa
bācyāpekha doyāmoya ei aparūpa

     kintu - however; jāniyāchi - I know; nātha - O Lord;bācaka-swarūpa - the name; bācya - the person identified by the name;āpekha - in relation to; doyāmoya - merciful; ei - this; aparūpa - wonderful and beautiful.

     Still, O my Lord, I know that Your holy name is more merciful than Your form. It is very wonderful and very beautiful.

Text 5 
nāma nāmī bheda nāi bedera bacana
tabu nāma nāmī ho'te adhika koruṇā

     nāma - the name; nāmī - the person identified by the name; bheda - difference; nāi - not; bedera - of the Vedas; bacana - thewords; tabu - of You; nāma - name; nāmī - and the form described by thename; ho'te - than that; adhika - more; koruṇā - merciful.

     The Vedas affirm that Your form and Your name are not different. Still, Your name is more merciful than Your form.

Texts 6 and 7 
kṛṣṇe aparādhī jadi nāme śraddhā kori'
prāṇa bhori' ḍāke nāma rāma kṛṣṇa hari

aparādha dūre jāya ānanda sāgare
bhāse sei anāyāse rasera pāthāre

     kṛṣṇe - against Lord Kṛṣṇa; aparādhī - an offender;jadi - of; nāme - the name; śraddhā - faith; kori' - doing;prāṇa - life; bhori' - bearing; ḍāke - calls ou; nāma - O name; rāma - O Rāma; kṛṣṇa – O Kṛṣṇa; hari - O Hari; aparādha - offenses; dūre - far away; jāya - go;ānanda - of bliss; sāgare - in the ocean; bhāse - floats; sei - he;anāyāse - easily; rasera - of nectar; pāthāre - in the ocean.

     If a person who has offended Lord Kṛṣṇa spends his life faithfully calling out the Lord's names, names like Rāma, Kṛṣṇa, and Hari, then that person's offenses will go far away. That 
person will easily float in an ocean of nectar, in an ocean of bliss.

Text 8 
bigraha-swarūpa bācye aparādha kori'
śuddha-nāmāśroye sei aparādha tori

     bigraha-swarūpa - the form; bācye - described by the name; aparādha - offense; kori' - doing; śuddha - purely; nāma - ofthe holy name; āśroye - shelter; sei - he; aparādha - offenses;tori - crosses beyond.

     A person who commits offenses against the Lord's form will cross beyond those offenses by purely taking shelter of the Lord's holy name.



Text 9 
bhakatibinoda māge śrī-rūpa-caraṇe
bācaka-swarūpa nāme rati anukhaṇe

     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; māge - begs; śrī-rūpacaraṇe - at the feet of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvami; bācaka-swarūpa - the Lord's identity as His name; nāme - for the name; rati - love; anukhaṇe - moment after moment.

     At Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's feet Bhaktivinoda begs, "May I love the Lord's holy name at every moment."




Song 7

(Lalita-jhiñjhiṭa-rāga, Eka-tālā)

Text 1
ohe hari-nāma taba mahimā apāra
taba pade nati āmi kori bāra bāra

     ohe - O; hari-nāma - holy name of Lord Hari; taba - of You; mahimā - the glories; apāra - limitless; taba - of You; pade - atthe feet; nati - bowing down; āmi - I; kori - do; bāra bāra - again and again.

     O holy name of Lord Hari, Your glories have no end. Again and again I bow down at Your feet.

Text 2 
gokulera mahotsaba ānanda-sāgora
tomāra caraṇe par6i hoiyā katora

     gokulera - of Gokula; mahotsaba - great festival of bliss; ānanda-sāgora - ocean of bliss; tomāra - of You; caraṇe - at thefeet; par6i - I fall; hoiyā - being; katora - unhappy.

     O festival of Gokula, O ocean of bliss, I, who am very unhappy, fall down before Your feet.

Text 3 
tumi kṛṣṇa pūrṇa-bapu rasera nidāna
taba pade por6i' taba guṇa kori gāna

     tumi - You; kṛṣṇa - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; pūrṇa-bapu - the full form; rasera - of nectar; nidāna - the origin; taba - of You; pade - atthe feet; por6i' - falling; taba - of You; guṇa - the virtues; kori - I do; gāna - songs.

     You are Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself. You are His form in all fullness. You are the spring from which streams of nectar flow. Falling down before Your feet, I sing of Your glories.

Text 4 
je kore tomāra pade ekānta āśroya
tā'ra ārti-rāśi nāśa koroho niścoya

     je - who; kore - does; tomāra - of You; pade - at the feet; ekānta - excluysive; āśroya - shelter; tā'ra - of him; ārtirāśi - the many sufferings; nāśa - destruction; korohaḥ - You do;niścoya - without doubt.

     You destroy the sufferings of anyone who takes shelter of Your feet alone. That is certain.

Text 5 
sarba aparādha tumi nāśa koro tā'ra
nāma-aparādhābadhi nāśaho tāhāra

     sarba - all; aparādha - offenses; tumi - You;nāśa - destruction; koraḥ - do; tā'ra - of him; nāma - to the holy name; aparādha - offenses; ābadhi - up to tthe limit; nāśahaḥ - You destroy; tāhāra - of him.

     You destroy all his offenses, up to his offenses to the holy name.

Text 6 
sarba-doṣa dhauta kori' tāhāra hṛdoya
siṁhāsane baise tumi parama āśroya

     sarba - all; doṣa - faults; dhauta - purification; kori' - doing; tāhāra - of him; hṛdoya - the heart; siṁhāsane - on the throne; baise - sit; tumi - You; parama - supreme; āśroya - shelter.

     Cleansing all his impurities, You, the supreme shelter, sit on a throne in his heart.

Text 7 
ati-ramya cid-ghana-ānanda-mūrtimāna
raso vai saḥ boli' beda kore toyā gāna

     ati-ramya - very delightful; cit - spiritual; ghana - intense; ānanda - bliss; mūrtimāna - having a form; rasaḥ - nectar;vai - indeed; saḥ - He; boli' - saying; beda - the Vedas; kore - do; toyā - of You; gāna - songs.

     Your form is spiritual, eternal, blissful, and very beautiful. By saying, "raso vai saḥ" (He is the reservoir of all pleasure), the Vedas sing Your glories.

Text 8 
bhaktibinoda rūpa-goswāmī-caraṇe
māgaye sarbadā nāma-sphūrti sarba-khaṇe

     bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; rūpa-goswāmī-caraṇe - at the feet of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; māgaye - begs;sarbadā - always; nāma - of the holy name; sphūrti - the manifestation; sarba - at every; khaṇe - moment.

     At Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's feet Bhaktivinoda begs that the holy name may appear before him at every moment.




Song 8

(Maṅgala-bibhāsa-rāga, Eka-tālā)

Text 1
nārada muni         bājāya bīṇā
rādhikā-ramaṇa-nāme
nāma amani          udita hoya
bhakata-gīta-sāme
     nārada muni - Narada Muni; bājāya - sounds; bīṇā - vina; rādhikā-ramaṇa-nāme - the names of Śrī Rādhā's lover; nāma - name; amani - this; udita - risen; hoya - is;bhakata-gīta-sāme - the songs of the devotee.
     Nārada Muni, the great soul, plays a stringed instrument called a vīṇā, vibrating the sound Rādhikā-ramaṇa, which is another name for Kṛṣṇa. As soon as he strokes the strings, all the devotees begin responding, making a very beautiful vibration.*

Text 2 
amiya-dhārā         bariṣe ghana
srabaṇa jugala giyā
bhakata-jana        saghane nāce
bhoriyā āpana hiyā
     amiya - of nectar; dhārā - a flood; bariṣe - showers; ghana - intense; srabaṇa - hearing; jugala - the divine couple;giyā - singing; bhakata-jana - the devotees; saghane - again and again;nāce - dance; bhoriyā - filling; āpana - own; hiyā - heart.
     Accompanied by the stringed instrument, the singing seems like a shower of nectar, and all the devotees dance in ecstasy to the fullest extent of their satisfaction.*

Text 3 
mādhurī-pūra        āsabo paśi'
mātāya jagata-jane
keho bā kānde       keho bā nāce
keho māte mane mane
     mādhurī-pūra - flood of nectar; āsabo paśi' - touching; mātāya - intoxicated; jagata-jane - the people of the universe; kehaḥ - someone; ba - or; kānde - weeps; kehaḥ - someone; bā - or; nāce - dances;kehaḥ - someone; māte - intoxicated; mane mane - at heart.
     While dancing, they appear madly intoxicated with ecstasy, as if drinkingthe beverage called mādhurī-pūra. Some of them cry, some of them dance, and some of them, although unable to 
dance publicly, dance within their hearts.*

Text 4 
pañca-badana        nārade dhori'
premera saghana rola
kamalāsana          nāciyā bole
bolo bolo hari bolo
     pañca-badana - Śiva; nārade - Nārada; dhori' - embracing; premera - with love; saghana - again and again; rola - goes; kamalāsana - Brahmā; nāciyā - dancing; bole - says; bolaḥ - chant; bolaḥ - chant; hari - Hari!; bolaḥ - chant.
     Lord Śiva embraces Nārada Muni and begins talking in an ecstatic voice, and seeing Lord Śiva dancing with Nārada, Lord Brahmā also joins, saying, "All of you kindly chant,  Haribol! Haribol!"*

Text 5 
sahasrānana         parama-sukhe
hari hari boli' gāya
nāma-prabhābe       mātilo biśwa
nāma-rasa sabe pāya
     sahasrānana - Indra; parama-sukhe - with great happiness; hari - Hari; hari - Hari; boli' - saying;gāya - sings; nāma - of the name; prabhābe - by the power; mātilaḥ - become intoxicated; biśwa - the world; nāma-rasa - by the nectar of the holy name; sabe - everyone; pāya - attaining.
     The king of heaven, Indra, also gradually joins with great satisfaction and begins dancing and chanting, "Haribol! Haribol!" In this way, by the influence of the transcendental vibration of the holy name of God, the whole universe becomes ecstatic.*

Text 6 
śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma      rasane sphuri'
pūrā'lo āmāra āśā
śrī-rūpa-pade       jācaye ihā
bhakatibinoda dāsa
     śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma - the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa; rasane - on the tongue; sphuri' - appearing; pūrā'laḥ - fulfilled;āmāra - of me; āśā - the desire; śrī-rūpa-pade - at the feet of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; jācaye - I beg; ihā - this; bhakatibinoda dāsa - Bhaktivinoda dāsa.
     Bhaktivinoda \Thākura says, "When the universe becomes ecstatic, mydesire is satisfied. I therefore pray unto the lotus feet of Rūpa Gosvāmī that this chanting of harer nāma may go on nicely like this.*




Part 9 Śreyo-nirṇaya (The Best Welfare)



Song 1

Text 1
kṛṣṇa-bhakti binā kabhu nāhi phalodoya
miche saba dharmādharma jībera upādhimoya
     kṛṣṇa-bhakti - devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa;binā - without; kabhu - something; nāhi - not; phala - result; udoya - arisal; miche - false; saba - all; dharma - piety; adharma - and sin; jībera - of the soul;upādhi - of material designations; moya - consisting.
     A life without devotional service is wasted. Piety and sin are only illusions. They are artificial things placed over the soul.

Text 2 
joga-jāga-tapo-dhyāna sannyāsādi brahma-jñāna
nānā-khaṇda-rūpe jībera bandhana-kāraṇa hoya
     joga - yoga; jāga - yajnas; tapaḥ - asuterities; dhyāna - meditati;on sannyāsa - sannyasa; ādi - beginning with; brahma-jñāna - knowledge of impersonal Brahman; nānā - various; khaṇda - parts; rūpe - in the form; jībera - of the soul; bandhana - bondage; kāraṇa - the cause; hoya - are.
     When meant to lead to knowledge of impersonal Brahman, yoga, yajñas, austerities, meditation, sannyāsa, and other activities are only many shackles that bind the soul.

Text 3 
binodera bākya dharo nānā kāṇḍa tyāga koro
nirupādhi kṛṣṇa-preme hṛdoye deho āśroya
     binodera - of Bhaktivinoda; bākya - the words; dharaḥ – please take; nānā - various; kāṇḍa - parts; tyāga - renunciation;koraḥ - do; nirupādhi - without material designations; kṛṣṇa-preme - pure love for Lord Kṛṣṇa; hṛdoye - in the heart;deho āśroya - take shelter.
     Listen to Bhaktivinoda's words. Turn from all these. In your heart take shelter of pure love for Lord Kṛṣṇa, love that is beyond the artificial designations of this world. 




Song 2

Text 1
āra keno māyā-jāle par6itecho jība-mīna
nāhi jāno baddha ho'ye ro'be tumi cira-dina
     āra - and; kenaḥ - why?; māyā - of Maya; jāle - in thenet; par6itechaḥ - fallen; jība - of the soul; mīna - fish;nāhi - not; jānaḥ - know; baddha - bound; ho'ye - is; ro'be - will stay; tumi - you; cira-dina - for a long time.
     O jīva, why have you become like a fish fallen into Māyā's net? You do not know that you will be trapped in that net for a very long time.

Text 2 
ati-tuccha bhoga āśe bandī ho'ye māyā-pāśe
rohile bikṛta-bhābe daṇḍya jathā parādhīna
     ati - very; tuccha - insignificanr; bhoga - pleasure;āśe - desire; bandī - bound; ho'ye - are; māyā-pāśe - in Maya's net;rohile - stay; bikṛta - unnatural; bhābe - condition; daṇḍya - to be punished; jathā - as; para - on others; adhīna - dependent.
     Yearning to taste pathetic pleasures, you remain trapped in Māyā's net. Your life is unnatural. You are sick at heart. Dependent on others, you are punished again and again.

Text 3 
ekhona bhakati-bale kṛṣṇa-prema-sindhu-jale
krīḍā kori' anāyāse thāko tumi kṛṣṇādhīna
     ekhona - one; bhakati - of devotional service; bale - by the power; kṛṣṇa-prema - of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa; sindhu - of theocean; jale - in the water; krīḍā - playing; kori' - doing; anāyāse - easily; thākaḥ - stay; tumi - you; kṛṣṇaon LordKṛṣṇa; adhīna - dependent.
     By the power of devotional service, you will be set free. Playing in the ocean of love for Kṛṣṇa, you will take shelter of Kṛṣṇa and be His servant.



Song 3

Text 1
pīriti sac-cid-ānande rūpabatī nārī
doyā-dharma-ādi guṇa alaṅkāra saba tāhāri
     pīriti - love; sac-cid-ānande - eternal and full of knowledge and bliss; rūpabatī - beautiful; nārī - woman;doyā - mercy; dharma - piety; ādi - beginning; guṇa - virtues; alaṅkāra - ornaments; saba - all; tāhāri - onher.
     Love for the eternal, blissful, all-knowing Supreme Personality of Godhead is a beautiful woman decorated with ornaments of mercy, piety, and other virtues.

Text 2 
jñāna tā'ra paṭṭa-śāṭī joga-gandha-paripāṭi
e sabe śobhita satī kore kṛṣṇa-mana curi
     jñāna - knowledge; tā'ra - of her; paṭṭa-śāṭī - silk garment; joga - yoga; gandha-paripāṭi - perfume; e - this; sabe - all; śobhita - beautiful; satī - saintly; kore - does; kṛṣṇa-mana - of 
Lord Kṛṣṇa's heart; curi - steals.
     Knowledge is her silk garment. Yoga is her perfume. Very beautiful, she charm's Lord Kṛṣṇa's heart.

Text 3 
rūpa binā alaṅkāre kibā śobhā e soṁsāre
pīriti-bihīna guṇe kṛṣṇa na tuṣite pāri
     rūpa - nbeauty; binā - without; alaṅkāre - ornaments;kibā - how?; śobhā - beauty; e - this; soṁsāre - in the world;pīriti - love; bihīna - without; guṇe - virtue; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;na - not; tuṣite - pleases; pāri - is able.
     How can ornaments make an ugly girl beautiful in this world? If a person has virtues but no love, how can he please Lord Kṛṣṇa?

Text 4 
bānarīra alaṅkāra śobhā nā hoya tā'ra
kṛṣṇa-prema binā tathā guṇe nā ādara kori
     bānarīra - of a monkey; alaṅkāra - ornament;śobhā - beauty; nā - not; hoya - isd; tā'ra - of her; kṛṣṇa-prema - love forLord Kṛṣṇa; binā - without; tathā - so; guṇe - virtue; nā - not;ādara - honor; kori - I do.


     Ornaments do not make a monkey beautiful. In the same way, I do not honor virtues when love for Lord Kṛṣṇa is absent.




Song 4

Text 1
nirākāra nirākāra koriyā citkāra
keno sādhakera śānti-bhaṅgo bhāi bāra bāra
     nirākāra - formless; nirākāra - formless; koriyā - doing; cītkāra - screaming; kenaḥ - why?; sādhakera - of the devotees; śānti - peace; bhaṅgaḥ - breaking; bhāi - O brother;bāra - again; 
bāra - and again.
     Again and again screaming, "Formless! Formless!", why do you break the devotees' peace, O my brothers?

Text 2 
tumi ja' bujhecho bhāla tai lo'ye kāṭo kāla
bhakti binā phalodoya tarke nāhi jāno sāra
     tumi - you; jā' -  - which; bujhechaḥ - know;bhāla - good; tai - that; lo'ye - accept; kāṭaḥ - cut; kāla - time; bhakti - devotionalservice; binā - without; phala - results; udoya - arisal; tarke - in logic; nāhi - not; jānaḥ - know; sāra - best.
     You think you know the truth, but you are only wasting time. Please know that if devotional service is absent, then logic and argument cannot bring anything that is good.

Text 3 
sāmānya tarkere bale bhakti nāhi āswādile
janama hoilo bṛthā nā korile su-bicāra
     sāmānya - ordinary; tarkere - by logic; bale - by the power; bhakti - devotional serviuce; nāhi - not; āswādile - onerelishes; janama - birth; hoilaḥ - is; bṛthā - useless; nā - not; korile - does; su-bicāra - proper understanding.
     Using only ordinary logic, you could not taste the sweetness of devotional service. Your lives are wasted. You could not understand the truth.

Text 4 
rūpāśroye kṛṣṇa bhaji' jadi hari-preme maji
tā' hole alabhya bhāi ki koribe bolo āra
     rūpāśroye - in the shelter of Śrīla Rupa Gosvami; kṛṣṇa - Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhaji' - worshiping; jadi - if; hari-preme - love forLordx Kṛṣṇa; maji - I plunge; tā' - that; hole - say; alabhya - unattainable; bhāi - O brothers; ki - what; koribe - youwill do; bolaḥ - say; āra - other.
     If I take shelter of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, worship Lord Kṛṣṇa, and dive into the nectar of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa, what will I not attain? What do you say to that?


Song 5

Text 1
keno āra koro dweṣa bideṣi-jana-bhajane
bhajanera liṅga nānā nānā deśe nānā jane
     kenaḥ - why?; āra - and; koraḥ - do; dweṣa - hatred; bideṣi - of other countries; jana - of people; bhajane - of worship; bhajanera - ofworship; liṅga - signs; nānā - various; nānā - various;deśe - countries; nānā - various; jane - people.
     Why do you dislike the way foreigners worship the Lord? Different people in different countries have different ways of worship.

Text 2 
keho mukta-kacche bhaje keho hāṭu gār6i' pūje
keho ba nayana mudi' thāke brahma-arādhāne
     kehaḥ - some; mukta-kacche - Buddhists; bhaje - worship;kehaḥ - some; hāṭu - knees; gār6i' - bowing; pūje - worship;kehaḥ - some; ba - or; nayana - eyes; mudi' - closing; thāke - stay; brahma-arādhāne - worshiping Brahman.
     Some worship as Buddhists. Others kneel down when they worship. Others close their eyes and worship the impersonal Brahman.

Text 3 
keha jogāsane pūje keho saṅkīrtana maje
sakala bhajiche sei eka-mātro kṛṣṇa-dhane
     keha - some; jogāsane - yoga pastures; pūje - worship;kehaḥ - some; saṅkīrtana - sankirtana; maje - dive; sakala - all;bhajiche - worship; sei - this; eka-mātraḥ - one only; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; dhane - treasure.
     Other sit in yoga postures and worship. Others dive into saṅkīrtana. All worship the same Supreme Person, the same treasure, the same Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 4 
ata eba bhrātṛ-bhābe thāko sabe su-sad-bhābe
hari-bhakti sādho sadā e jībane bā maraṇe
     ata eba - therefore; bhrātṛ-bhābe - as brothers;thākaḥ - stay; sabe - all; su-sad-bhābe - with ecstatic love; hari-bhakti - devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa; sādhaḥ - desire;sadā - always; e - this; 
jībane - in life; bā - or; maraṇe - in death.


     Everyone should be brothers. Everyone should serve Lord Kṛṣṇa with great love, both throughout life and at the moment of death.




Song 6

Text 1
bhaja re bhaja re āmāra mana ati manda
(bhajana binā gati nāi re)
(bhaja) braja-bane rādhā-kṛṣṇa-caraṇārabinda
(jñāna-karma parihari' re) 
(bhaja) (braja-bane rādhā-kṛṣṇa)
     bhaja - worship; re - O; āmāra - my; mana - mind;ati - very; manda - slow; bhajana - worship; binā - without;gati - destination; nāi - not; re - O; bhaja - worship; braja-bane - the forests of Vraja;rādhā-kṛṣṇa-caraṇārabinda - the lotus feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa;jñāna-karma - jnana and karma; parihari' - renouncing.
     Worship! Worship, O my slow mind!
     (Without worshiping the Lord, you will not attain the goal of life.)
     (Worship) the lotus feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the forests of Vraja!
     (Ah! Renounce jñāna and karma.)
     (Worship) (Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the forests of Vraja) 

Text 2 
(bhaja) gaura-gadādharādwaita guru-nityānanda
(gaura-kṛṣṇe abheda jene' re)
(guru-kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha jene' re)
(smara) śrīnibāsa haridāsa murāri mukunda
(gaura-preme smara smara re)
(smara) (gaura-preme smara smara re)
(smara) (śrīnibāsa-haridāse)
     bhaja - worship; gaura-gadādharādwaita - Kaṁsa, Gadādahara, and Advaita; guru-nityānanda - Guru Nityānanda; (gaura-kṛṣṇe - Gaura-Kṛṣṇa; abheda - not different; jene' - know; re) - O; (guru-kṛṣṇapreṣṭha - dear to guru and Kṛṣṇa; jene' - know; re) - O;(smara) - remember; śrīnibāsa - Śrīvasa; haridāsa - Haridasa; murāri - Murari; mukunda - Mukunda; gaura-preme - with love for LordCaitanya; smara - remember.
     (Worship) Lord Caitanya, Lord Nityānanda, Lord Advaita, and Lord Gadādhara.
     (Know that Lord Caitanya is not different from Lord Kṛṣṇa.)
     (Know that the spiritual master is most dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa.)
     (Remember) Śrīvāsa, Haridāsa \Thkura, Murāri Gupta, and Mukunda.
     (Filled with love for Lord Caitanya, remember them. Remember them!)
     (Remember) (Śrīvāsa, Haridāsa \Thkura, and the others.)

Text 3 
(smara) rūpa-sanātana-jība-raghunātha-dwandwa
(kṛṣṇa-bhajana jadi korbe re)
(rūpa-sanātane smara)
(smara) rāghaba-gopāla-bhaṭṭa-swarūpa-rāmānanda
(kṛṣṇa-prema jadi cāo re)
(swarūpa-rāmānande smara)
     smara - remember; rūpa-sanātana-jība-raghunātha-dwandwa - Rūpa, Sanātana, Jīva, the two Raghunāthas; kṛṣṇa-bhajana - worship of Lord Kṛṣṇa; jadi - of; korbe - you will do; re - Oh; smara - remember;rāghaba-gopāla-bhaṭṭa-swarūpa-rāmānanda - Rāghava-, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, Svarūpa, and Rāmānanda; kṛṣṇa-prema - love for Lord Kṛṣṇa; jadi - if; cāaḥ - youdesire; re) - Oh.
     (Remember) Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī, and the two Raghunāthas
     (if you wish to worship Lord Kṛṣṇa.)
     (Remember Rūpa and Sanātana.)
     (Remember) Rāghava Paṇḍita, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, Svarūpa Dāmodara, and Rāmānanda Rāya
     (if you yearn to fall in love with Lord Kṛṣṇa.)
     (Remember Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāmānanda Rāya.)

Text 4 
(smara) goṣṭhi-saha karṇapūra sena śibānanda
(ajasra smara smara re)
(goṣṭhi-saha karṇapūre)
(smara) rūpānuga sādhu-jana bhajana-ānanda
(braje bāsa jadi cāo re)
rūpānuga sadhu smara)
     smara - remember; goṣṭhi-saha - with his associates; karṇapūra - Kavi-karnapura; sena śibānanda - Śivananda Sena; ajasra - always; smara - remember; rūpānuga - the followers of Rupa Gosvami; sādhu-jana - saintly devotees; bhajana-ānanda - the bliss of devotional service; (braje - in Vraja; bāsa - residence; jadi - if;cāaḥ - you desire.
     (Remember Kavi-karṇapūra, Śivānanda Sena, and their associates.
     (Always remember them. Remember them.)
     (Kavi-karṇapūra and his associates.)
     (Remember) Rūpa Gosvāmī's saintly followers who taste the bliss of devotional service
     (if you yearn to live in Vraja.)
     (Remember Rūpa Gosvāmī's saintly followers.)


Song 7

Text 1
bhābanā bhābanā mana tumi ati duṣṭa
(biṣaya-biṣe āche he)
kāma-krodha-lobha-moha-madādi-abiṣṭa
(ripura baśe āche he)
     bhābanā - think; mana - O heart; tumi - You; ati - very; duṣṭa - wicked; biṣaya - of material sense pleasures; biṣe - in the poison; āche - are; he - Oh; kāma - lust; krodha - anger; lobha - greed;moha - illusion; mada - madness; ādi - beginning with; abiṣṭa - surrounded; ripura - of your enemies; baśe - in the control; āche - are; he - Oh.
     Think! Think, O my heart! You are very wicked. 
     (You drink the poison of sense pleasures.)
     You are surrounded by lust, anger, greed, illusion, madness, and a host of faults.
     (You are in the grip of my enemies.)

Text 2 
asad-bārtā-bhukti-mukti-pipāsā-ākṛṣṭa
(asat-kathā bhalo lāge he)
pratiṣṭhāśā-kuṭināṭi-śaṭhatādi-piṣṭa
(sarala to' ho'le nā he)
ghireche tomāre bhāi e saba ariṣṭa
(e saba to' śatru he)
     asat - not good; bārtā - news; bhukti - sense gratification; mukti - impersonal liberation; pipāsā - thirst; ākṛṣṭa - attracted; asat-kathā - bad talks; bhalaḥ - good; lāge - accept; he - O; pratiṣṭhā - fame; āśā - desire; kuṭināṭi - crooked diplomacy; śaṭhatā - cheating; ādi - beginning with; piṣṭa - crushed into powder;sarala - honest; to' - you; ho'le - are; nā - not; he - O;ghireche - surround; tomāre - you; bhāi - O my brother; e - these; saba - all;ariṣṭa - calamities; e - they; saba - all; to' - your; śatru - enemies; he - Oh.
     You thirst after sense pleasure, impersonal liberation, and mindless gossip. 
     (You think mindless gossip is very pleasant.)
     Crooked diplomacy, cheating, hankering for fame, and a host of other faults crush you into powder.
     (You are not honest.)
     All these dangers now surround you, O my brother.
     (They are all your enemies.)

Text 3 


e saba na cher6e kise pā'be rādhā-kṛṣṇa
(jatane chār6o chār6o he)
sādhu-saṅga binā āra kothā taba iṣṭa
(sādhu-saṅga koro koro he)
baiṣṇaba-caraṇa maja ghucibe aniṣṭa
(eka-bāra bhebe' dekho he)
     e - these; saba - all; na - not; cher6e - renounce;kise - how?; pā'be - you will attain; rādhā-kṛṣṇa - Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; jatane - with agreat effort; chār6aḥ - renounce; he - Oh; sādhu-saṅga - theassociation of devotees; binā - without; āra - or; kothā - where?;taba - of you; iṣṭa - desired; sādhu-saṅga - association of devotees; koraḥ - do; he - Oh; baiṣṇaba-caraṇa - the feet of the Vaiṣnavas; maja - dive; ghucibe - will destroy; aniṣṭa - not desired;eka - one; bāra - one; bhebe' - think; dekhaḥ - see; he - Oh.
     If you do not turn from all these, how will you attain Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa?
     (Struggle to give them up! Give them  up!)
     Without associating with devotees, how will you attain your desire?
     (Associate with devotees! Associate with them!)
     Dive before the feet of the Vaisnavas. Then you will destroy all your faults.
     (Just once think of all this. Look at all this.)




Part 10 Śrī Rādhāṣṭaka



Song 1

Texts 1 and 2
rādhikā-caraṇa-padma          sakala-śreyera sadma
jatane je nāhi āradhilo
rādhā-padmāṅkita-dhāma        bṛndābana jāra nāma
taha je nā āśroya korilo


     rādhikā-caraṇa-padma - the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā; sakala-śreyera - of all thta is good; sadma - the abode; jatane - withcare; je - which; nāhi - not; āradhilaḥ - worshiped;rādhā - of Rādhā; 
padma - lotus; aṅkita - marked; dhāma - abode;bṛndābana - Vṛndāvana; jāra - of whom; nāma - the name; taha - of You; je - whioch; nā - not; āśroya - shelter; korilaḥ - does.
     How can a person who in this life did not earnestly worship Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet, the abodes of all auspiciousness, did not take shelter of Śrī Rādhā's lotus abode, which bears the name 
Vṛndāvana... 

rādhikā-bhāba-gambhira        citta jeba mahā-dhīra
gaṇa-saṅge na koilo jībane
kemone se śyāmānanda          rasa-sindhu-snānānanda
labhibe bujhoha eka-mane

 rādhikā - for Rādhā;bhāba - love; gambhira - deep; citta - heart; jeba - who; mahā-dhīra - very saintly; gaṇa - multitudes; saṅge - association; na - not; koilaḥ - does; jībane - in life; kemone - how?; se - he; śyāmānanda - of LordKṛṣṇa; rasa - nectar; sindhu - ocean; snāna - bathing;ānanda - bliss; labhibe - will obtain; bujhoha - please know; eka-mane - with one mind.

...and did not associate with the great souls who deeply love Rādhā joyfully bathe in the nectar ocean of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa? Please know this with a single heart.

Text 3 
rādhikā ujjwala-raser ācārja
rādhā-mādhaba-śuddha-prema bicārja
     rādhikā - Śrī Rādhā; ujjwala - splendid; raseḥ - of the rasa; ācārja - the ācārya; rādhā-mādhaba - Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; śuddha - pure; prema - love; bicārja - to be considered.
     Śrī Rādhā is the teacher of ujjvala-rasa. Now we will consider the topic of pure love for Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.



Text 4 
je dhorilo rādhā-pada parama jatane
se pāilo kṛṣṇa-pada amūlya-ratane
     je - who; dhorilaḥ - holds; rādhā-pada - Śrī Rādhā's feet; parama - with great; jatane - care; se - he;pāilaḥ - attains; kṛṣṇa-pada - Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet; amūlya - priceless; ratane - jewel.
     Anyone who earnestly takes shelter of Śrī Rādhā's feet will attain the priceless jewel that is Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet.

Text 5 
rādhā-pada binā kabhu kṛṣṇa nāhi mile
rādhāra dāsīra kṛṣṇa sarba-bede bole
     rādhā-pada - Śrī Rādhā's feet; binā - without;kabhu - when; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; nāhi - not; mile - meets; rādhāra - ofRādhā; dāsīra - of the maidservant; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; sarba-bede - all the Vedas; bole - say.
     Without first taking shelter of Śrī Rādhā's feet, one will never meet Lord Kṛṣṇa. Lord Kṛṣṇa is the property of Śrī Rādhā's maidservants. This all the Vedas say.

Text 6 
chorato dhana-jana       kalatra-suta-mita
chorato karama geyāna
rādhā-pada-paṅkaja       madhurata sebana
bhakatibinoda paramāṇa
     chorataḥ - renouncing; dhana - wealth; jana - and followers; kalatra - wife; suta - children; mita - friends;chorataḥ - renouncing; karama - karma; geyāna - jnana; rādhā-pada-paṅkaja - Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet; madhurata - sweet; sebana - service; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; paramāṇa - testimony.
     Renouncing wealth, followers, wife, children, and friends, and turning away from karma and jñāna, Bhaktivinoda vows to dedicate his life to the sweet service of Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet.




Song 2

Text 1
birajara pare śuddha-parabyoma-dhāma
tad-upari śrī-gokula-bṛndāraṇya-nāma
     birajara - the Viraja river; pare - beyond; śuddha-parabyoma-dhāma - the pure spiritual abode; tad-upari - above that; śrī-gokula-bṛndāraṇya-nāma - named Śrī Gokula Vṛndāvana.
     On the farther shore of the Virajā River is the pure spiritual sky, and above that sky is the world named Śrī Gokula Vṛndāvana.

Text 2 
bṛndābana-cintāmaṇi      cid-ānanda-ratna-khani
cinmoya apūrba-daraśana
tahi mājhe camatkāra          kṛṣṇa-banaspati-sāra
nīlamaṇi tamāla jemona
     bṛndābana - Vṛndāvana; cintāmaṇi - cintamani; cit - spiritual; ānanda - bliss; ratna - jewels;khani - abode; cinmoya - spiritual; apūrba - wonderful and unprecedented; daraśana - sight;tahi - there; mājhe - in the midst; camatkāra - wonderful; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa;-banaspati-sāra - the best of trees; nīlamaṇi - sapphire; tamāla - tamal; jemona - like.
     Vṛndāvana is made of cintāamaṇi jewels. It is filled with the jewels of spiritual bliss. Everything there is spiritual. It is very wonderful to see. In the middle of that abode is 
wonderful Kṛṣṇa, who is like a glorious sapphire tamāla tree.

Text 3 
tahe eka swarṇamoyī      latā sarba-dhāma-jayī
uṭhiyāche parama-pābanī
hlādinī-śaktira sāra          mahā-bhāba nāma jāra
tribhūbana-mohana-mohinī
     tahe - there; eka - one; swarṇamoyī - golden;latā - vine; sarba-dhāma-jayī - most glorious; uṭhiyāche - grows; parama-pābanī - most pure; hlādinī-śaktira - pleasure potency; sāra - best; mahā-bhāba - great ecstasy; nāma - name; jāra - of whom; tribhūbana-mohana - the persopn who charms the three worlds; mohinī - charms.
     On that tree grows a most effulgent and pure golden vine, a vine that is the Lord's hlādinī śakti (pleasure potency), a vine that bears the name "Mahā-bhāva" (greatest ecstasy of love), a vinethat charms the person who charms the three worlds.

Text 4 
rādhā-nāme paricita      tuṣiyā gobinda-cita
birājaye parama ānande
sei latā-patra-phula          lalitādi-sakhī-kula
sabe mili' bṛkhe dṛḍha bandhe
     rādhā-nāme - by the name Rādhā; paricita - known; tuṣiyā - pleasing; gobinda-cita - Kṛṣṇa's heart; birājaye - is gracefully present; parama ānande - with great bliss; sei - this; latā - of the vine; patra - the leaves; phula - and flowers; lalitādi-sakhī - the friends beginning with Lalitā;
kula - multitudes; sabe - all; mili' - meeting; bṛkhe - on thetree; dṛḍha - firm; bandhe - embrace.
     Also known by the name "Rādhā", that vine joyfully pleases Lord Kṛṣṇa's heart. That vine's flowers and leaves, which are Lalitā and the other gopīs, all tightly embrace that tree.

Text 5 
latāra paraśe praphulla tamāla
latā chāri' nāhi rahe kono kāla
     latāra - of the vine; paraśe - by the touch; praphulla - blossomed; tamāla - the tamala tree; latā - the vine; chāri' - leaving; nāhi - not; rahe - stays; konaḥ - any; kāla - time.
     Touched by the vine, the tamāla tree bears flowers. Not for a moment will that vine ever leave.

Text 6 
tamāla chāriyā latā nāhi bāñche
se latā milana sadā-kāla jāce
     tamāla - the tamala tree; chār6iyā - leaving; latā - thevine; nāhi - not; bāñche - desires; se - that; latā - vine;milana - meeting; sadā-kāla - always; jāce - requests.
     That vine never desires to leave the tamāla tree. The vine always prays to stay with that tree.

Text 7 
bhakatibinoda milana doṅhāra
nā cāhe kakhona binā kichu āra
     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; milana - meeting; doṅhāra - of Themboth; nā - not; cāhe - desires; kakhona - at any time;binā - without; kichu - something; āra - other.
     Bhaktivinoda desires to meet that divine couple. He does not desire anything else.




Song 3

Text 1
ramaṇī-śiromaṇi          bṛṣabhānu-nandinī
nīla-basana-paridhānā
chinna-puraṭa jini'          barṇa-bikāśinī
baddha-kabarī hari-prāṇa
     ramaṇī - of beautiful girls; śiromaṇi - the crest jewel; bṛṣabhānu-nandinī - King Vrsabhanu;s daughter; nīla - blue; basana - garments; paridhānā - wearing; chinna-puraṭa - molten gold;jini' - defeating; barṇa-bikāśinī - complexion; baddha - bound; kabarī - braids; hari - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; prāṇa - the life-breath.
     King Vṛṣabhānu's daughter is the crest jewel of all beautiful girls. Dressed in blue garments, Her braids gracefully tied, and Her fair complexion conquering molten gold, She is Lord Kṛṣṇa's life.

Text 2 
ābharaṇa-maṇḍitā         hari-rasa-paṇḍitā
tilaka-suśobhita-bhālā
kañculikācchāditā        stana-maṇi-maṇḍitā
kajjala-nayanī rasālā
     ābharaṇa - with ornaments; maṇḍitā - decorated; hari-rasa-paṇḍitā - learned in the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa; tilaka - tilaka; suśobhita - glorious; bhālā - forehead; kañculika - by a bodice; ācchāditā - covered; stana - breast; maṇi - jewels; maṇḍitā - decorated; kajjala - mascara; nayanī - eyes; rasālā - delightful and charming like nectar.
     Gracefully decorated with ornaments, Her forehead graceful with tilaka, Her jewel breasts gracefully covered by a bodice, and Her eyes gracefully decorated with mascara, She is delightful 
and charming like nectar.

Text 3 
sakala tyajiyā se rādhā-caraṇe
dāsī ho'ye bhaja parama-jatane
     sakala - all; tyajiyā - renouncing; se - this; rādhācaraṇe - Śrī Rādhā's feet; dāsī - a maidservant; ho'ye - become;bhaja - worship; parama-jatane - with great earnestness.
     Renouncing everything, I will become a maidservant and earnestly worship Śrī Rādhā's feet.

Text 4 
saundarja-kiraṇa dekhiyā jaṅhāra
rati-gaurī-līlā garba-parihāra
     saundarja - of beauty; kiraṇa - effulgence; dekhiyā - seeing; jaṅhāra - of whom; rati-gaurī-līlā - Rati, Gauri, and Lila; garba - rpide; parihāra - removal.
     Gazing at the splendor of Rādhā's beauty, Rati, Gaurī, and Līlā find all their pride taken away.

Text 5 
śacī-lakṣmī-satyā saubhāgya bolane
parājita hoya jāṅhāra caraṇe
     śacī-lakṣmī-satyā - of saci, Satya, and Lakṣmī; saubhāgya - the good fortune; bolane - increase;parājita - defeated; hoya - is; jāṅhāra - of whom; caraṇe - at the feet.
     At Rādhā's feet the good fortune of Śacī, Lakṣmī, and Satyā are defeated.

Text 6 
kṛṣṇa-baśīkāre candrābalī-ādi
parājaya māne hoiyā bibādī
     kṛṣṇa - Lord Kṛṣṇa; baśīkāre - to bring under control; candrābalī-ādi - headed by Candravali; parājaya - defeat; māne – in jealous pride; hoiyā - being; bibādī - dispute.
     Competing with Rādhā to conquer Kṛṣṇa, Candrāvalī and her friends are defeated.

Text 7 
hari-doyitā rādhā-caraṇa prayāsī
bhakatibinoda śrī-godruma-bāsī
     hari - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; doyitā - beloved; rādhā-caraṇa - ŚrīRādhā's feet; prayāsī - earnestly strives; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; śrī-godruma-bāsī - a resident of Śrī Godruma.
     Bhaktivinoda, who lives at Śrī Godruma, strives to attain Śrī Rādhā's feet, which are so dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa.




Song 4

Text 1
rasika-nāgarī-      gaṇa-śiromaṇi
kṛṣṇa-preme sara-haṁsī
bṛṣabhānu-rāja      śuddha-kalpa-ballī
sarba-lakṣmī-gaṇa-aṁśī
     rasika - who taste nectar; nāgarī-gaṇa - of heroines; śiromaṇi - the crest jewel; kṛṣṇa-preme - love for Lord Kṛṣṇa;sara-haṁsī - a graceful female swan; bṛṣabhānu-rāja - of King Vrsabhanu; śuddha - pure; kalpa-ballī - desire vine;sarba - all; lakṣmī-gaṇa - goddesses of fortune; aṁśī - the parts.
     Śrī Rādhā is the crest jewel of all amorous girls expert at tasting nectar. She is a graceful swan in the lake of pure love for Lord Kṛṣṇa. She is a pure kalpa-latā vine grown from King 
Vṛṣabhānu. All goddesses of fortune are parts of Her.

Text 2 
rakta paṭṭa-bastra          niṭamba-upari
khudra-ghaṇṭi dule tā'ya
kuca-jugopari       dhuli' muktā-mālā
citta-hārī śobhā pāya
     rakta - red; paṭṭa-bastra - silk cloth; niṭamba - hips; upari - over; khudra - small; ghaṇṭi - bells; dule - dangles; tā'ya - of Her; kuca - breasts; juga - pair; upari - over; dhuli' - dangling; muktā-mālā - necklave of pearls; citta - the heart; hārī - enchanting; śobhā - beauty; pāya - attaining.
     On Her hips a red silk garment and small tinkling bells, and over Her breasts a necklace of pearls, beautiful Rādhā charms Lord Kṛṣṇa's heart.

Text 3 
sarasija-bara-       karṇikā-samāna
atiśoya kāntimatī
kaiśora-amṛta       tāruṇya-karpūra
miśra-smitādhara satī
     sarasija - of lotus flowers; bara - the best; karṇikā - the whorl; samāna - like; atiśoya - very; 
kāntimatī - splendidly beautiful; kaiśora - of youth; amṛta - the nectar; tāruṇya - of youth; karpūra - the camphor; miśra - mixed; smita - miling; adhara - lips; satī - graceful.
     She is splendidly beautiful, like the whorl of the most graceful lotusflower. On Her smiling lips are the nectar of youth's beginning and the camphor of youth's fullness.

Text 4 
banānte āgata       braja-pati-suta
parama-cañcala-bore
heri' śaṅkhākula         nayana-bhaṅgite
ādarete staba kore
     bana - of the forest; ante - at the end; āgata - arrived; braja - of Vraja; pati - of the king; suta - the son;parama - most; cañcala - restless and mischievous; bore - best; heri' - seeing;śaṅkhā - with anxieites; ākula - filled; nayana - eyes; bhaṅgite - crooked; ādarete - worship; staba - prayers;kore - does.
     Seeing Him come from the forest's edge, She worshiped Vraja's prince with many prayers spoken by the anxious, restless, mischievous, crooked glances from the corners of Her eyes.

Text 5 
brajera mahilā-          gaṇera parāṇa
jaśomatī-priya-pātrī
lalita-lalitā-          snehete praphulla-
śarīrā lalita-gātrī
     brajera - of Vraja; mahilā - of the women; gaṇera - of the multitudes; paraṇa - the life; jaśomatī-priya - dear toYasoda; pātrī - the object; lalita - playful and graceful; lalitā - of 
Lalita; snehete - by the love; praphulla - blossomed;śarīrā - body; lalita - graceful; gātrī - with limbs.
     She is the life of Vraja's women and the object of Yaśodā's affection. Because of graceful Lalitā's love, every limb on Her body blossoms with perfect beauty and grace.

Text 6 
biśākhāra sane      bana-phula tuli'
gāṇṭhe baijayantī mālā
sakala-śreyasī      kṛṣṇa-bakhaḥ-sthitā
parama-preyasī bālā
     biśākhāra - of Visakha; sane - in the company; bana - forest; phula - flower; tuli' - picking; gāṇṭhe - strings; baijayantī - vaijayanti; mālā - garland; sakala-śreyasī - best of all; kṛṣṇa-bakhaḥ - on Kṛṣṇa's chest; sthitā - situated; parama-preyasī - most dear; bālā - girl.
     Accompanied by Viśākhā, She picks forest flowers and makes a Vaijayantī garland. The best and most dear of all the gopīs, She rests on Lord Kṛṣṇa's chest.



Text 7 
snigdha-beṇu-rabe        druta-gati jāi'
kuñje peye naṭa-bore
hasita-noyanī       namra-mukhī satī
karṇa kaṇḍūyana kore
     snigdha - dear; beṇu - flute; rabe - sound; druta-gati - quickly; jāi' - goes; kuñje - forest; peye - attains; naṭa-bore - the best of dancers; hasita - smiling; noyanī - eyes; namra-mukhī - bowed head;satī - saintly; karṇa - ears; kaṇḍūyana - scratching kore.
     Hearing the sweet sound of the flute, She runs to the forest and finds Kṛṣṇa, the best of dancers. Her eyes smiling and Her head shyly lowered, She scratches Her ear.

Text 8 
sparśiyā kamala          bāyu su-śītala
kore jabe kuṇḍa-nīra
nidāghe tathāya          nija-gaṇa saha
tuṣāya gokula-bīra
     sparśiyā - touching; kamala - lotus; bāyu - breeze; su-śītala - cool; kore - does; jabe kuṇḍa - of the lake; nīra - water; nidāghe - in summer; tathāya - there; nija-gaṇa - associates; saha - with; tuṣāya - pleases; gokula-bīra - Gokula's hero.
     Touching the lotus flowers, a breeze cools Her lake in the hot summer. Accompanied by Her friends, there She pleases Gokula's hero.

Text 9 
bhakatibinoda       rūpa-raghunāthe
kohaye caraṇa dhori'
heno rādhā-dāsya         sudhīra-sampada
kabe dibe kṛpā kori'
     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; rūpa-raghunāthe - Rup and Raghunatha; kohaye - says; caraṇa - the feet;dhori' - grasping; henaḥ - like this; rādhā-dāsya - service to Śrī Rādhā; sudhīra - of the sainlty;sampada - the treasure; kabe - when; dibe - will give;kṛpā - mercy; kori' - doing.
     Grasping their feet, Bhaktivinoda says to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha Gosvāmī, "When will you kindly give me direct service to Śrī Rādhā, service that is the great treasure sought by the saints?"




Song 5

Text 1
mahābhāba-cintāmaṇi      udbhābita-tanu-khāni
sakhī-pati-sajjā prabhābatī
kāruṇya-tāruṇya āra      lābaṇya-amṛta-dhārā
tāhe snātā lakṣmī-jayī satī
     mahābhāba - of ecstatic love; cintāmaṇi -       udbhābita - manifesteed; tanu - body; khāni - jewel mine;sakhī-pati-sajjā - decorated by Her friends; prabhābatī - splendid; kāruṇya - mercy; tāruṇya - youth; āra - and;lābaṇya - beauty; amṛta-dhārā - streams ofnectar; tāhe - in that; snātā - bathed; lakṣmī-jayī - defeating Lakṣmī; satī - saintly.
     Śrī Rādhā is a cintāmaṇi jewel of ecstatic love. Her form is a treasury of precious jewels. Dressed and decorated by Her friends, She is glorious. Bathing in the nectars of compassion, 
youth, and luster, She eclipses the goddess of fortune Lakṣmīdevī.

Text 2 
lajjā paṭṭa-bastra jāra          saundarja kuṅkuma-sāra
kasturī-citrita kalebara
kampāśru-pulaka-raṅga         stambha-sweda-swara-bhaṅga
jāḍyonmāda naba-ratna-dhara
     lajjā - shyness; paṭṭa-bastra - garment; jāra - of whom; saundarja - beauty; kuṅkuma-sāra - kunkuma; kasturī - with musk; citrita - pictures; kalebara - body; kampa - trembling; aśru - tears; pulaka - hairs erect;raṅga - ecstasy; stambha - stunned; sweda - perspiration; swara - voice; bhaṅga - broken; jāḍya - stunned; unmāda - madness; naba - nine;ratna - jewels; dhara - wearing.
     Her dress is composed of various kinds of silken garments, which may be compared to Her natural shyness. Her beauty is more and more enhanced, being decorated with kunkuma, which is compared to beauty itself, and with blackish musk, which is compared to conjugal love. Thus Her body is decorated with different colors. The kunkuma is red and the musk is black. Her ornaments embody the natural symptoms of ecstasy: trembling, tears, jubilation, stunning, perspiration, faltering of the voice, body redness, madness, and dulness. In this way the entire body is bedecked with these nine different jewels.*

Text 3 
pañca-biṁśati-guṇa       phula-mālā su-śobhana
dhīrādhīrā bhāba-paṭṭa-bāsā
pihita-māna-dhammillā         saubhāgya-tilakojjwalā
kṛṣṇa-nāma-jaśaḥ-karṇollāsā
     pañca-biṁśati-guṇa - 25 qualities; phula-mālā - flower garland; su-śobhana - beauty; 
dhīrādhīrāsober and restless bhāba-paṭṭa-bāsā - the garment of ecstasy; pihita - hidden; māna - jealous anger; dhammillā - braids; saubhāgya - good fortune; tilaka - tilaka; ujjwalā - splendor; kṛṣṇa-nāma - of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy name; jaśaḥ - glory;karṇa - of the ear; ullāsā - joy.
     The beauty of Her body is enhanced by Her twenty-five transcendental qualities, which hang as a flower garland on Her body. The ecstasy of love for Kṛṣṇa is known as dhīra and adhīra, 
sober and restless. Such ecstasy constitutes the covering of Śrī Rādhā's body, and it is adorned by camphor. Her transcendental anger toward Kṛṣṇa is embodied as the arrangement of the hair on Her head, and the tilaka of Her great fortune shines on Her beautiful forehead. The earrings of Śrī Rādhā are the holy names of Kṛṣṇa, as well as the hearing of His name and fame.*

Text 4 
rāga-tāmbūlita-oṣṭha          kauṭilya-kajjala-spaṣṭa
smita-karpūrita narma-śīlā
kīrti-jaśa-antaḥ-pure         garba-khaṭṭopari sphure
dulita prema-baicittya-mālā
     rāga - red; tāmbūlita - betelnuts; oṣṭha - lips; kauṭilya - black; kajjala - mascara; spaṣṭa - manifest; smita - smile; karpūrita - camphor; narma - playful and joking;śīlā - ntaure; kīrti-jaśa - glory and fame; antaḥ-pure - in the inner rooms; garba - pride; khaṭṭa - bed; upari - on; sphure - manifest; dulita – manifest;  prema-baicittya-mālā - the garland of prema-vaicittya.
     Her lips are always reddish due to the betelnut of ecstatic affection for Kṛṣṇa. The black ointment around Her eyes is Her tricky behavior with Kṛṣṇa brought about by love. Her joking with Kṛṣṇa and gentle smiling is the camphor with which She is perfumed. She sleeps in Her room with the aroma of pride, and when She lies down in Her bed, the transcendental variety of Her loving ecstasies is like a jeweled locked in the midst of Her necklace of separation.*

Text 5 
prāṇaya-roṣa-kañculī-         pihita stana-jugmakā
candrā-jayī kacchapī-rabinī
sakhī-dwaya-skhande līlā-          karāmbujārpaṇa-śīlā
śyāmā śyāmāmṛta-bitaraṇī
     prāṇaya - of love; roṣa - anger; kañculī - bodice;pihita - covered; stana-jugmakā - breasts; 
candrā - moon; jayī - defeating; kacchapī - vina;rabinī - playign; sakhī - friends; dwaya - two; skhande - on the shoulders; līlā - pastime; kara - hand; ambuja - lotus flower; arpaṇa-śīlā - placing; śyāmā - beautiful; śyāma - of Kṛṣṇa; amṛta - nectar; bitaraṇī - giving.
     Her transcendental breasts are covered by Her sari in the form of affection and anger toward Kṛṣṇa. She has a stringed instrument known as a kacchapī-vīṇā, which is the fame and fortune that actually dries up the faces and breasts of the other gopīs. She always keeps Her hands on the shoulder of a gopī friend, who is compared to Her youthful beauty, and although She is highly qualified with so many spiritual assets, She is nonetheless affected by the Cupid known as Kṛṣṇa. Thus She is defeated.*

Text 6 
e heno rādhikā-pada      tomādera su-sampada
dante tṛṇa jāce taba pāya
e bhaktibinoda dīna      rādhā-dāsyāmṛta-kaṇa
rūpa-raghunātha deho tāya
     e henaḥ - in this way; rādhikā-pada - Śrī Rādhā's feet; tomādera - of You; su-sampada - treasure; dante - teeth;tṛṇa - straw; jāce - begs; taba - of You; pāya - attaining; e - this; 
bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; dīna - poor; rādhā - to Rādhā;dāsya - of service; amṛta - nectar; 
kaṇa - drop; rūpa-raghunātha - O Rupa and Raghunatha; dehaḥ - please give; tāya - to him.
     Śrī Rādhā's feet are your treasure. Placing a straw between his teeth, poor Bhaktivinoda prays, "O Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, O Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, please give me a drop of the nectar of direct service to Śrī Rādhā."




Song 6

Text 1
baraja-bipine       jamunā-kūle
mañca manohara      śobhita phule
     baraja - of Vraja; bipine - in the forest; jamunā-kūle - on the Yamuna's bank; mañca - on a platform; manohara - beautiful; śobhita - beautiful; phule - flowers.
     On the Yamunā's bank in Vraja's forest is a beautiful platform graceful with many flowers.

Text 2 
banaspati-latā      tuṣaye āṅkhi
tad-upari kata      ḍākaye pākhī
     banaspati - trees; latā - and vines; tuṣaye - please; āṅkhi - eyes; tad-upari - above them; kata - how many?; ḍākayecall; pākhī - birds.
     There the trees and vines delight the eyes. How many birds sing there?

Text 3 
malaya-anila        bahaye dhīre
ali-kula madhu          lobheye phīre
     malaya - Malaya; anila - breeze; bahaye - blows; dhīre - gentle; ali-kula - bees; madhu - honey; lobheye - greedily; phīre - fly.
     A fragrant Malaya breeze gently blows. Greedy for honey, many bees fly.

Text 4 
bāsantīra rāka      urupa tadā
kaumudī bitore          ādare sadā
     bāsantīra - of spring; rāka - the full moon; urupa - stars; tadā - then; kaumudī - moonlight; bitore - spreads        ādare - worships; sadā - always.
     The springtime moon and stars gloriously shine.

Text 5 
emata samaye        rasika-bara
ārambhilo rāsa      muralī-dhara
     emata samaye - at that time; rasika-bara - the best of rasikas; ārambhilaḥ - began; rāsa - rasa dance; muralī-dhara - the flute player.
     At that time the flute-player expert at tasting nectar pastimes began the rāsa dance.

Text 6 
śata-kotī-gopī      mājhete hori
rādhā-saha nāce          ānanda kori'
     śata - hundreds; kotī - millions; gopī - gopīs;mājhete - in the midst; hori - doing; rādhā-saha - with Rādhā;nāce - dances; ānanda - bloss; kori' - doing.
     Surrounded by hundreds and millions of gopīs, Kṛṣṇa joyfully danced with Rādhā.

Text 7 
mādhaba-mohinī      gāiyā gīta
harilo sakala       jagata cita
     mādhaba - Kṛṣṇa; mohinī - charming; gāiyā - singing;gīta - songs; harilaḥ - charmed; sakala - all; jagata - of the world; cita - the hearts.
     Singing many songs, Śrī Rādhā, the enchantress of Lord Kṛṣṇa, charmed the hearts of all the worlds.

Text 8 
stābara-jāṅgama          mohilā satī
hārāolo candrā-      balīra mati
     stābara - stationary; jāṅgama - and moving; mohilā - charmed; satī - saintly girl; hārāolaḥ - removes; candrābalīra - of Candravali; mati - the pride.
     She charms all moving and unmoving beings. She removes Candrāvalī's pride.

Text 9 
mathitā baraja-      kiśora-mana
antarita hoya       rādhā takhana
     mathitā - churning; baraja - of Vraja; kiśora - of the youth; mana - the heart; antarita - vanished; hoya - is; rādhā - Rādhā; takhana - then.
     After churning the heart of Vraja's young Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā suddenly vanishes.

Text 10 
bhakatibinoda       paramāda gaṇe
rāsa bhāṅgala (aji)      rādhā-bihane
     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; paramāda - calamity; gaṇe - percieves; rāsa - rasa dance; bhāṅgala - breaks;(aji) - now; rādhā - of Rādhā; bihane - in the absence.
     Bhaktivinoda sees a great calamity has come. In Rādhā's absence, the rāsa dance breaks.




Song 7

Text 1
śata-koṭi gopī      mādhaba-mana
rākhite nārilo      kori' jatana
     śata - hundreds; koṭi - and millions; gopī - of gopīs; mādhaba - of Kṛṣṇa; mana - the heart; rākhite - to protect;nārilaḥ - not; kori' - doing; jatana - effort.
     Earnestly trying, hundreds and millions of gopīs have no power to calm Kṛṣṇa's heart.

Text 2 beṇu-gīte ḍāke         rādhikā-nāma
esa esa rādhe       ḍākoye śyāma
     beṇu - of the flute; gīte - the song; ḍāke - calls; rādhikā-nāma - Rādhā;s name; esa - this; esa - this;rādhe - Rādhā; ḍākoye - calls; śyāma - Kṛṣṇa.
     Playing the flute, Kṛṣṇa calls Rādhā's name, saying,  Rādhā! Come here! Come here!" 
Text 3 bhaṅgiyā śrī-rāsa-       maṇḍala tabe
rādhā-anbeṣaṇe      calaye jabe
     bhaṅgiyā - breaking; śrī-rāsa- - of the rasa dance; maṇḍala - the circle; tabe - then; rādhā - Rādhā; anbeṣaṇe - searching; calaye - goes; jabe - when.
     Breaking the rāsa-dance circle, Kṛṣṇa goes searching for Rādhā.

Text 4 dekhā diyā rādhe         rākhoha prāṇa
boliyā kāndaye      kānane kāna
     dekhā - sight; diyā - giving; rādhe - tp Rādhā; rākhoha - save; prāṇa - life; boliyā - saying; kāndaye - weeps; kānane - in the forest; kāna - Kṛṣṇa.
     Calling out, "Rādhā! Please let Me see You! Please save My life!", Kṛṣṇa weeps in the forest.

Text 5 

nirjana kānane      rādhāre dhari'
miliyā paraṇa       jurāya hari
     nirjana - secluded; kānane - in the forest; rādhāre - of Rādhā; dhari' - holding; miliyā - meeting; paraṇa - life; jurāya - cools; hari - Kṛṣṇa.
     Meeting in a secluded forest, Kṛṣṇa embraces Rādhā. Now His feverish life has become cool.

Text 6 bole tuṅhu binā          kāhāra rāsa
tuṅhu lāgi' mora         baraja-bāsa
     bole - says; tuṅhu - You; binā - without;kāhāra - how?; rāsa - rasa dance; tuṅhu - You; lāgi' - taking; mora - ofMe; baraja-bāsa - home in Vraja.
     Kṛṣṇa says, "How can there be a rāsa dance without You? I stay in Vraja only for Your sake."

Text 7 e heno rādhikā-          caraṇa-tole
bhakatibinoda       kāndiyā bole
     e henaḥ - in this way; rādhikā- - of Śrī Rādhā; caraṇa-tole - the soles of nthe feet; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; kāndiyā - weeping; bole - says.
     Standing before Śrī Rādhā's feet, Bhaktivinoda says,

Text 8 tuyā gaṇa-mājhe          āmāre gaṇi
kiṅkorī koriyā       rākho āpani
     tuyā - of You; gaṇa-mājhe - among teh associates; āmāre - me; gaṇi - counting; kiṅkorī - maidservant;koriyā - making; rākhaḥ - keep; āpani - own.
     "Counting me among Your entourage, please make me Your maidservant."




Song 8

Text 1
rādhā-bhajane jadi mati nāhi bhelā
kṛṣṇa-bhajana taba akāraṇa gelā
     rādhā-bhajane - worship of Rādhā; jadi - if; mati - mind; nāhi - not; bhelā - is; kṛṣṇa-bhajana - worship of Kṛṣṇa;taba - your; akāraṇa - suddenly; gelā - goes.
     If you do not wish to worship Rādhā, then the worship of Kṛṣṇa will suddenly flee from you.

Text 2 ātapa rohita sūraya nāhi jāni
rādhā-birahita mādhaba nāhi māni
     ātapa - sunlight; rohita - without; sūraya - sun;nāhi - not; jāni - I know; rādhā-birahita - without Rādhā; mādhaba - Kṛṣṇa;
nāhi - not; māni - I know.
     I know the sun does is never without sunlight. I know Kṛṣṇa is never without Rādhā.

Text 3 kebala mādhaba pūjaye sa ajñānī
rādhā anādara koro-i abhimānī
     kebala - alone; mādhaba - k; pūjaye - worship;sa - that; ajñānī - fool; rādhā - Rādhā; anādara - without worship;koro-i - does; abhimānī - proud.
     Anyone who worships Kṛṣṇa without Rādhā is a fool. Anyone who disrespects Rādhā is arrogant.

Text 4 kabaṅhi nāhi korobi tāṅkora saṅga
citte icchasi jadi braja-rasa-raṅga
     kabaṅhi - at any time; nāhi - not; korobi - will do;tāṅkora - of him; saṅga - association; citte - in the heart; icchasi - youdesire; jadi - if; braja - of Vraja; rasa - nectar; raṅga - pastimes.
     Please never associate with such persons, if in your heart you wish to taste the nectar of Vraja.

Text 5 


rādhikā-dāsī jadi hoya abhimāna
śīghra-i mila-i taba gokula-kāna
     rādhikā-dāsī - Rādhā's maidservant; jadi - if; hoya - is; abhimāna - idea; śīghra-i - quickly; mila-i - meet; taba - ofyou; gokula-kāna - Gokula's Kṛṣṇa.
     If you think of yourself as Rādhā's maidservant, you will quickly meet Gokula's Kṛṣṇa.

Text 6 brahmā śiba nārada śruti nārāyaṇī
rādhikā-pada-raja pūjaye māni'
     brahmā - Brahma; śiba - Siva; nārada - Narada; śruti - theVedas; nārāyaṇī - Laksmi; rādhikā-pada - Rādhā's feet; raja - dust; pūjaye - worship; māni' - honoring.
     Brahmā, Śiva, Nārada, Lakṣmī, and the Vedas personified all worship the dust of Rādhā's feet.

Text 7 umā ramā satyā śacī candrā rukmiṇī
rādhā-abatāra sabe - āmnāya-bāṇī
     umā - Paravati; ramā - Laksmi; satyā - Satyabhama;śacī - Saci; candrā - candravali; rukmiṇī - Rukmini; rādhāabatāra - incarnations of Śrī Rādhā; sabe - all; āmnāya - of the Vedas; bāṇī - the words.
     Pārvatī, Lakṣmī, Satyabhāmā, Śacī, Candrāvalī, and Rukmiṇī are all incarnations of Śrī Rādhā. This the Vedas say.

Text 8 heno rādhā-paricarjā jāṅkara dhana
bhakatibinoda tāṅ'ra māgaye caraṇa
     henaḥ - like this; rādhā-paricarjā - worship of Rādhāt; jāṅkara - of whom; dhana - wealth; bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; tāṅ'ra - of him; māgaye - begs; caraṇa - the feet.
     Bhaktivinoda begs to stay at the feet of persons whose only treasure is the worship of Śrī Rādhā.



Part 11 Pariśiṣṭa (Appendix)

Song 1

Text 1
bhojana-lālase      rasane āmāra
śunoha bidhāna mora
śrī-nāma-jugala-         rāga-sudhā-rasa
khāiyā thākoha bhora
     bhojana - for pleasures; lālase - yearning; rasane - O tongue; āmāra - my; śunoha - please hear; bidhāna - way; mora - of me; śrī-nāma - the holy name; jugala - for the divine couple; rāga - love; sudhā-rasa - nectar; khāiyā - tasting; thākoha - please stay; bhora - intoxicated.
     O tongue always yearning to taste pleasures, please hear my words. Please always be intoxicated by tasting beautiful names full of nectar love for the divine couple.

Text 2 naba-sundara-pīyūṣa rādhikā-nāma
ati-miṣṭa manohara tarpaṇa-dhāma
     naba - new; sundara - beautiful; pīyūṣa - nectar;rādhikā-
nāma - Śrī Rādhā's name; ati-miṣṭa - very sweet; manohara - charming; tarpaṇa - of pleasure; dhāma - the abode.
     Śrī Rādhā's name is very sweet nectar. It is new, beautiful, and charming. It is the home of pleasures.

Text 3 kṛṣṇa-nāma madhurādbhuta gāḍha dugdhe
atība jatane koro miśrita lubdhe
     kṛṣṇa-nāma - Kṛṣṇa's name; madhura - sweet;adbhuta - wonderful; gāḍha - thick; dugdhe - milk; atība - great; jatane - woithcare; koraḥ - do; miśrita - mixed together; lubdhe - desiring.
     Lord Kṛṣṇa's name is wonderfully sweet condensed milk. With great care and eager desire, please mix together the nectar of Rādhā's name and the milk of Kṛṣṇa's name.

Text 4 surabhi rāga hima ramya tāṅhi āni'
aharaha pana koroho sukha jāni'


     surabhi - fragrance; rāga - love; hima - ice;ramya - delightful; tāṅhi - in that; āni' - bringing; aharaha - day after day;pana - drinking; korohaḥ - do; sukha - happily; jāni' - knowing.
     Into this drink then place the delightful fragrant ice of passionate love. Day after day, please happily drink this nectar.

Text 5 nāhi rabe rasane prākṛta pipāsā
adbhuta rasa tuyā pūrāobo āśā
     nāhi - not; rabe - will stay; rasane - on the tongue; prākṛta - material; pipāsā - desire; adbhuta - wonderful;rasa - nectar; tuyā - of you; pūrāobaḥ - will fulfill; āśā - desires.
     Material thirst will no longer stay on your tongue. This wonderful nectar will fulfill all your desires.

Text 6 dāsa-raghunātha-pade bhaktibinoda
jāco-i rādhā-kṛṣṇa-nāma pramoda
     dāsa-raghunātha-pade - at the feet of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; jāco-i - begs; rādhākṛṣṇa - of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; nāma - names; pramoda - bliss.
     At Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's feet Bhaktivinoda begs for the bliss of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa's holy names.




Part 12 Śikṣāṣṭaka


Song 1

(Jāmphi-lophā)

Text 1
pita-baraṇa kali-pābana gorā
gāoyāi aichana bhāba-bibhora
     pita - fair; baraṇa - complexion; kali - of the Kali-yuga;
pābana - the purifier; gorā - Lord Caitanya; gāoyāi - sings;
aichana - is; bhāba - by ecstasy; bibhora - agitated.
     Overcome with ecstatic love, fair Lord Caitanya, who purifies the Kali-yuga, sings:

Text 2 citta-darpaṇa-parimārjana-kārī
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya citta-bihārī
     citta - of the mind; darpaṇa - the mirror; parimārjana - cleaning; kārī - doing; kṛṣṇa-kīrtana - thechanting of Kṛṣṇa; jaya - glory; citta - in the heart; bihārī - pastimes.
     "Let there be all victory for the chanting of the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, which can cleanse the mirror of the heart.*

Text 3 helā-bhāba-dāba-nirbāpana-bṛtti
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya kleśa-nibṛtti
     helā-bhāba - of material existence; dāba - the forest fire; nirbāpana - extinguishing; bṛtti - activity; kṛṣṇa-
kīrtana - chanting of Kṛṣṇa; jaya - glory; kleśa - sufferings; nibṛtti - stopping.
     "Let there be all victory for the chanting of the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, which stops the miseries of the blazing fire of material existence.*

Text 4 


śreyaḥ-kumuda-bidhu-jyotsnā-prakāśa
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya bhakti-bilāsa
     śreyaḥ - of good fortune; kumuda - lotus; bidhu - moon; jyotsnā - moonlight; prakāśa - shining; kṛṣṇa-kīrtana - chanting
Kṛṣṇa; jaya - glory; bhakti-bilāsa - pastimes of devotionalservice.
     "Let there be all victory for the chanting of the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, which is the waxing moon that spreads the white lotus of good fortune for all living beings* and brings the pastimes of devotional service.

Text 5 biśuddha-bidyā-badhū-jībana-rūpa
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya siddha-swarūpa
     biśuddha - pure; bidyā - knowledge; badhū - girl;jībana - life; rūpa - form; kṛṣṇa-kīrtana - chanting Kṛṣṇa; jaya - glory; siddha-swarūpa - perfect form.
     "Let there be all victory for the chanting of the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, which is the life and soul of all education* and the form of all perfection.

Text 6 ānanda-payo-nidhi-bardhana-kīrti
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya plābana-mūrti
     ānanda - of bliss; payo-nidhi - the ocean;bardhana - increasing; kīrti - glory; kṛṣṇa-kīrtana - chanting Kṛṣṇa; jaya - glory; plābana - a flood; mūrti - the form.
     "Let there be all victory for the chanting of the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, which expands the blissful ocean of transcendental life.*

Text 7 pade pade pīyūṣa-swāda-pradātā
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya prema-bidhātā
     pade pade - step after step; pīyūṣa - of nectar; swāda - the taste; pradātā - giving; kṛṣṇa-kīrtana - chanting Kṛṣṇa; jaya - glory; prema - love; bidhātā - giving.
     "Let there be all victory for the chanting of the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, which gives a cooling effect to everyone, enables one to taste full nectar at every step,* and brings ecstatic spiritual love."

Text 8 

bhaktibinoda-swātma-snāpana-bidhāna
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya prema-nidāna
     bhaktibinoda - of Bhaktivinoda; swātma - the self; snāpana - bathing; bidhāna - activity; kṛṣṇa-kīrtana - chanting Kṛṣṇa; jaya - glory; prema-nidāna - the abode of love.
     Let there be all victory for the chanting of the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, which is the abode of ecstatic spiritual love, and which now bathes the soul of Bhaktivinoda. 



Song 2

Text 1
tuṅhu doyā-sāgora tārayite prāṇī
nāma aneka tuyā śikhāoli āni'
     tuṅhu - You; doyā - of mercy; sāgora - an ocean;tārayite - to deliver; prāṇī - the living entities; nāma - the holy name;
aneka - many; tuyā - of You; śikhāoli - teach; āni' - bringing.
     O Supreme Lord, O ocean of mercy, to deliver the living entities, You teach them about Your many holy names.

Text 2 sakala śakati de-i nāma tohāra
grahaṇe rākholi nāhi kāla-bicāra
     sakala - all; śakati - power; de-i - give; nāma - ;tohāra - of You; grahaṇe - in accepting; rākholi - protect; nāhi - not; kāla - time; bicāra - considerations.
     O Lord, You have invested all Your potencies in those names, and therefore there are no hard and fast rules for remembering them.*

Text 3 śrī-nāma-cintāmaṇi tohāri samāna
biśwe bilāoli koruṇā-nidāna
     śrī-nāma-cintāmaṇi - the contamani jewel of the holy name; tohāri - in You; samāna - equal; biśwe - to theworld; bilāoli - give; koruṇā-nidāna - ocean of mercy.
     O Lord, Your holy name is like a cintāmaṇi jewel. O Lord, You mercifully give Your holy name to the whole wolrd.

Text 4 tuyā doyā aichana parama udārā
atiśoya manda nātha bhāga hāmāra
     tuyā - of You; doyā - mercy; aichana - attained;parama - great; udārā - generosity; atiśoya - great; manda - fool; nātha - OLord; bhāga - fortune; hāmāra - of me.
     O Lord, You are very kind and generous. Still, I am an unlucky fool.

Text 5 nāhi janamalo nāme anurāga mora
bhakatibinoda-citta duḥkhe bibhora
     nāhi - not; janamalaḥ - splendidly manifest; nāme - for the holy
name; anurāga - love; mora - of me; bhakatibinodacitta - Bhaktivinoda's heart; duḥkhe - with sadness; bibhora - overcome.
     I never fell in love with Your holy name. That is why Bhaktivinoda's heart is overcome with grief.




Song 3

Text 1
śrī-kṛṣṇa-kīrtane jadi mānasa tohāra
parama jatane taṅhi labha adhikāra
     śrī-kṛṣṇa-kīrtane - in chanting Kṛṣṇa; jadi - if;mānasa - the mind; tohāra - of you; parama - great; jatane - effort; taṅhi - in that; labha - attainment; adhikāra - qualified.
     If you make a great effort in your heart to chant Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy name, then you will become qualified to chant.

Text 2 tṛṇādhika hīna dīna akiñcana chāra
āpane mānobi sadā chār6i' ahaṅkāra
     tṛṇa - a blade of grass; adhika - more;hīna - insignificant; dīna - low; akiñcana - without anything; chāra - ashes;āpane - own; mānobi - you will think; sadā - always; chār6i' - renouncing; ahaṅkāra - false ego.
     Then You will turn away from false ego. Then you will think yourself more fallen and lowly than a blade of grass, less important than a pile of ashes.

Text 3 bṛkha-sama khamā-guṇa korbi sādhana
pratihiṁsā tyaji' anye korobi pālana
     bṛkha - tree; sama - like; khamā - lolerance;guṇa - virtue; korbi - do; sādhana - practice; pratihiṁsā - violence;tyaji' - renouncing; anye - to others; korobi - do; pālana - protection.
     Then you will be more tolerant than a tree. Turning from violence, you will protect others.

Text 4 jībana-nirbāhe āne udbega nā dibe
para-upakāre nija-sukha pāśaribe
     jībana - life; nirbāhe - in the course; āne - to others;
udbega - distress; nā - not; dibe - you will give; paraupakāre - helping others; nija-
sukha - own happiness; pāśaribe - you will forget.
     In the course of your life you will never give trouble to others. Forgetting your own happiness, you will help others.

Text 5 hoile-o sarba-guṇe guṇī mahāśoya
prathiṣṭhāśā chār6i' koro amānī hṛdoya
     hoile-aḥ - is; sarba-guṇe - all virtues; guṇī - virtuous; mahāśoya - saintly; prathiṣṭhā - for fame; āśā - the desire; chār6i' - renoincing; koraḥ - do; amānī - humble;hṛdoya - heart.
     Then you will become saintly. You will have all virtues. Turning from the desire for fame, you will be humble.

Text 6 kṛṣṇa-adhiṣṭhāna sarba-jībe jāni' sadā
korobi sammāna sabe ādare sarbadā
     kṛṣṇa - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; adhiṣṭhāna - the home; sarbajībe - in all living entities; jāni' - knowing; sadā - always;korobi - you will do; sammāna - respect; sabe - to all; ādare - with honor;sarbadā - always.
     Aware that Lord Kṛṣṇa makes His home in every living entity, You will always give all respects to others.

Text 7 dainya doyā anye māna pratiṣṭhā-barjana
cāri-guṇe guṇī ho-i' koroho kīrtana
     dainya - humbleness; doyā - mercy; anye - to others;māna - respect; pratiṣṭhā - honor; barjana - without; cāri - four; guṇe - good
qualities; guṇī - virtuous; ho-i' - be; korohaḥ - please do;kīrtana - kīrtana.
     Possessing the four virtues humility, mercy, respect to others, and not desiring respect for oneself, please chant the holy names.

Text 8 bhakatibinoda kadi' bole prabhu-pāya
heno adhikāra kabe dibe he amāya
     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; kadi' bole - says; prabhu-pāya - at
the Lord's feet; henaḥ - like this; adhikāra - qualities;kabe - when; dibe - will give; he - Oh; amāya - to me.
     Approaching the Lord's feet, Bhaktivinoda says, "O Lord, when will You make me qualified in these ways?"




Song 4

(Jāmphi-lophā)

Text 1
prabhu taba pada-juge mora nibedana
nāhi māgi deha-sukha bidyā dhana jana
     prabhu - O Lord; taba - of You; pada-juge - at the feet;mora - of me; nibedana - request; nāhi - not; māgi - I ask; deha - of thebody; sukha - happiness; bidyā - knowledge; dhana - wealth; jana - followers.
     O Lord, I place this prayer at Your feet: I do not pray for the happiness of this material body, nor for knowledge, wealth, or followers.

Text 2 nāhi māgi swarga āra mokha nāhi māgi
na kori prārthanā kono bibhūtira lāgi'
     nāhi - not; māgi - I request; swarga - Svargaloka;āra - or; mokha - liberation; nāhi - not; māgi - I ask; na - not;kori - I do; prārthanā - request; konaḥ - something; bibhūtira - power;lāgi' - in relation to.
     I do not pray for Svargaloka. I do not pray for impersoanl liberation. I do not pray for any kind of power or opulence.

Text 3 nija-karma-guṇa-doṣe je je janma pāi
janme janme jeno taba nāma-guṇa gāi
     nija - own; karma - karm; guṇa - virtues; doṣe - faults; je je - whatever; janma - birth; pāi - I attain; janme - birth; janme - after birth; jenaḥ - like; taba - of You; nāma - the name; guṇa - and qualities; gāi - Ising.
     Wherever I may take my birth because of my past good and bad deeds, I pray that I will always sing, birth after birth, Your holy names and the descriptions of Your holy qualities.

Text 4 ei mātra āśā mama tomāra caraṇe
ahoitukī bhakti hṛde jāge anukhaṇe
     ei - this; mātra - only; āśā - desire; mama - my;tomāra - of You; caraṇe - at the feet; ahoitukī - vauaseless; bhakti - devotionalservice; hṛde - in the heart; jāge - will awaken; anukhaṇe - at every moment.
     My only weish is the unmotivated devotion to Your feet may awaken in my heart moment after moment.

Text 5 biṣaye je prīti ebe āchaye āmāra
sei-mata prīti ha-uka caraṇe tomāra
     biṣaye - for sense objects; je - what; prīti - love;ebe - now; āchaye - is; āmāra - of me; sei-mata - in this way;prīti - love; ha-
uka - may be; caraṇe - for the feet; tomāra - of You.
     As I now love material sense objects, so may I love Your feet.

Text 6 bipade sampade taha thākuka sama-bhābe
dine dine bṛddhi ha-uka nāmera prabhābe
     bipade - in calamity; sampade - in good fortune; taha - that; thākuka - may be; sama-bhābe - equality; dine - day; dine - afterday; bṛddhi - increase; ha-uka - may be; nāmera - of the name; prabhābe - power.
     In prosperity and in calamity may my love for You remain unchanged. By the power of Your holy name may my love for You increase day after day.

Text 7 paśu-pakhī ho'ye thāki swarge bā niroye
taba bhakti rahu bhaktibinoda-hṛdoye
     paśu - beast; pakhī - bird; ho'ye - may be;thāki - stay; swarge - in Svarga; bā - or; niroye - in hell; taba - for You;bhakti - devotion; rahu - may be; bhaktibinoda - of Bhaktivinoda; hṛdoye - in the heart.
     I may become a bird or a beast. I may live in heaven or hell. I only wish that devotion to Youn will always stay in Bhaktivonoda's heart.




Song 5

(Choṭa Daśakuśī)

Text 1
anādi karama-phale       por6i bhabārṇaba-jale
toribaṛe na dekhi upāya
e-biṣaya-halāhale        dibā-niśi hiyā jwale
mana kabhu sukha nāhi pāya
     anādi - beginningless; karama - of karma; phale - fruit; por6i - falling; bhaba - of birth and death; arṇaba - of the ocean; jale - in the water; toribaṛe - to cross over; na - not; dekhi - I see; upāya - a way; e-biṣaya - of material senseobjects; halāhale - poison; dibā - day; niśi - and night; hiyā - the heart; jwale - burns; mana - mind; kabhu - when; sukha - happiness; nāhi - not;pāya - attains.
     Due to my past fruitive activities I have fallen into this ocean of nescience and I do not see any means of getting out of this great ocean. It is just like an ocean of poison. As soon as one takes some pungent food, it burns the heart. Similarly, as we try to be happy by sense enjoyment, it becomes the opposite -  3}the cause of burning the heart. That burning sensation goes on twenty-four hours, day and night, and on account of this my mind is not at all in satisfaction. I am always making plans -  3}by the hundreds and thousands -  3}how I will be happy, but actually all of this gives me only trouble, day and night, for twenty-four hours.*

Text 2 āśā-pāśa-śata-śata       kleśa deya abirata
prabṛtti-ūrmira tāhe khelā
kāma-krodha-ādi choya         bāṭapār6e deya bhoya
abasāna hoilo āsi' belā
     āśā - of desires; pāśa - ropes; śata-śata - hund4reds and hundreds; kleśa - troubles; deya - given; abirata - withoutstop; prabṛtti - action; ūrmira - waves; tāhe - in that; khelā - playing; kāma-krodha
ādi - beginning with lust and anger; choya - six; bāṭapār6e - thieves; deya - given; bhoya - fear; abasāna - opportunity;hoilaḥ - is; āsi' - taking; belā - was.
     It is exactly like the waves of the ocean always passing one another. That is my position. Besides that there are so many thieves and rogues. Especially they are six in number: lust, anger, envy, and illusion. In so many ways they are always present, and I am afraid of them.*

Text 3 jñāna-karma ṭhuga dui        more pratāriyā loi
abaśeṣe phele sindhu-jale
e heno samaye bandhu          tumi kṛṣṇa kṛpā-sindhu
kṛpā kori' tolo more bale
     jñāna - jnana; karma - and karma; ṭhuga - thugs;dui - two; more - me; pratāriyā - cheating; loi - accept;abaśeṣe - end; phele - thown; sindhu-jale - into the ocean; e - this;henaḥ - like; samaye - at the time; bandhu - friend; tumi - You; kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; kṛpā - of mercy; sindhu - ocean; kṛpā - mercy;kori' - doing; tolaḥ - pick up; more - me; bale - with strength.
     In this way my life is becoming advanced, and I am coming to the end. Although this is my position, still two kinds of activities -  3}mental speculation and fruitive activities -  3}are cheating me. They are misleading me. After misleading me they bring me to the seashore and push me down into the sea.In this circumstance, my dear Kṛṣṇa, You are the only friend. Now I have no strength to get out of this ocean of nescience, so I request, I pray unto Your lotus feet, that by your strength You kindly pick me up.*

Text 4 patita-kiṅkore dhori'          pāda-padma-dhūli kori'
deho bhaktibinode āśroya
āmi taba nitya-dāsa      bhuliyā māyāra pāśa
baddha ho'ye āchi doyāmoya
     patita - fallen; kiṅkore - servant; dhori' - picking up; pāda-padma-dhūli - dust of the lotus feet; kori' - doing;dehaḥ - body; bhaktibinode - Bhaktivinoda; āśroya - shelter; āmi - I;taba - of You; nitya-dāsa - eternal servant; bhuliyā - forgetting; māyāra - of Maya; pāśa - the ropes; baddha - bound;ho'ye - am; āchi - am; doyāmoya - merciful.
     After all, I am Your eternal servant, so, somehow or other I have fallen into this ocean, so You kindly pick me up and fix me as one of the dust of Your lotuys feet. Bhaktivinoda \Thākura entreats: Kindly give me shelter on Your lotus feet. Actually I am your eternal servant,. Somehow or other I forget you and I am now fallen in the network of Māyā. My dear Lord, I am entangled in this way. Kindly save me.*




Song 6

(Choṭa Daśakuśī Lophā)

Text 1
aparādha-phale mama      citta bhelo bajra-sama
tuyā nāme na labhe bikāra
hatāśa hoiye hari        taba nāma ucca kori'
bor6o duḥkhe ḍāki bāra bāra
     aparādha - of offenses; phale - by the fruits; mama - of me; citta - heart; bhelaḥ - was; bajra - thunderbolt; sama - like; tuyā - of You; nāme - in the name; na - not; labhe - attained; bikāra - ecstasy; hata - destroyed;āśa - hopes; hoiye - is; hari - O Kṛṣṇa; taba - of You; nāma - name;ucca - loud; kori' - doing; bor6aḥ - did; duḥkhe - suffering; ḍāki - I call out;bāra - again; bāra - and again.
     Because of my past offenses, my heart became like a thunderbolt. I had no ecstatic love for Your holy name. Now my hopes are all destroyed. In great distress I call Your name again and again.    
Text 2 dīna doyāmoya koruṇā-nidāna
bhāba-bindhu dei rākhoha parāṇa
     dīna - to the poor; doyāmoya - merciful; koruṇānidāna - origin of mercy; bhāba-bindhu - ocean of birth and death; dei - pleasegive; rākhoha - please save; parāṇa - life.
     O Lord merciful to the poor! O origin of all of mercy! Please save my life! Please rescue me from this ocean of birth and death!

Text 3 kabe tuyā nāma-uccaraṇe mora
nayane jharabo daradara lora
     kabe - when?; tuyā - of You; nāma-uccaraṇe - calling out the name; mora - of me; nayane - in the eyes; jharabaḥ - falls; daradara - again and again; lora - tears.
     When will my eyes be beautified by filling with tears that constantly glide down as I chant Your holy Name?*



Text 4 gadgada-swara kaṇṭhe upajabo
mukhe bolo ādha ādha bāhirābo
     gadgada - faltering; swara - sound; kaṇṭhe - in the voice;
upajabaḥ - born; mukhe - in the mouth; bolaḥ - chant; ādhaādha - babb;ing; bāhirābaḥ - outside.
     When will my voice falter as I chant Your holy name?

Text 5 pulake barabo śarīra hāmāra
sweda-kampa-stambha habe bāra bāra
     pulake - hairs standing up; barabaḥ - will be; śarīra - on the body; hāmāra - my; sweda - perspiration; kampa - trembling; stambha - being stunned; habe - will be; bāra bāra - asain and again.
     When will the hairs of my body stand erect in transcendental happiness, and when will perspiration, trembling, and being stunned be manifested on my body as I chant Your holy name?

Text 6 bibarṇa-śarīre hārāobuṅ jñāna
nāma-samāśroye dharobuṅ parāṇa
     bibarṇa - turning pale; śarīre - body; hārāobun - will be; jñāna - knowledge; nāma-samāśroye - taking shelter of the holy name; dharobun - I will maintain; parāṇa - my life.
     When will I turn pale and I fall unconscious as I keep my life under the shelter of Your holy name?

Text 7 milabo hāmāra kiye aiche dina
rowe bhaktibinoda mati hīna
     milabaḥ - will meet; hāmāra - of me; kiye - when;aiche - will be; dina - day; rowe - stays; bhaktibinoda - Bhaktivinoda;mati - intelligence; hīna - without.
     Foolish Bhaktivinoda cries out, "O Lord, when will that day be mine?"




Song 7

Text 1
gāite gāite nāma ki daśā hoilo
kṛṣṇa-nitya-dāsa mui hṛdoye sphurilo
     gāite gāite - singing and singing; nāma - the holy name; ki - what?; daśā - condition; hoilaḥ - is; kṛṣṇa-nityadāsa - the eternal servant ofLord k; mui - I; hṛdoye - in the heart; sphurilaḥ - manifested.
     What became of me, as I chanted and chanted the holy name? In my heart I realized, "I am an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa."

Text 2 jānilāṅ māyā-pāśe e jaḍa-jagate
gobinda-birohe duḥkha pāi nānā-mate
     jānilān - I understood; māyā-pāśe - in the ropes of Maya; e - this; jaḍa - dead and inert; jagate - material world;gobinda - from Lord Kṛṣṇa; birohe - separation; duḥkha - suffering; pāi - I attain; nānā-mate - in various ways.
     I realized that, caught in Māyā's trap in this dead material world, and separated from Kṛṣṇa, I was suffering in many different ways.

Text 3 āra je soṁsāra mora nāhi lāge bhālo
kāṅhā jāi kṛṣṇa heri - e cintā biśālo
     āra - or; je - who; soṁsāra - material world; mora - ofme; nāhi - not; lāge - I attain; bhālaḥ - good;kāṅhā - where?; jāi - I go; kṛṣṇa - Kṛṣṇa; heri - see; e - this; cintā - anxiety; biśālaḥ - great.
     I did not think anything in this world was good.  Where will I go to see Kṛṣṇa?" That was my constant thought.

Text 4 kāndite kāndite āṅkhi-bariśoya
barṣā-dhārā heno cakhe hoilo udoya
     kāndite - weeping; kāndite - and weeping; āṅkhi - eyes;
bariśoya - shower; barṣā-dhārā - torrential rains; henaḥ - like that; cakhe - in the eyes; hoilaḥ - was; udoya - arisal.


     I wept and wept. A great monsoon of tears rose in my eyes.

Text 5 nimeṣe hoilo mora śata-juga-sama
gobinda-biroha āra sahite akhama
     nimeṣe - moment; hoilaḥ - was; mora - of me; śata-jugasama - like a hundred yugas; gobinda-biroha - in separation fom Kṛṣṇa;āra - or; sahite - to tolerat; akhama - unable.
     My Lord Govinda, because of separation from You, I consider even a moment a great millenium.* I have no power to bear being separated from You.
(Daśakuśī)
 Text 6
śūnya-dharā-tala         caudike dekhiye
parāṇa udāsa hoya
ki kori ki kori          sthira nāhi hoya
jībana nāhika roya
     śūnya-dharā-tala - a desert; caudike - fourteen; dekhiye - seeing; parāṇa - life; udāsa - indifferent;hoya - is; ki - what?; kori - I do; sthira - steady; nāhi - not;hoya - am; jībana - life; nāhika - not; roya - stays.
     Seeing the fourteen worlds are like a great desert, I no longer wish to maintain my life. What will I do? What will I do? I am not peaceful. My life will not stay.

Text 7 braja-bāsi-gaṇa          mora prāṇa rākha
dekhāo śrī-rādhā-nāthe
bhakatibinoda-      minati māniyā
lāohe tāhāre sāthe
     braja-bāsi-gaṇa - O residents of Vraja; mora - my; prāṇa - life; rākha - save; dekhāaḥ - show; śrī-
rādhā-nāthe - the Lord of Rādhā; bhakatibinoda- - of Bhaktivinoda; minati - the prayer; māniyā - considering; lāohe - accept; tāhāre - his; sāthe - company.
     O residents of Vraja, please save my life. Please show me Rādhā's master. Please grant Bhaktivinoda's prayer. Please accept him in your company.

Text 8 

śrī-kṛṣṇa-biroha āra sahite nā pāri
parāṇa chār6ite āra dina dui cāri
     śrī-kṛṣṇa-biroha - separation from Lord Kṛṣṇa; āra - or;
sahite - to tolerate; nā - not; pāri - I am able;parāṇa - life; chār6ite - to leave; āra - and; dina - days; dui - two; cāri - or four.
     I have no power to bear this separation from Lord Kṛṣṇa. In two or four days I will give up this life.
(Daśakuśī) Text 9
gāite gobinda-nāma       upajilo bhāba-grāma
dekhilāṅ jamunāra kūle
bṛṣabhānu-sutā-saṅge          śyāma-naṭa-bara-raṅge
bāṁśarī bājāya nīpa-mūle
     gāite - sing; gobinda-nāma - Lord Kṛṣṇa's names; upajilaḥ - wasborn; bhāba-grāma - ecstasies; dekhilān - I saw; jamunāra - of the Yamuna; kūle - on the bank; bṛṣabhānu-sutā-
saṅge - with Rādhā; śyāma - dark; naṭa-bara-raṅge - best of dancers; bāṁśarī - flute; bājāya - plays; nīpa-mūle - under a kadamba tree.
     As I chanted Lord Kṛṣṇa's names, ecstasy rose in my heart. Then I saw dark Lord Kṛṣṇa, the best of dancers. Rādhā at HJis side, He played a flute under a kadamba tree by the Yamunā's bank.

Text 10 dekhiyā jugala-dhana          asthira hoilo mana
jñāna hārā hoinu takhona
kata-khaṇa nāhi jāni          jñāna-lābha hoilo māni
āra nāhi bhelo daraśana
     dekhiyā - seeing; jugala-dhana - the gloriosu divine couple; asthira - unsteady; hoilaḥ - became; mana - heart; jñāna - knowledge; hārā - removal; hoinu - i was; takhona - then; kata-khaṇa - in a moment;nāhi - nothing; jāni - I knew; jñāna-lābha - attainment of consciousness; hoilaḥ - was; māni - I think; āra - or; nāhi - not;bhelaḥ - gone; daraśana - sight.
     As I gazed at the glorious divine couple, my heart became unsteady. Then I lost consciousness. How long was I unconscious? I don't know. When I became conscious again, the vision had gone.
(Jāmbphi Lophā)
Text 11 sakhi go kemate dharibo parāṇa
nimeṣa hoilo jugera samāna
     sakhi gaḥ - O gopī; kemate - how?; dharibaḥ - I willmaintain; parāṇa - life; nimeṣa - a momnet; hoilaḥ - was; jugera - of ayuga; samāna - like.
     O sakhīs, how will I maintain my life? Every moment has become like a yuga!
(Daśakuśī)
Text 12 śrabaṇera dhārā          āṅkhi-bariṣoya
śūnya bhelo dharā-tala
gobinda-birohe      prāṇa nāhi rohe
kemone bāñcibo bolo
     śrabaṇera - of Sravanma; dhārā - floods; āṅkhi-
bariṣoya - rain from the eyes; śūnya - desert; bhelaḥ - gone;
dharā-tala - the earth; gobinda-birohe - separation from Kṛṣṇa; prāṇa - life; nāhi - not; rohe - maintain; kemone - how?;
bāñcibo+ will stay alive; bolaḥ - please tell.
     The desert is now gone. The monsoon from my eyes floods the earth like the floods in the month of Śrāvaṇa.

Text 13 bhakatibinoda       asthira hoiya
punaḥ nāmāśroya kori'
ḍāke rādhā-nātha       diyā darśana
prāṇa rakho nahe mari
     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; asthira - unsteady; hoiya - being; punaḥ - again; nāmāśroya - shelter of the holyname; kori' - doing; ḍāke - calls out; rādhā-nātha - O master of Rādhā; diyā - to be guven; darśana - sight; prāṇa - life; rakhaḥ - pleasesave; nahe - not; mari - I die.
     Becoming unsteady, Bhaktivinoda again takes shelter of the holy name. He calls out, "O master of Rādhā! Please show Yourself to me! Please save my life, so I will not die!"




Song 8 (a)

(Daśakuśī)

Text 1
bandhu-gaṇa śunoha bacana mora
bhābete bibhora          thākiye jakhona
dekha deya citta-cora

     bandhu-gaṇa - O friends; śunoha - please hear;bacana - words; mora - my; bhābete - by ecstatic love; bibhora - agitated; thākiye - staying; jakhona - where; dekha - see; deya - give; citta-cora - the thief of my heart.
     O friends, please hear my words. When I am agitated with ecstatic love, the thief of my heart shows Himself to me.

Text 2 bicakhana kori'          dekhite cāhile
hoya āṅkhi-agocara
punaḥ nāhi dekhi'        kāndaye parāṇa
duḥkhera nāhi thāke ora
     bicakhana - thought; kori' - doing; dekhite - to see; cāhile - I desire; hoya - is; āṅkhi - to the eyes;agocara - invisible; punaḥ - again; nāhi - not; dekhi' - I see; kandaye - I weep; parana - life; duḥkhera - of suffering; nāhi - not; thāke - stays; ora - Oh.
     Suddenly my eyes see Him no longer. I yearn to see Him. I weep. I cannot keep this life of suffering.

Text 3 jagatera bandhu sei kabhu more loya sātha
jathā tathā rākhu more āmāra sei prāṇa-nātha
     jagatera - of the universe; bandhu - friend; sei - He;kabhu - ever; more - to me; loya - attaining; sātha - with; jathā - as;tathā - so; rākhu - may protect; more - me; āmāra - of me; sei - He;prāṇa-
nātha - the master of life.
     Will He who is the friend of the whole world ever accept me as one of His companions? He may do what He likes to me. He is always the master of my life.

Text 4 darśana-ānanda-dāne      sukha deya mora prāṇe
bole more prāṇaya-bacana
punaḥ adarśana diyā      dagdha kore mora hiyā
prāṇe mora māre prāṇadhana
     darśana - sight; ānanda - bliss; dāne - in giving; sukha - happiness; deya - gives; mora - of me; prāṇe - thelife; bole - says; more - to me; prāṇaya - of love; bacana - words; punaḥ - again;adarśana - not seeing; diyā - giving; dagdha - burned; kore - does;mora - of me; hiyā - the ehart; prāṇe - life; mora - of me; māre - dies; prāṇa-
dhana - the treasure of my life.
     Allowing me to see Him, He brings bliss to my life. Then He speaks words of love. Then, becoming invisible again, He sets my heart on fire. In this way He who is the treasure of my life kills me. 
Text 5 jāhe tā'ra sukha hoya sei sukha mama
nije sukhe duḥkhe mora sarbadāi sama
     jāhe - in whom; tā'ra - of Him; sukha - happiness;hoya - is; sei - that; sukha - happiness; mama - of me; nije - own;sukhe - happiness; duḥkhe - in suffering; mora - of me; sarbadāi - always; sama - the same.
     His happiness is my happiness. To me my own happiness and suffering are both the same.

Text 6 bhakatibinoda       sañjoge bijoge
tāhe jāne prāṇeswara
tā'ra sukhe sukhī        sei prāṇa-nātha
se kabhu na hoya para
     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; sañjoge - in meeting; bijoge - in separation; tahe - in that; jāne - I know;prāṇeswara - the master of life; ta'ra - of Him; sukhe - in happiness; sukhi - happy; sei - this; prāṇanātha - master of life; se - He; kabhu - ever; na - not; hoya - is; para - other.
     In meeting or in separation, Bhaktivinoda knows Kṛṣṇa is the master of his life. Kṛṣṇa's happiness is his happiness. Kṛṣṇa is the master of his life. There will never be anyone else.




Song 8 (b)

(Daśakuśī)

Text 1
joga-pīṭhopari-sthita         aṣṭa-sakhī-subeṣṭita
bṛndāraṇye kadamba-kānane
rādhā-saha baṁśī-dhārī        biśwa-jana-citta-hārī
prāṇa mora tāhāra caraṇe
     joga-pīṭhopari-sthita - staying in the yoga-pitha; aṣṭa-sakhī - by eight friends; subeṣṭita - surrounded; bṛndāraṇye - in Vṛndāvana; kadamba-kānane - ina  kadama forest;
rādhā-saha - with Rādhā; baṁśī-dhārī - playign the flute; biśwa - of the world; jana - of the people; citta - the hearts;
hārī - charming; prāṇa - life; mora - of me; tāhāra - ofHim; caraṇe - the feet.
     Staying in the yoga-pīṭha in a kadamba grove in Vṛndāvana, surrounded by the eight sakhīs, and with Rādhā at His side, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who charms the hearts of the whole world, plays the flute. I place my life at His feet.

Text 2 sakhī-ājñā-mata kori doṅhāra sebana
pālya-dāsī sadā bhābi doṅhāra caraṇa
     sakhī - of the sakhis; ājñā - the order; mata - following; kori - I do; doṅhāra - of the divine couple; sebana - service;pālya-
dāsī - a maidservant; sadā - always; bhābi - I remember; doṅhāra - of the divine couple; caraṇa - thefeet..
     Following the sakhī's commands, I serve the feet of the divine couple. I, Their maidsrrvant, always meditate on the divine couple's feet.

Text 3 kabhu kṛpā kori'         mama hasta dhori'
madhura bacana bole
tāmbūla loiyā       khāya dui jane
mālā loya kutūhale
     kabhu - when; kṛpā - mercy; kori' - doing; mama - of me; hasta - hand; dhori' - holding; madhura - sweet;bacana - words; bole - speak; tāmbūla - betenluts; loiyā - accepting; khāya - chew;dui - two; jane - persons; mālā - garlkand; loya - accepting; kutūhale - with joy.
     Sometimes They hold my hand and speak sweet words. Very happily Theyaccept the garlands I offer and chew the betelnuts I bring.

Text 4 adarśana hoya kakhona ki chale
nā dekhiyā doṅhe hoya jwale
     adarśana - not seeing; hoya - is; kakhona - sometimes;ki - what?; chale - by a trick; nā - not; dekhiyā - seeing; doṅhe - thedivine couple; hoya - is; jwale - burns.
     Sometimes They play a trick and I cannot see Them. Not seeing Them, I burn with fever.

Text 5 jekhane sekhane          thākuka du' jane
āmi to' caraṇa-dāsī
milane ānanda       birohe jātanā
sakala samāna bāsi
     jekhane - who; sekhane - they; thākuka - may stay;du' - two; jane - persons; āmi - I; to' caraṇa-
dāsī - the maidservant of Their feet; milane - in meeting;ānanda - bliss; birohe - in separation; jātanā - torment; sakala - always; samāna - the same; bāsi - I stay.
     I am always the maidservant at Their feet. The joy of meeting Them and the agony of separation from Them are all the same to me.

Text 6 rādhā-kṛṣṇa prāṇa mora jībane maraṇe
more rākhi' māri' sukhe thākuka du' jane
     rādhā-kṛṣṇa - Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; prāṇa - life; mora - ofme; jībane - in life; maraṇe - in death; more - to me; rākhi' - protecting; māri' - killing; sukhe - in happiness; thākuka - may stay;du' - two; jane - persons.
     Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are my life. Whether I live or die, whether They save me or kill me, I pray They will always be happy.

Text 7 bhakatibinoda       āna nāhi jane
por6i nija-sakhī pāya
rādhikāra gaṇe      thākiyā satata
jugala-caraṇa cāya
     bhakatibinoda - Bhaktivinoda; āna - another; nāhi - not; jane - knows; por6i - I fall; nija-sakhī - own friend;pāya - attaining; rādhikāra - of Rādhā; gaṇe - in the group; thākiyā - staying; satata - always; jugala - of the divine couple; caraṇa - the feet; cāya - desires.
     Bhaktivinoda knows nothing but Them. Falling down before them, she joins the sakhīs. Always staying in Rādhā's group, she desires only the feet of the divine couple.



Part 13 Śrī Godruma-candra-bhajanopadeśa


Song 1

Text 1

yadi te hari-pāda-saroja-sudhā-
     rasa-pāna-paraṁ hṛdayaṁ satatam
parihṛtya gṛhaṁ kali-bhāva-mayaṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     yadi - if; te - of you; hari-pāda-saroja-sudhā - the nectar ofLord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet; rasa - nectar; pāna - drinking;paraṁ - intent; hṛdayaṁ - heart; satatam - always; parihṛtya - renouncing; gṛhaṁ - home; kali-bhāva-mayaṁ - consisting of Kali-yuga; bhaja - worship; godruma - of Godruma; kānana - of the forests; kuñja - in the groves; vidhum - the moon.

     O friend, if you desire to drink the nectarean beverage of service to the lotus feet of Lord Hari, and if your home has become a fortress for the age of quarrel and an impediment to your devotional service, then just give up such a home and worship Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 2 

dhana-yauvana-jīvana-rājya-sukhaṁ
     na hi nityam anukṣaṇa-nāśa-param
tyaja grāmya-kathā-sakalaṁ viphalaṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     dhana - wealth; yauvana - youth; jīvana - life;rājya - kingdom; sukhām - happiness; na - not; hi - indeed; nityam - eternal; anukṣaṇa - at every moment; nāśa-param - destruction; tyaja - renounce; grāmya-kathā-sakalaṁ - gossip; viphalaṁ - useless.

     O friend, please consider this: wealth, youth, royal happiness, and the very existence of this material body are all temporary and liable to be destroyed at any moment. Give up all attachment to them and abandon all fruitless chattering about material news and affairs. Just worship Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 3 

ramaṇī-jana-saṅga-śikhām ca sakhe
     carame bhayadaṁ puruṣārtha-haram
hari-nāma-sudhā-rasa-matta-matir
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     ramaṇī-jana - with women; saṅga - association;sukham - happiness; ca - and; sakhe - friend; carame - at the end;bhayadaṁ - fearful; puruṣārtha - the goal of life; haram - removing; hari - of LordKṛṣṇa; nāma - of the name; sudhā-rasa - with the nectar;matta - intoxicated; matir - heart.

     O friend, the happiness of female association robs one of the real goal of life and in the end places one in a very fearful condition. Just give up that so-called happiness and become intoxicated by the nectar of the holy names of Lord Hari. Worship Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 4 

jaḍa-kavya-raso na hi kavya-rasaḥ
     kali-pāvana-gaura-raso hi rasaḥ
alam anya-kathādy anuśīlanayā
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     jaḍa - material and dull; kavya - poetry; raso - nectar;na - not; hi - indeed; kavya-rasaḥ - nectar poetry; kali - Kali-yuga; pāvana - purifying; gaura - of Lord Caitanya; raso - nectar; hi - indeed; rasaḥ - nectar; alam - greatly; anya - other;kathā - talks; ady - beginning with; anuśīlanayā - following.

     So-called nectarean poetry describing dull material topics is not at all sweet. The actual nectar is in the glorification of Lord Caitanya, the purifier of Kali-yuga. What is the use of studying these dull, material poems? Just give them up and worship Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 5 

vṛṣabhānu-sutānvita-vāma-tanuṁ
     yamunā-taṭa-nāgara-nanda-sutam
muralī-kala-gīta-vinoda-paraṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     vṛṣabhānu-sutā - Śrī Rādhā; anvita - with;vāma - left; tanuṁ - body; yamunā-taṭa - on the Yamuna's bank; nāgara - hero; nanda-sutam - Kṛṣṇa; muralī - of the flute; kala - sweet;gīta - music; vinoda - pastimes; paraṁ - devoted.

     Lord Caitanya is actually that same Supreme Personality who appeared as the son of Mahārāja Nanda. He was fond of playing the flute sweetly. With Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī on His left side, He enjoyed charming and delightful pastimes on the banks of the Yamunā Ruver. O friend, please worship that Supreme Person, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 6 

hari-kīrtana-madhya-gataṁ sva-janaiḥ
     pariveṣṭita-jāmbunadābha-harim
nija-gauḍa-janaika-kṛpā-jaladhiṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     hari-kīrtana - in the chanting of Lord Kṛṣṇa;s holy names; madhya - in the middle; gataṁ - gone; sva-janaiḥ - with Hisdevotees; pariveṣṭita - surrounded; jāmbunada - golden; ābha - splendor; harim - Kṛṣṇa;nija - own; gauḍa - of West Bengal; jana - people; eka - one; kṛpā - mercy;jaladhiṁ - ocean.

     Surrounded by His own associates, Lord Caitanya chanted the holy names of Lord Hari and became the exclusive ocean of mercy spreading love of God to the residents of Bengal. Just worship that Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 7 

girirāja-sutā-parivīta-gṛhaṁ
     nava-khaṇḍa-patiṁ yati-citta-haram
sura-saṅgha-nutaṁ priyayā sahitaṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     girirāja-sutā - by the Gaṅgā; parivīta - surrounded; gṛhaṁ - home; nava-khaṇḍa-patiṁ - the master of Navadvipa;yati - of the sannyasis; citta - the hearts; haram - charming; sura-saṅgha - by thedemigods; nutaṁ - glorified; priyayā - beloved; sahitaṁ - with.

     Lord Caitanya enchants the minds of those in the renounced order of life and He is the master of Navadvīpa, His own abode, which is surrounded by the river Ganges. He stays there with His consort Śrīmatī Viṣṇupriyā-devī and receives the worship and prayers of the demigods and devotees. Just worship that Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 8 

kali-kukkura-mudgara-bhāva-dharaṁ
     hari-nāma-mahauṣadha-dāna-param
patitārta-dayārdra-su-mūrti-dharaṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     kali - of Kali-yuga; kukkura - of the dog; mudgara - with astick; bhāva - feature; dharaṁ - manifesting; hari-nāma - of Lord Kṛṣṇa's
name; maha - great; auṣadha - medicine; dāna - gift; param - devoted; patita - fallen;ārta - distress; dayā - with mercy; ardra - melting; su-mūrti-dharaṁ - manifesting a glorious form.

     Out of compassion for ther sufferings of the conditioned souls, the Supreme Lord has assumed the beautiful form of Lord Caitanya. Chasing away the dog of Kali-yuga with a stick, Lord Caitanyacontinually administers the supreme medicine of the chanting of Lord Hari's holy names. Just worship that Supreme Person, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 9 

ripu-bāndhava-bheda-vihīna-dayā
     yad abhīkṣṇam udeti mukhābja-tatau
tam akṛṣṇam iha vraja-rāja-sutaṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     ripu - enemies; bāndhava - friends; bheda - difference; vihīna - without; dayā - mercy; yad - what; abhīkṣṇam - atevery moment; udeti - rises; mukha - mouth; abja-tatau - lotus; tam - that; akṛṣṇam - notblack; iha - here; vraja-rāja-sutaṁ - the prince of Vraja.

     Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa's lotus face always displays mercy for all living entities, regardless of whether they consider themselves the friends of the Lord or His enemies. For this reason the merciful son of Vraja's king has now appeared as the golden-
complexioned Lord Caitanya. Just worship that Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 10 

iha copaniṣat-parigīta-vibhur
     dvija-rāja-sutaḥ puraṭābha-hariḥ
nija-dhāmani khelati bandhu-yuto
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     iha - here; ca - and; upaniṣat - by the Upanisads; parigīta - sung; vibhur - glory; dvija-rāja-sutaḥ - sonm of the kingof brāhmaṇas; puraṭa - gold; ābha - splendor; hariḥ - chamring; nijadhāmani - in His own abode; khelati - enjoys pastimes; bandhu-yuto - with Hisassociates.

     Lord Caitanya is glorified by all the Upaniṣads, and the splendor of His complexion has eclipsed the glory of gold. He has appeared as the son of Jagannātha Miśra, the best of brāhmaṇas, and He performs pastimes with His associates in His own abode of Navadvīpa. Just worship that Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 11 

avatāra-varaṁ paripūrṇa-kalaṁ
     para-tattvam ihātma-vilāsa-mayam
vraja-dhāma-rasāmbudhi-gupta-rasaṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     avatāra-varaṁ - the best of incarnations; paripūrṇa-kalaṁ - perfect and complete; para-tattvam - the Supreme Truth; iha - here; ātma - own; vilāsa-mayam - with pastimes; vraja-dhāma - in the abode of Vraja;rasa - of nectar; ambudhi - ocean; gupta - hidden; rasaṁ - nectar.

     All incarnations of the Personality of Godhead are simultaneously present in the form of Lord Caitanya, the best of incarnations. Lord Caitanya is the Absolute Truth, and He is intent on performing His own transcendental pastimes. He continually tastes the ocean of nectar that is the confidential mellows of pure love of God exchanged by the residents of Vrajabhūmi. Just worship that Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 12

 śruti-varṇa-dhanādi na yasya kṛpā-
     janane balavad-bhajanena vinā
tam ahaituka-bhāva-pathā hi sakhe
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     śruti - learning; varṇa - noble birth; dhana - wealth;ādi - beginning; na - not; yasya - of whom; kṛpā - mercy; janane - in thebirth; balavad - powerful; bhajanena - by worship; vinā - without; tam - Him;ahaituka - unmotivated; bhāva - love; pathā - path; hi - indeed; sakhe - O friend.

     If one does not have intense devotional service, then scholarship, noble birth, wealth, or any other material asset will not help one attain the mercy of Lord Caitanya. O friend, for this reason please become free from all material motives and with great devotion worship Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 13 

api nakra-gatau hrada-madhya-gataṁ
     kam amocayad ārta-janaṁ tam ajam
avicintya-balaṁ śiva-kalpa-taruṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     api - also; nakra - to the crocodiles; gatau - in the path;
hrada - lake; madhya - middle; gataṁ - gone; kam - whom?; amocayad - delivered; ārta - distressed; janaṁ - people; tam - Him; ajam - unborn; avicintyabalaṁ - inconceivable power; śiva-kalpa-taruṁ - an auspicious desire tree.

     Lord Caitanya is the same Personality of Godhead who formerly delivered the elephant Gajendra from the crocodile's attack in the middle of the lake, and who also delivered Gajapati Mahārāja Pratāparudra from the ferocious crocodile of material existence. Just worship that Lord Caitanya, who is full of inconceivable potencies, and who appears like an auspicious desire-tree, and who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 14 

surabhīndra-tapaḥ-parituṣṭa-manā
     vara-varṇa-dharo harir āvirabhūt
tam ajasra-sukhaṁ muni-dhairya-haraṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     surabhīndra - of Surabhindra; tapaḥ - by the austerities; parituṣṭa - staisfied; manā - heart; vara-varṇa-dharo - appearing in the best varna; harir - Kṛṣṇa; āvirabhūt - appeared; tam - Gom,; ajasrasukhaṁ - blissful; muni-dhairya-haraṁ - stealing away the sages' peaceful composure.

     Satisfied at heart by Surabhīndra's austerities, Lord Hari appeared as a golden-complexioned brāhmaṇa known as Lord Caitanya and refuted the conclusions of the impersonalists. Just worship that Lord Caitanya, who is full of eternal transcendental bliss and who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 15 

abhilāṣa-cayaṁ tad-abheda-dhiyam
     aśubhaṁ ca śubhaṁ tyaja sarvam idam
anukūlatayā priya-sevanāyā
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     abhilāṣa-cayaṁ - desires; tad-abheda-dhiyam - not different; aśubhaṁ - inauspicious; ca - and; śubhaṁ - auspicious; tyaja - renoucne; sarvam - all; idam - this;anukūlatayā - favorable; priya-sevanāyā - by serving the beloved.

     O friend, please reject all varieties of material desires and also reject the impersonalists' conception of the living entity's oneness with the Supreme Godead. Give up all so-called auspicious and inauspicious material activities and just engage in the pure and favorable loving service of Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 16 

hari-sevaka-sevana-dharma-paro
     hari-nāma-rasāmṛta-pāna-rataḥ
nati-dhainya-dayā-para-māna-yuto
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     hari - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sevaka - of the servants;sevana - service; dharma - religion; paro - devoted; hari-nāma - of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy name; rasāmṛta - nectar; pāna - drinking; rataḥ - devoted; nati-dhainya - to the meek and humble; dayā-para - merciful; māna-yuto - honoring.

     O friend, be humble, meek, full of compassion for the fallen souls, and respectful to all. Just worship the devotees of Lord Hari and always drink the nectar of Lord Hari's holy names. In this way worship Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.


Text 17 

vada yādava mādhava kṛṣṇa hare
     vada rāma janārdana keśava he
vṛṣabhānu-sutā-priya-nātha sadā
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     vada - say; yādava - descendent of Yadu; mādhava - husband of the
goddess of fortune; kṛṣṇa - all-attractive; hare - remover of allthat is inauspicious; vada - say; rāma - the supreme enjoyer;janārdana - he who removes distress; keśava - the master of Brahma and Siva; he - O; vṛṣabhānu-sutāpriya-
nātha - the dear lover of Śrī Rādhā; sadā - always.

     O friend, just call out the names of the Personality of Godhead, saying: "O Yādava, O Mādhava, O Kṛṣṇa, O Hari, O Rāma, O Janārdana, O Keśava, O dear master of the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu!" Continually worship Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 18 

vada yāmuna-tīra-vanādri-pate
     vada gokula-kānana-puñja-rave
vada rāsa-rasāyaṇa gaura-hare
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     vada - say; yāmuna-tīra - by the Yamuna's banl; vana - in the forests; adri - and hills; pate - master; vada - say;gokula-kānana-
puñja - in the forests of Gokula; rave - sound; vada - say; rāsa-rasāyaṇa - the nectar of the rasadnace; gaura-hare - Gaura-hari.

     Please call out: "O Kṛṣṇa, O master of Govardhana Hill, Vṛndāvana, and the banks of the Yamunā! O Lord who appears like a brilliant sun shining in the forests of Gokula! O Lord who relishes the transcendental pastime of the rāsa dance! O Lord Caitanya, O fair-complexioned Lord Hari!" In this way just worship Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 19 

cala gaura-vanam nava-khaṇḍa-mayaṁ
     paṭha gaura-hareś caritāni mudā
luṭha gaura-padāṅkita-gāṅga-taṭaṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     cala - go; gaura-vanam - to Lord Caitanya's forest; navakhaṇḍa-mayaṁ - consisting of nine parts; paṭha - read; gaura-hares - of Lord Caitanya; caritāni - the pastimes; mudā - happily; luṭha - roll about;gaura-pada - by Lord Caitanya's footprints; aṅkita - marked; gāṅga-taṭaṁ - the Ganges' banks.

     Go to Lord Caitanya's forest, known as the nine islands of Navadvīpa, read about Lord Caitanya's pastimes with great delight, and roll about on the bank of the Ganges, which is marked with Lord Caitanya's footprints. In this way worship Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.

Text 20 

smara gaura-gadādhara-keli-kalaṁ
     bhava gaura-gadādhara-pakṣa-caraḥ
śṛṇu gaura-gadādhara-cāru-kathāṁ
     bhaja godruma-kānana-kuñja-vidhum

     smara - remember; gaura-gadādhara-keli-kalaṁ - the pastimes of Gaura-Gadādhara; bhava - become; gaura-gadādhara - of Gaura-Gadādhara; pakṣa-caraḥ - a follower; śṛṇu - hear; gaura-gadādhara-cārukathāṁ - the beautiful descriptions of Gaura-Gadādhara.

     Remember the transcendental pastimes of Gaura-Gadādhara, become a devotee of Gaura-Gadādhara, and hear the pleasing instructions of Gaura-Gadādhara. Worship Lord Caitanya, who is like a moon shining in the groves of Godruma forest.



