Folio Archives
First Campū

Song 1 (1.6.57)

Text 1

riṅgana-keli-kule jananī-sukha-karī
vraja-dṛśi sukṛta-sphurad-avatarī

riṅgana - of crawling; keli - of pastimes; kule - in a multitude; jananī - of Your mother; sukha - happiness; karī - creating; vraja - of Vraja; dṛśi - in the eyes; sukṛta - blessing; sphurat - manifesting; avatarī - appearance.

Your crawling pastimes delight Your mother. The sight of You blesses the eyes of Vraja.

Text 2 - Refrain

valayita-balya-vilasa jaya bala-valita hare

valayita - manifested; balya - of childhood; vilasa - pastimes; jaya - all glories; blal - by Balarama; valita - accompanied; hare - O Kṛṣṇa.
   
O Hari, O companion of Balarāma, O Lord who enjoys the pastimes of a small child, all glories to You!

Text 3

kiṅkiṇi-gaṇa-raṇane hṛdi ruci-dharī
pada-yuga-calana-kutuka-vihari

kiṅkiṇi - of ankle-bells; gaṇa - host; raṇane - in the sounds; hṛdi - in the heart; ruci - pleasure; dharī - manifesting; pada - of feet; yuga - of the pair; calana - movements; kutuka - eager; viharī - with pastimes. 

You eagerly move Your feet. The tinkling sounds of Your ankle-bells delight everyone's heart.

Text 4

gorasa-kīrṇi-bhave paṅke laghu-carī
varaṇa-karaṇa-vag-aticarī

gorasa - with milk; kīrṇi-bhave-sprinkled; paṅke - in the mud; laghu - slowly; carī - moving; varaṇa - to stop; karaṇa - causing; vak - words; aticarī - disobeying; 

Disobeying the order to stop, You slowly crawl over the ground muddied with milk.
 
Text 5

akalita-jana-milane tasmad apasarī
jananīṁ prati gati-capala-bharī

akalita - unnoticed; jana - of people; milane - in the assembly; tasmat - from them; apasarī - going; jananīm - Yoour mother; prati - towards; gati - movements; capala - speed; bharī - filled with.

Ignoring the others, You quickly crawl to Your mother.

Text 6

jananī-stana-vasane bhaya-bhag anuharī
tatra payorasa-visaraharī

jananī - of Your mother; stana - on the breast; vasane - on the garment; bhaya - fear; bhak - possing; anuharī - imitating; tatra - there; payorasa - of milk; visara; an abundance; aharī - 
taking.

You timidly become like a bodice covering Your mother's breast, where You drink a great flood of milk.

Text 7

vapuṣi mṛda-maline mṛdutapaharī
jananī-kara-kṛta-mṛjayaharī

vapuśi - on the body; mṛda - with mud; maline - dirty; mṛduta - with gentleness; apaharī - removing; jananī - by Your mother; kara - by the hand; kṛta - done; mṛjaya - with washing; 
aharī - taken.

Your mother gently washes Your muddy body with her own hand.

Text 8

api tandra-valane stana-pam anukarī
jananī-smita-patad-amṛtasarī

api - also; tandra - of sleepiness; valane - in the movements; stana - of the breast; pam - drinking; anukarī - imitating; jananī - of Your mother; smita - from the smile; patat - falling; 
amṛta - of nectar; asarī - a shower.

You become sleepy and only pretend to drink her breast. A shower of nectar falls from Your mother's smile.




Song 2 (1.7.63)

Text 1

bala-kṛṣnau bala-valita-vilasau
khelata iha sakhi sakhi-kṛta-hasau

bala - Balarama; kṛṣṇau - and Kṛṣṇa; bala - strengthy; valita - manifested; vilasau - whose pastimes; khelataḥ - play; iha - here; sakhi - O friend; sakhi - by Their friends; kṛta - done; 
hasau - laughter.

O friend, Kṛṣṇa and Balarama enthusiastically play as Their friends laugh.

Text 2

tarṇaka-puccha-dhṛti-vyapṛtinau
praṇaya-kalita-kali-kalane kṛtinau

tarṇaka - of a calf; puccha - the tail; dhṛti - holding; vyapṛtinau - manifesting; praṇaya - with love; kalita - done; kali-kalane - in a quarrel; kṛtinau - engaged.

They playfully hold the tail of a calf. They become engaged in a friendly quarrel.

Text 3

gṛha-gṛha-vīkṣaṇa-sakṣaṇa-netrau
dhenu-pala-tulaya dhṛta-vetrau

gṛha-gṛha - at each house; vīkṣaṇa - glances; sa - with; kṣaṇa - joy; netrau - whose eyes; dhenu - the cows; p;ala-tulaya - by protecting; dhṛta-held;vetrau - sticks.

They hold sticks to protect the cows. They happily glance at each house as They pass.

Text 4

druta-tarṇakam anu vidrutavantau
śreṇīyita-cala-veṇīmantau

druta - quickly moving; tarṇakam - calf; anuvidrutavantau - quickly following; śreṇīyita - together; cala - moving; veṇīmantau - in a line.

They follow the quickly moving calves as they walk in a long line.

Text 5

śarada-varṣika-varida-vapuṣau
cala-locana-ruci-capalaṁśu-juṣau

śarada - autumn; varśika-rain; varida-clouds; vapuśau - forms; cala - moving; locana - eyes; ruci - splendor; capala - aṁśu - lightning; juśau - engaged.

Their forms are like autumn rainclouds and Their restless eyes are like splendid lightning flashes.

Text 6

skhalad-alaka-dyuti-valayita-lapanau
ali-lalitamala-kamala-glapanau

skhalat - falling; alaka - of curling locks of hair; dyuti - splendor; valayita - encircled; lapanau - faces; ali - bumble - bee; lalita - charming; amala - splendid; kamala - lotus flower; 
glapanau - wilting.

Their faces encircled by falling curly locks of hair make splendid lotus flowers surrounded by playful bees wilt in comparison.

Text 7

nīla-kanaka-ruci-śuci-laghu-vasanau
cañcala-caraṇa-sphuṭa-rata-rasanau

nīla - blue; kanaka - golden; ruci - beauty; śuci - splendid; laghu - fine; vasanau - garments; cañcala - moving; caraṇa - feet; sphuṭa - manifested; rata-rasanau-tinkling.

They wear splendid and fine garments of blue and gold. The ankle-bells tinkle on Their quickly moving feet.



Song 3 (1.7.68) 

 (A Conversation Between Mother Yaśodā and a Gopi)

Text 1

tava sunur muhur anayaṁ kurute
akurata kim va vyañjita-kurute

tava - your; sunuḥ - sons; muhuḥ - repeatedly; anayam - misconduct; kurute - does; akuruta - did; kim - what? va - or; vyañjita - manifested; ku-rute - criticizers.

"Your son is always mischievous." 
"O critic, what has He done?"

Text 2

muñcati vatsan bhramaṁ bhramam
sacivyaṁ vaḥ kurute kamam

muñcati - He releases; vatsan - the calves; bhramam bhramam - wandering about; sacivyam - friendship; vaḥ - of you; kurute - does; kamam - greatly.

"He wanders about releasing the calves."
"He is your friend. He does it to help out."

Text 3
asamaya-mocanam asukha-nidhanam
kaḥ kiṁ kurute na yadi nidanam

asamaya - at the wrong time; mocanam - releasing; asukha - of unhappiness; nidhanam - the abode; kaḥ - who? kim - why? kurute - does; na - not; yadi - if; nidanam - reason.

"He releases the calves at the wrong time. This brings us great unhappiness."
"Why would He do this? Who would do this if he did not have a reason?"

Text 4

vina nidanaṁ kurute svamini
krośaṁ na kim iva kuruṣe bhamini

vina - without; nidanam - reason; kurute - He does;  svamini - O queen; krośam - anger; na - not; kim - why? iva - as if; kuruṣe - you do; bhamini - O noble lady. 

"O queen, He does this without any reason."
"O noble lady, why do you not angrily scold Him?"

Text 5

krośe hasati praty uha so 'yam
dattva vaśaya sphuṭam api toyam

korśe - at the colding; hasati - laughs; prati uta - on the contrary; saḥ ayam - He; dattva - giving; vaśaya - you should control; sphuṭam - clearly; api - also; toyam - water.

"When I scold Him He laughs at me."
"Splash water on Him. That will stop Him."

Text 6

atti steyaṁ param iha rucitam
ajñe bhanaṁ katham idam ucitam

atti - He eats; steyam - stolen; praram - further; iha - here; rucitam - delicious; ajñe - O foolish woman; bhanam - being visible; katham - how? idam - this; ucitam - is proper.

"He steals my delicious food and eats it."
"Foolish woman, why do you leave the food out in plain view?"

Text 7

steyopaye gurur ayam akhile
narhati sarvaṁ mithya-nikhile

steya - of theft; upaye - in methods; guruḥ - the guru; ayam - He; akhile - in all; na - not; rhatideserves; sarvam - all; mithya - lies; nikhile - all. 

"He is the guru of all thieves."
"It is not true. It is all a lie."

Text 8

racayati pīṭhadikam aroham
tad agamyaṁ kuru sarvaṁ doham

racayati - He does; pīṭha - on a chain; adikam - beginning with; aroham - climbing; tat - then; agamyam - unreachable; kuru - make; sarvam - all; moham - the milk.

"He stands on a chair or other object to reach my supply of milk."
"Then keep your milk very high so He cannot reach it." 

Text 9

durac cchidraṁ kalayati patre
asya kathaṁ dhīḥ sati tan-matre

durat - from far away; chidram - a hole; kalayati - He makes; patre - in the pot; asya - of Him; katham - how? dhīḥ - intelligence; sati - O noble lady; tat-matre - in this.

"When He cannot reach the pot because it is too high, He finds a way to poke a hole in it."
"O noble lady, how can He be clever enough to do all these things?"

Text 10

antar dhiyam anu sa iha viśalaḥ
vakṣi yathasau na tatha balaḥ

antaḥ - within; dhiyam - intelligence; anu - following; saḥ - He; iha - in this; viśalaḥ - great; vakṣi - I will say; yatha - in that way; asau - He; na-not; tatha - in that way; balaḥ - a 
child.

"He is very intelligent."
"I say it is not possible. He is only a child."

Text 11

vetti sa kṛtsnaṁ gopana-rītim
geha-guha na hi davayati bhītim

vetti - He knows; saḥ - He; kṛtsnam - completely;  gopa-ritim - hiding; geha - of the house; guha - in the inner reccesses; na - not; hi - indeed; davayati bhītim - cause fear.

"He knows all my hiding-places."
"Your dark closet does not frighten Him?"

Text 12

geha-guhatra vṛtha tanu-dīpe
tanur anulipta kalaya samīpe

geha - of; guha - the colset; atra-here vṛtha - useless; tanu - of the body; dīpe - in the lamp; tanuḥ - the body; anulipta - anointed; kalaya - you may see; samīpe - in the presence.

"My closet is useless. The effulgence of His body lights up the darkness.”
"Then I shall anoint His body with dark cosmetics. That will cover the effulgence. I shall do this in your presence. You watch as I do it."

Text 13

mani-gana-mahasa gaṇayati na tamaḥ
bhuṣaṇa-rahitas tiṣṭhet katamaḥ

maṇi - of jewels; gaṇa - of the host; mahasa - by the effulgence; gaṇayati - counts; na - not; tamaḥ - the darkness; bhuśaṇa - ornaments; rahitaḥ - withoup; tiṣṭhet - may remain; 
katamaḥ - who?

"The effulgence of His jewels has made the darkness very insignificant."
"What child can remain without ornaments?"

Text 14

api caśayati balad api kīśam
manuṣe kiyad amum attum adhīśam

api - and; ca - also; aśayati - He feeds; balat - by force; api - even; kīśam a monkey; manuśe - you think; kiyat - how much; amum - He; attum - to eat; adhīśam - is able.

"He also feeds a monkey."
"How much do you think He can eat by Himself?"

Text 15

tad aśaktau patraṁ bhedayate
tasyaśaucaṁ va vedayate

tat - then; aśaktau - in the inability; patram - the pot; bhedayate - breaks; tasya - of that; aśaucam - the impure; va - or; vedayate - informs.

"When He cannot reach a pot He breaks it."
"That is His way of telling you the pot is impure."

Text 16

gama-samaye rodayati ca balam
prakṣamo vara-mahila-malam

gama - of going; samaye - at the time; rodayati - causes to cry; ca - also; balam - small child; prakṣamaḥ - well-behaved; vara - good; mahila - of women; malaṁ - to the group.
   
"When He goes He makes the babies cry."
"It is not true. He is always well-behaved to the good women of Vraja."

Text 17

api balan mehayate gehe 
na hi na hi curṇaṁ patitaṁ snehe

api - also; balat - forcibly; mahayate - urinates; gehe - in our hone; na - not; hi - indeed; na - not; hi - indeed; curṇam - dust; patitam - fallen; snehe - in oil; 

"He urinates in my home!"
"No! No! That is only dust fallen on some oil!"

Text 18

tava purato 'yam sthiravan murtiḥ
aścarye 'yaṁ tava vak-purtiḥ

tava - of you; purataḥ - in the presence; sthiravan - still; murtiḥ - form; aścarye - in wonder; ayam - He; tava - of you; vak - of words; purtiḥ - the flood.

"He is standing very still before you."
"He is struck with wonder by the flood of your words."



Song 4 (1.8.4)

Text 1 - Refrain

gokula-pati-kula-tilaka tvam asīha
kṛta-sukṛta-vraja-racita-sukha-vraja nayananandi-samīha

gokula-of Gokula; pati - of the king; kula - of the family; tilaka - O tilaka marking; tvam - You; asi - are; iha - here; kṛta - performed; sukṛta - of pious activities; vraja - a host; racita - 
created; sukha - of happiness; vraja - an abundance; nayana - the eyes; anandi - delighted; samīha - endeavor.

O tilaka decoration in the family of Gokula's king, You bring great happiness to the pious people of Vraja. You delight their eyes.

Text 2

anandodbhava-janma-mahotsava-nandita-gopa-samaja
putanika-mṛti-nava-maṅgala-kṛti-valayita-gokula-raja

ananda - from bliss; udbhava - manifested; janma - birth; maha - great; utsava - festival; nandita - delighted; gopa - of cowherds; samaja - the community; putanika - of Putana; mṛti - from the death; nava - new;maṅgala - auspicious; kṛti - ceremonies; valayita - enclosed; gokula - of Gokula; raja - the king.

The cowherd people were very pleased by the jubilant celebration of Your birthday. After Pūtanā died, the king of Gokula performed various auspicious rites to protect You.

Text 3

dhairya-nivartana-śakaṭa-vivartanam anubhavyena parīta
sa-tṛnavartaka-vayu-nivartaka-parameśenanīta

dhairya - patience; nivarttana - losing; śakaṭa - the cart; vivartanam - overturning; anubhavyena - with an attempt; parīta - attained; sa - with; tṛnavartaka - of Tṛnavarta; vayu - the 
wind; nivartaka - stopping; parama-īśena - by the Supreme Lord; anīta - brought. 

You impatiently turned over the cart. The Supreme Personality of Godhead killed the Tṛṇavarta whirlwind demon and returned You to us.

Text 4

madhura-praṅgana-viracita-riṅgana-jalaja-nayana su-puṇya
nana-keliṣu nṛtya-kalaliṣu darśita-vara-naipuṇya

madhura - with charm; praṅgana - in the courtyard; viracita - done; riṅgana - crawling; jalaja - lotus; nayana - sees; su-puṇya - pure-hearted; nana - various; keliṣ - in pastimes; nṛtya-kala-aliṣu - in dancing; darśita - shown; vara - excellent; naipuṇya - expertness.

O beautiful lotus-eyed child who gracefully crawls in the courtyard, O expert, playful dancer,

Text 5

tarṇaka-bala-dhi-śavalita-tanv-adhi-valayita-mañjula-śobha
jaratī-nivahe kautuka-kalahe pravalita-mithya-lobha

tarṇaka-calf; bala-dhi - as a boy;  śavalita - mixed; tanu - body; adhi - to; valayita - enclosed; mañjula - charming; śobha -  beauty; jaratī - of elderly gopis; nivahe - in the multitude; katuka - eager; kalahe - in the quarrel;  pravalita - manifested; mithya - of lies; lobha - greed.

O handsome boy who protects the calves, O greedy lier in the playful quarrel with the elderly gopis,

Text 6

maṁ mataram anu sukham udvitanu pratataṁ satataṁ kṛṣṇa
drutam urarī-kuru tanu-vṛddhiṁ puru-khelavali-kṛta-tṛṣṇa

mam - to me; mataram - mother; anu - following; sukham - happiness; udvitanu - bring; pratatam - great;  satatam - always; kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; drutam - quickly;  urarī-kuru - please accept; tanu - of the body; vṛddhim - expansion; puru - greatt; khela - of pastimes;  avali - multitude; kṛta - done; tṛṣṇa-thirst.

Quickly come here. I am Your mother. Make me happy, O Kṛṣṇa who thirsts to play.

Text 7

tri-bhuvana-darśana-vismaya-marśana-niścita-vaiṣṇava-maya
hari-varivaśya-sukhada-tamaḥ sya vigata-jara-marakaya

tri - three; bhuvana - worlds; darśana - showing; vismaya - wonder; marśana - consideration; niścita - confirmed; vaiṣṇava - of Lord Viṣṇu; maya - thepotency; hari - to Lord Hari; varivaśya - by devotional service; sukhada - granting happines; tamaḥ - the most; syaḥ - may be; vigata - without; jara - old- age; marakaya - and death.

O child, whose potency fills the three worlds with wonder, I pray that by worshiping Lord Hari You will never grow old or die, but will always bring us happiness.



Song 5 (1.9.32)

Text 1 - Refrain

nanda-mahīpati-jata
nanda yaśoda-mata

nanda - Nanda; mahīpati - from King; jata - born; nanda - be happy; yaśoda - who has; Yaśoda; mata - as mother.

O son of King Nanda, O son of Mother Yaśoda, may You be happy.

Text 2

janma-maha-maha-digdha
ramita-samasta-snigdha

janma - birth; maha - great; maha-festival; digdha - anointed; ramita - delighted; samasta - all; snigdha - afectionate.

O child anointed for Your birthday celebration, O child full of love for Your delighted relatives,

Text 3

sparśardita-viṣa-yoṣa
aparicitapara-doṣa

sparśa - by a touch; ardita - killed; viṣa - poison. yośa - woman; aparicita - ignored; apara - peerless; doṣa - sins.

O child who with a touch killed the poisonous witch Pūtanā, O child who forgave all her grievous sins,

Text 4

śakaṭa-vighaṭṭana-śeṣa
gokula-puṇya-viśeṣa

śakaṭa - of the cart; vighaṭṭana - the breaking; śeśa - the remainder; gokula - in Gokuola; puṇya - pious; viśeśa - specific.

O child who broke the cart, O most pious child in Gokula,

Text 5

kṛta-namabhir abhirama
santata-ramarama

kṛta - given; namabhiḥ - by names; abhirama - delightful; santata - always; rama - with Balarama; arama-playing.

O child who has many beautiful names, O child who continually plays with Balarāma,

Text 6

riṅga-bhṛtaṅgana-raṅga
aṅgī-kṛta-sakhi-saṅga

riṅga - moving; bhṛta - manifested; aṅgana-raṅga - in the courtyard; aṅgī-kṛta - accepted; sakhi - of friends; saṅga - the association.

O child who runs in the courtyard of the house, O child who stays with His friends,

Text 7

laṅghita-maruta-cakra
nandita-gokula-śakra

laṅghita - killed; maruta-cakra- - the whirlwind demon Tṛnavarta; nandita - delighted; gokula - of Gokula; śakra - the king.

O child who killed the whirlwind deimon, O child who delighted Gokula's King Nanda,

Text 8

vatsa-vimocana-moda
vraja-jana-śarma-yaśo-da

vatsa - of the calves; vimocana - in releasing; moda - pleasure; vraja-of Vraja; jana - to the people śarma - happiness; yaśaḥ - and fame; da - giving.

O child, who delights in releasing the calves, O child who brings happiness and fame to the people of Vraja,

Text 9

sarvananda-caurya
tasmin darśita-śaurya

sarva - of everyone; ananda - bliss; caurya - thieving pastimes; tasmin - in that; darśita - revealed; śaurya - prowess and heroism.

O child who delights everyone with the pastimes of a thief, O child who demonstrates great prowess and heroism in this way,

Text 10

ayi damodara-līla
akhila-sukha-prada-śīla

ayi - O; dama - a rope; udara - at the belly; līla - whose pastime; akhila - to everyone; sukha - happiness; prada - giving;  śīla - whose pastimes.

O child who manifested the dāmodara pastime, O child whose pastimes bring everyone transcendental bliss,



Song 6 (1.11.53)

Text 1 - Refrain

nanda-tanujanur adya vyalam
hatavan hṛtavan asmat-kalam

nanda - of Nanda; tanujanuḥ - the son; adya - now;  vyalam - a snake; hatavan - killed; 
hṛtavan - removed; asmat - from us; kalam - the harm.

Today the son of Nanda killed a snake and rescued us from danger.

Text 2

oṣṭhadharam iha jalada-taṭaliḥ
dantavalir api dantaka-paliḥ

oṣṭha-adharam - upper and lower lips; iha - here; jalada - of clouds; taṭa - surface; aliḥ - series; 
danta - of teeth; avaliḥ - the series; api - also; dantaka - of mountain peaks; paliḥ - a host.

"This snake's lips are many rainclouds. Its teeth are a row of mountain peaks.

Text 3

śvasa-bharaḥ khara-davaja-vataḥ
jihva-yugam api vartma-nipataḥ

śvasa-bharaḥ - breath; khara - acrid; davaja - from a forest fire; vataḥ - the wind; jihva - of tongues; yugam - the pair; api - also; vartma - of a road; nipataḥ - the falling.

"Its breath is the acrid wind from a forest-fire. Its forked tongue is a highway."

Text 4

ity utprekṣitatama-vividhaṅgan
vyatihasan acarataḥ saṅgan

iti - thus; utprekṣitatama - guessed; vividha - various; aṅgan - limbs; vyatihasan - laughter; acarataḥ - did; saṅgan - complete.

We made these guesses about its limbs and we all laughed.

Text 5

ahim anv ahitaṁ kalpayamanan
girir iti taṁ viśataḥ kṛtamanan

ahim - the snake; anu - following; ahitam - the status of being a snake; kalpayamanan - seeing; giriḥ - a mountain; iti - thus; tam - him; visataḥ kṛtamanan - entered.

Although we could clearly see it was a snake, we said "It is a mountain", and entered within it.

Text 6

tad-udara-madhya kṛtabhyanuveśaṇ
nija-virahadi-vimurchita-veśan

tat - of it; udara - of the belly; madhya - in the midst; kṛta - abhyanuveśan - entered; nija - own; viraha - separation; adi - beginning with; vimurchita-veśan - fainted.

We marched into the snake's belly, separated ourselves from Kṛṣṇa, and then fainted unconscious.

Text 7

sneha-bharad atha svena sametan
svaka-netramṛta-vṛṣṭi-sacetan

sneha - of love; bharat - because of great; atha - then; svena - by their own friend; sametan - met; svaka - own; netra - of the glance; amṛta - of nectar; vṛṣṭi - by the shower; sacetan - returned to consciousness. 

Out of great love our friend Kṛṣṇa found us and restored our consciousness by showering us with the nectar of His glance.

Text 8

tasmad bahir atha niṣkasitavan
punar iha nikhilaṁ bata darśitavan

tasmat - from it; bahiḥ - outside. atha - then; niṣkasitavan - brought out; punaḥ - again; iha - here; nikhilam- - everything; bata - indeed; darśitavan - caused to see.

He brought us out of the snake and showed all of us what had happened.

Text 9

pranad adhikaḥ so 'yam praṇan
rakṣan asman kurute traṇan

praṇat - than life; adhihaḥ - more; saḥ ayam - He; praṇan - life; rakṣan - protecting; asman - us; kurute - does; traṇan - protection.

In this way, Kṛṣṇa, who is more dear to us than our own lives, saved our lives and protected us.



Song 7 (1.12.46)

Text 1

ramate ramaṁ paritaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ
sakhi-gaṇa-gīta-gaṇeṣu sa-tṛṣṇaḥ

ramate - plays; ramam - Balarama; paritaḥ - with;  kṛṣṇaḥ - Kṛṣṇa; sakhi - of friends; gaṇa - of the multitude; gīta - of songs; gaṇeśu - in the multitude; sa - with; tṛṣṇaḥ - thirst.

As His friends sing many songs, Kṛṣṇa eagerly plays with Balarāma.

Text 2

anugayati pika-ṣaṭpada-ganam
parijalpati śuka-haṁsa-samanam

anugayati - sing in imitation; pika - of the cuckoos;  śaṭpada - and bees; ganam - thesong; parijalpati - talks; śuka - of the parrots; haṁsa - swans;samanam - like; 

He sings like the bees and cuckoos. He talks like the swans and parrots.

Text 3

evaṁ cakra-cakora-bakadi
anurauti sphuṭa-hasa-vivadi

evam - in this way; cakra - cakravakas; cakora - cakoras; baka - bakas; adi - beginning with; anurauti - imitates; sphuṭa - manifested; hasa - laughter; vivadi - debating.

In this way He imitates the calls of the cakravākas, cakoras, bakas, and other birds. He laughs as He debates with them.

Text 4

dvīpi-mukharpita-bhīti paśunam
rutim iva sṛjati bhayaya śiśunam

dvīpi - a tiger; mukha - in the mouth; arpita - placed; bhīti - fear; paśunam - of the cows; rutim - a roar; iva - like; sṛjati - emits; bhayaya - for the fear; śiśunam - of the boys. 

Roaring like a tiger He frightens the cows and boys.

Text 5

pakṣi-mṛgadikam ahar ahar acalam
viracita-namabhir aha ca sakalam

pakṣi - with birds; mṛga - and deer; adikam - beginning; ahaḥ ahaḥ - day after day; acalam - without fail; viracita - given; namabhiḥ - with names; aha - spoke; ca - and; sakalam - to all.

Every day He would speak with all the birds, deer, and other animals. He would call them by name.

Text 6

bhramati sakha yadi tasmin ko 'pi 
karśati vihasan pranayam utapi

bhramati - wanders; sakha - a friend; yadi - if; tasmin - in this place; kaḥ api - someone; karśati - pulls; vihasan - laughing; praṇayam - with love; uta api - indeed.

If one of His friends wanders away, He affectionately pulls Him back and laughs.

Text 7

duragaṁ paśum ahvayati ca namna
kṛta-go-gopa-manorama-samna

dura - far away; gam - gone; paśum - a cow; ahvayati - calls; ca - also; namna - by name; kṛta - created; go - of the cows; gopa - and cowherd boys; manorama - beautiful; samna - with a song.

By name He calls a cow that has wandered far away. The musical sound of His call delights the cows and cowherd boys.

Text 8

gavy ahutau śikhinam hutiḥ
jata yad asau ghana-ruti-bhutiḥ

gavi - when the cow; ahutau - is called; śikhinam - of the peacocks; hutiḥ - the call; jata - is manifested; yat - which; asau - this; ghana-ruti-bhutiḥ - tumult.

When He calls the cow the peacocks all reply with a great tumult of calls.

Text 9

vyatiyuñjano bhratra sva-karam
śaṁsati hasati sakhi-hita-nikaram

vyatiyuñjanaḥ - taking; bhratra - by the brother; sva - own; karam - hand; śaṁsati - praises; hasati - laughs; sakhi - of friends; hita - good fortune; nikaram abundance.

Taking His brother by the hand, He laughs and praises His friends.

Text 10

sakhibhir viśramayann ayam aryam
pranayati tat-pada-lalana-karyam

sakhibhiḥ - with the friends; viśramayan - causing to rest; ayam - this; aryam - noble person; praṇayati - does; tat - of Him; pada - of the feet; lalana-karyam - massage.

Making Him lie down to rest with His friends, He massages His noble brother's feet.

Text 11

su-lalita-pallava-talpa-vidhanaḥ
suhṛd-uru-sthira-murdha-nidhanaḥ

su - very; lalita - charming; pallava - of leaves; talpa - a bed; vidhanaḥ - placing; suhṛt - of a friend; uru - on the lap; sthira - motionless; murdha - head; nidhanaḥ - placing. 

He lies down on a nice bed of leaves and rests His head on a friend's lap.

Text 12

keli-śramam anukṛta-śayanehaḥ 
puṇyatamair upa vījita-dehaḥ

keli - of playing śramam - fatique; anukṛta - following;  śayana - to rest; īhaḥ - the endeavor; puṇyatamaiḥ - by the most pure saintly persons; upavījita - fanned; dehaḥ - body.

Tired from playing, He lies down to rest. The most pure saintly persons fan His body.

Text 13

atra ca kair api lalita-caraṇaḥ
asmat-tṛn-matrada-paricaraṇaḥ

atra - here; ca - also; kaiḥ api - by some; lalita - massaged; caraṇaḥ - whose feet; asmat - of us; tṛt - of desire; maṭra - only; da - giving; paricaraṇaḥ - whose servants.

Some boys massage His feet. These servants create in us the desire to become like them.

Text 14

yaḥ snigdhanaṁ gana-vinodaiḥ
nidram itavan svara-kṛta-modaiḥ

yaḥ - who; snigdhanam - of affectionate friends; gana - of songs; vinodaiḥ - with pastimes; nidram - sleep; itavan - who attained; svara - by the sounds; kṛta - done; modaiḥ - with happiness.
   
Pleased by the singing of His loving friends, He went to sleep.

Text 15

smaratam tan naḥ kim api manaḥ-stham
samayaṁ sahate nanyavastham

smaratam - may remember; tat - this; naḥ - of us;  kim api - something; manaḥ - in the heart; stham - situated; samayam - opportunity; sahate - bears; na - not; anya - another; avastham - condition.

May we always remember these pastimes. Our hearts cannot bear to think of anything else.

Text 16

vayam iha ke va lubdhaṁ manyaḥ
lubdha yasmin śuka-mukha-dhanyaḥ

vayam - we; iha - here; ke - who? va - or; lubdham manyaḥ - desiring; lubdhaḥ - desired; yasmin - in which; śukha - by  Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvamī; mukha - headed; dhanyaḥ - fortunate souls.

Who are we to yearn after these things? These are the desires of Śrila Śukadeva Gosvāmi and a host of other very fortunate saints.



Song 8 (1.14.22)

Text 1 - Refrain

harina halina saha-ripu-dalina
rajanī-mukham anu jananī-lalanam iti kalitam jita-kalina

hariṇa - with Kṛṣṇa; halina - with Balarama; saha - with; ripu - of enemies; dalina - the crusher; rajanī - of night; maukham - the gace; anu - following; jananī - of the mother; lalanam - affectionate service; iti - thus; kalitam - performed; jita - defeated; kalina - sin.

After the face of night appeared Mother Yaśodā affectionately served Kṛṣṇa the conqueror of sin, and Balarāma, the crusher of enemies.

Text 2

nirmañchana-nīrajana-marjana-vadanalokana-racanam
mardana-majjana-samvastranatah paścat puṇḍraka-sacanam

nirmañchana-nirmanchana; nīrajana - arati; marjana - wiping; vadana - of the face; alokana - seeing; racanam - activity; mardana - massage; majjana - bath; samvastraṇataḥ - garments; paścat - after; puṇḍraka - tilaka; sacanam - service.

She performed nirmañchana and ārati, washed Them, looked at Their faces, massaged, bathed, and dressed Them and decorated Them with tilaka.

Text 3

rasa-caya-yojana-bhojana-puraṇa-surabhita-niṛasvadanam
aguru-drava-yutir atha tambula-svadanam sukha-samvadanam

rasa - of tastes; caya - a multitude; yojana - endowed; bhojana - meal; puraṇa - filling; surabhita - fragrant; nīra - water; asvadanam - taste; aguru-drava - aguru; yutiḥ - with; atha - then; tambula - betel-nuts;svadanam - taste; sukha - with happiness; samvadanam - conversation.

She fed Them a delicious meal and gave Them scented water. She anointed Them a aguru, gave Them betel-nuts, and happily conversed with Them.

Text 4

sukṛti-janaṁ prati śayya-saṁskṛti-samanujñam anuśayanam
priya-sakha-saṅgatim anusevy-anugatim anu ca mudam ati-cayanam

sukṛti-janam - servants; prati - to; śayya - the bed; samśkṛti - preparation; samanujñam - instruction; sauśayanam - resting; priya - dear; sakha - of friends; saṅgatim - company; snusevi-anugatim - along with; anu - following; ca - also; mudam - of happiness; ati - great; cayanam - abundance.

She ordered the servants to make the arrangements for sleeping, and she very happily put Them and their gopa friends to bed.


Song 9 (1.17.43)

ramo ramanuja iti yugalam
kṛta-naṭa-veśataya paṭu rajati gayati sakhi-gaṇa-yugalam

ramaḥ - Balarama; rama-anujaḥ - and Balarama's younger brother, Kṛṣṇa; iti - thus; yugalam - the pair; kṛta - done; naṭa - of dancing; veśataya - with appearance; paṭu-expertly; rajati - are splendidly manifested; gayati - sings; sakhi - of friends; gaṇa - the host; yugalam - pair.

As Their friends sing, Balarāma and His younger brother Kṛṣṇa expertly dance.

Text 2

sarasa-rasalaja-pallava-tallaja-pallavitamala-śīrṣam
nava-yauvana-vana-bījaṅkuram iva dharayad atanu-cikīrṣam

sarasa - beautiful; rasala - from a mango tree; ja - born; pallava - blossoms; tallaja - excellent; pallavita - blosomed; amala - splendid; śīrṣam - heads;  nava - new; yauvana - youth; vana - forest; bīja - from the seed; aṅkuram - the sprout; iva - like;  dharayat - holdingt; anatanu - of cupid; cikīrṣam - the desire.

Their splendid heads are crowned with beautiful mango flowers. Their amorous desires are like a new sprout rising from a seed in the forest of Their fresh youthfulness.

Text 3

vañchita-piñchavali-parilañchita-mani-nicayañcita-keśam
dadhad iva hari-dhanur-anugata-taravali-valitambuda-leśam

vañchita - desired; piñcha - of peacock feathers; avali - a host; parilañchita - marked; maṇi - of jewels; nicaya - with a multitude; añcita - decorated; keśam - whose hair; dadhat - wearing; iva - like; hari-dhanuḥ - a rainbow; anugata - followed; tara - of stars; avali - series; valita - encircled; ambuda - clouds; leśam - slight.

Decorated with many beautiful jewels and peacock feathers, Their hair is like small dark clouds with stars and rainbows.

Text 4

valayita-nava dalad-utpala-karnika-karna-yugadbhuta-śobham
latika kasav iti vismaya-kṛti-madhukṛti-vinihita-lobham

valayīta - curling; nava - newly; dalat - blossomed; utpala - lotus; karṇika - whorls; karṇa - ears; yuga - pair; adbhuta - wonderful; śobham - beauty; latika - creeper; ka - what? asau - this; iti - thus; vismaya-kṛti - wonder; madhukṛti - bees; vinihita - placed; lobham - greed.

Their wonderfully beautiful curling ears are like the whorls of newly blossomed lotus flowers. When the bumblebees see these flower-ears, They become filled with desire to drink their honey. They become struck with wonder and say: "What vine has borne these flowers?"

Text 5

hasta-kamalam abhi kamala-vighurnana-ramana-kala-ramaṇīyam
madhupa-gaṇaṁ prati madhu-kaṇa-varṣaṇam akṛta yataḥ kamanīyam

hasta - hands; kamalam - reddish; abhi - to; kamala - lotus flowers; vighurṇana - moving; ramaṇa - delightful kala - art; ramaṇīyam - pleasing; madhupa - of bees; gaṇam - the host; prati - to; madhu - of honey; kaṇa -of drops; varśaṇam - a shower; 
akṛta - did; yataḥ - from which; kamanīyam - beautiful.

Their reddish hands are handsome, gracefully moving lotus flowers that shower drops of nectar on the bumblebees.

Text 6

mala-mala-parimala-vali-vali-vapur-ali-valita-sadeśam
ali-jhaṅkṛti-nuti-kolahala-vaha-bahula-kutuhala-veśam

mala - of garlands; mala - the series; parimala - the fragrance; vali-great; vali - offering; vapuḥ - form; ali - bees; valita - moved; sadeśam - near; ali - of the bees; jhaṅkṛti - the 
buzzing; nuti - prayers; kolahala - tumult; vaha - carrying; bahula - great; kutuhala - joy; veśam - manifestation.

Attracted by the sweet fragrance of Their flower garlands, the buzzing bees offer a great tumult of jubilant prayers.

Text 7

sitam asitaṁ vapur asitaṁ pītaṁ vasanaṁ yasya ca gītam
tad idaṁ yadi gokulam anu gokulam ayati tadagham atītam

sitam - light; asitam - dark; vapuḥ - form; asitam - dark; pītam - light; vasanam - garments; yasya - of whome; ca - also; gītam - glorious; tat - this; idam - that; yadi - if; gokulam - to Gokula; anu - following; go - of the surabhi cows; kulam - the herd; 
ayati - goes; tada - then; agham - suffering; atītam - passed.

Their glorious forms are light and dark and Their splendid garments are also light and dark. If They follow the surabhi cows into Gokula Village, then all our sufferings will end.



Song 10 (1.21.16)

Text 1 - Refrain

tvam upayanta sakhi vanamalī
sakala-śubhakara-vara-guna-śalī

tvam - you; upayanta - will marry; sakhi - O frind; vana-mali-Kṛṣṇa, who wears a garland of forest-flowers; sakala - all; subha - auspicious; akara - mine; vara - excellent; guna - will qualities; sali - endowed;

O gopi-friend, Kṛṣṇa, who wears a garland of forest flowers, who is a mine of auspciciousness, and who possesses all good qualities, will certainly marry you.

Text 2

yatra vraja-patir ati-ruci-rucitam
vartaṁ calayita sukha-sacitam

yatra - in which; vraja - of Vraja; patiḥ - the king; ati-ruci-rucitam - ver delightful; vartam - news; calayita - will bring; sukha - of happiness; sacitam - followed.

Vraja's King Nanda will happily bring this joyful news.

Text 3

śrutva tat tava matara-pitarau
sukham ayitarau kṛta-dhana-vitarau

śrutva - hearing; tat - this; tava - your; matara - mother; pitarau - and father; sukham - happiness; ayitarau - will attain; kṛta - performed; dhana - of wealth; vitarau - giving.
   
Hearing this, Your mother and father will become very happy. They will give you a very opulent dowry.

Text 4

harir api mudam iha hṛdi gopayita
sakhibhir narmani yaḥ kopayita

hariḥ - Kṛṣṇa; api - also; mudam - the happiness; iha - here hṛdi - in His heart; gopayita - will conceal sakhibhiḥ - with His gopa friends; narmaṇi - in joking words; yaḥ - who; kopayita - will become angry.

Kṛṣṇa will hide the happiness in His heart. He will joke with His friends and pretend to be angry.

Text 5

gaṇaka-nidiṣṭa-tare su-dinahe
veśaṁ dhasyati sa nija-vivahe

gaṇaka - by the astrologers; nidiṣṭa-tare - indicated; su-dinahe - on the auspicious day; veśam - dress. dhasyati - will take; saḥ - He; nija - own; vivahe - in the wedding.

On the auspicious wedding day indicated by the astrologers He will dress in very opulent clothing.

Text 6

nīla-ruci-cita-gaura-dukulam
ghana-capalabhirucam iva mulam

nīla-blue; ruci - splendor; cita - abundance; gaura - golden; dukulam - silk garments; ghana - a raincloud; capala - lightning; abhirucam - splendor; iva - like; mulam - the root.

His beautiful dark complexion and His golden-colored silk dhoti will make Him seem like the origin of the handsomeness of dark rainclouds and golden lightning flashes.

Text 7

antara-vasanaga-kañcika-pītam
citra-pracchada-ruci-parivītam

antara - another; vasana - garment; ga - placed; kañcuka - on His chest; pītam - yellow; citra - wonderful pracchada-covering; ruci - splendor; parivītam - extended.

He will wear another wonderfully splendid yellow garment on His chest.

Text 8

mukuṭa-kirīta-tirīṭa-virajam
alakavali-mani-citraka-bhajam

mukuṭa - of crowns; kirīṭa-tirīṭa-virajam - splendidly decorated with the crown; alaka - of locks of hair; avali - the host; maṇi - jewels; citraka - tilaka decorations; bhajam - 
possessing.

He will wear the most splendid of all crowns. He will have jewels in His hair. He will be decorated with splendid tilaka.

Text 9

kuṇḍala-maṇḍita-gaṇḍa-vibhagam
tambula-cchavi-jid-adhara-su-ragam

kuṇḍala - with earrings; maṇḍita - decorated; gaṇḍa - vibhagam - cheeks; tambula - of betelnuts; chavi - the splendor. jit - defeated; adhara - of His lips; su-ragam - the redness. 

His cheeks will be decorated with earrings. His handsome red lips will defeat the splendor of betelnuts.

Text 10

adharavṛtaye kara-dhṛta-celam
graiveyakam anukṛta-maṇi-melam

adhara - lips; avṛtaye - for covering; kara - in His hand; dhṛta - held; celam - cloth; graiveyakam - a necklace; anukṛta - made; maṇi - of jewels; melam - meeting.

He will wear a jewel necklace. He will hold in His hand a veil to cover your lips.

Text 11

saṅgada-kaṅkaṇa-mudrika-hastam
avapaka-dhṛti-valayita-śastam

sa - with; aṅgada - bracelets; kaṅkaṇa - bracelets; mudrika - and rings; hastam - in His hand;avapaka - a bracelet; dhṛti - holding; valayita - encircled; śastam - glorious.
   
His glorious hands will be decorated with aṅgadas, kaṅkanas and rings, and encircled by āvāpaka bracelets.

Text 12

hara-valita-hṛdi dhṛta-maṇi-rajam
vana-maladika-malya-samajam

hara - by a necklace; valita - encircled; hṛdi - on the chest; dhṛta - worn; maṇi - of jewels; rajam - the king; vana - of forest flowers; mala - the garland; adikam - beginning with; malya - of garlands; samajam - an assembly.

On His chest He will wear a jewel necklace holding the regal Kaustubha gem. He will wear a garland of forest flowers and many other garlands also.

Text 13

maṇi-maya-śṛṅkhala-lasad-avalagnam
caraṇa-vibhuśaṇa-gaṇa-ruci-magnam

maṇi-maya-jewelled; śṛṅkhala - chains; lasat - glistening; avalagnam - resting; caraṇa - of the feet; vibhuśaṇa - ornaments; gaṇa - multitude; ruci - splendor; magnam - immersed.

He will wear splendid anklets and a glistening jeweled belt.

Text 14

veśe casmin etad apurvam 
yat tu na dṛṣṭaṁ kvacana ca purvam

veśe - in garments; ca - also; asmin - in this; etat - this; apurvam - unprecedented; yat - which; tu - indeed; na - not; dṛṣṭam - seen; kvacana - ever; ca - also; purvam - before.

No one has ever seen anything as splendid as the garments and ornaments He will wear on that day.

Text 15

aṅgaṁ bhuśaṇam api kila sarvam
sarvabharaṇaṁ svayam iti garvam

aṅgam - body; bhuśaṇam - ornament; api - also; kila - indeed; sarvam - complete; sarva-all; abharaṇam - ornaments; svayam - personally; iti - thus; garvam - pride.

His transcendental body will also be an ornament. It will proudly think: "I am myself the best of all ornaments."

Text 16

atha maṇi-śakaṭadhiṣṭhitam etam
kalayiṣyanti suhṛdbhir apetam

atha - then; maṇi - jewelled; śakaṭa - chariot; adhiṣṭhitam - situated; etam - this; kalayiṣyanti - will be; suhṛdbhiḥ - with friends; apetam - gone.

His friends will travel to the wedding on a jeweled chariot.

Text 17

taṁ janyanaṁ śakaṭa-parītam 
kusumair varṣiṣyanti sa-gītam

tam - Him; janyanam - of friends; śakaṭa - on the chariot; parītam - assembled; kusumaiḥ - with flowers; varṣayiṣyanti - will shower; sa - with; gītam - songs.

The friends on the chariot will sing and shower Him with flowers.

Text 18

śakaṭa-dhvani-yuta-vadya-śatena
mudam apsyati sa svayam api tena

śakaṭa - from the chariot; dhvani - the sound; yuta - with; vadya - of music; śatena - with hundreds; mudam - happiness; apsyati - will attain; saḥ - He; svayam - personally; api - also; tena - by this.

Accompanied by the music of a hundred instruments, the sounds from the chariot will make Him very happy.

Text 19

tad-dhvani-kalanat tava sakhi cittam 
dhṛtam api yatnad bhavita bhittam

tat - of this dhvani the sounds; kalanat - from perceiving; tava - of you; sakhi - O friend; cittam - the heart; dhṛtam - peaceful and sedate; api - even; yatnat - from the endeavor; bhavita - will be; bhittam - broken.

O friend, when you hear these tumultous sounds you will become overwhelmed. The sedate composure in your heart will become broken.

Text 20

sa yada ganta dvara-sadeśam
sakhi visṛjeḥ sukha-murchaveśam

saḥ - He; yada - when; ganta - will go; dvara-sadeśam - to the doorway; sakhi - O friend; visṛjeḥ - you will manifest; sukha - in happiness; murcha-aveśam - fainting.

When He comes to the door You will faint in happiness.

Text 21

tam upavrajita sa tava goṣṭhī
strī-taṭir api gasyati bimboṣṭhī

tam - Him; upavrajita - will approach; sa - that; tava - your; toṣṭhī - assembly; strī - of women; taṭiḥ - the host; api - also; gasyati - will sing; bimba - bimba fruit; oṣṭhī - lips.

Your gopi-friends will then approach, sweetly singing with bimba-fruit lips.

Text 22

upayanaṁ tad-vadya-vitanam
gali-prayam tad api ca ganam

upayanam - the approach; tat-vadya-vitanam - with music;  gali-prayam - flowing; tat - that; api - also;  ganam -song.

There will be singing and instrumental music as He 
approaches.

Text 23

saratrika-nirmañchana-dṛṣṭim
kartaras te sa-kusuma-vṛṣṭim

sa - with; aratrika - arati; nirmañchana - and nirmañchana; dṛṣṭim - glances; kartaraḥ - the doers; te - they; sa - with; kusuma - of flowers; vṛṣṭim - a shower.

Your friends will offer ārati and nirmañchana to Him with their glances. They will shower Him with flowers.

Text 24

manḍapa-varam upanīte śyame
sukha-sammardo bhavita rame

maṇḍapa - pavillion; varam - into the beautiful; upanīte - brought; śyame - when dark-complexioned Kṛṣṇa; sikha - of happiness; sammardaḥ - abundance; bhavita - will be; rame - O beautiful girl.
   
O beautiful girl, when dark-complexioned Kṛṣṇa is led to the splendid wedding-pavilion you will become filled with happiness.

Text 25

gopendradika-gaṇa-pujam anu
narma-kutuhalam udayed vara-tanu

gopa - of the cowherd men; indra - of the king; adika - beginning with; gaṇa - of the multitude; pujam - the worship; anu - following; narma - of joking words; kutuhalam - a happiness; udyet - will arise; vara-tanu - O beautiful girl.

O beautiful girl, then the gopa-king Nanda and his associates will be worshiped, and then there will be a great festival of joking words.

Text 26

purvaṁ vidhim api kṛtva sad-vidhi
aneṣyanti tvam iha saha-nidhi

purvam - previous; vidhim - rites; api - also; kṛtva - having performed; sat-vidhi - nicely; aneśyanti - they will bring; tvam - you; iha - here; saha-nidhi - near Him.

After the preliminary rituals have been nicely performed they will bring you into His presence.

Text 27

vara-puratas tvaṁ śithilita-gatriṁ
sthapayitaraḥ priya-rati-patrīm

vara - the husband; purataḥ - from the presence; tvam - you;  śithilita - slackened; gatrīm - limbs; sthapayitaraḥ - those who place; priya - for the beloved; rati - of love; patrīm - the object.

When they place you before your husband you will become filled with love for Him and your limbs will become slackened.

Text 28

tatas tava karam atha dadhad abalam
grahayita vara-karam anu sa-jalam

tataḥ - father; tava - your; karam - hand; atha - then; dadhat - placing; abalam - delicate; grahayita - will take; vara - of the husband; karam - the hand; anu - in; sa - with; jalam - water.

Then your father will take your delicate hand, place it in the hand of your husband, and sprinkle you both with water.

Text 29

tatra ca bhavati sumukhi sukhena
kiṁ bhaviteti jñata kena

tatra - thgere; ca - also; bhavati - at that time; su-mukhi - O beautiful-faced girl; sukhena - with happiness; kim - what? bhavita - will be; iti - thus; jñata - known; kena - by whom?

O beautiful-faced girl, who can know the happiness you will feel then?

Text 30

kiṁ bahuna tava kara-samyamanam
kṛtam iva paśyamy amuna kamanam

kim - what? bahuna - more; tava - of you; kara - of the hand; samyamanam - the taking; kṛtam - done; iva - as if; paśyami - I see; amuna - by Him; kamanam - the beautiful ceremony.

What more need I say? It is as if I now directly see the beautiful ceremony of His accepting your hand in marriage.



Song 11 (1.21.142)

Text 1

taṁ rahasi gataṁ kiśalaya-śayana-śayanaṁ
harir alokata nija-muralī-kala-kalaya citrita-bhanam

tam - Her; rahasi - in a secluded place; gatam - gone; kiśalaya - of new sprouts; śayana - on a bed; śayanam - resting; hariḥ - Kṛṣṇa; alokata - saw; nija - own; muralī - of the flute; kala - of the sweet music; kalaya - by the artistry; citrita - struck with wonder; bhanam - consciousness.

The sweet music of His flute struck Her with wonder and made Her faint. Kṛṣṇa gazed at Her (Rādhā) as She lay unconscious on a bed of blossoming twigs in that secluded place. 
 
Text 2

ya nija-vadanamṛta-rucina tan-mukhha-ratnam ajasram 
bahala-masi-sravad iha yad bhatam pratipada-sampatad-asram

ya - who; nija - own; vadana - of the face; amṛta-rucina - with the nectar moonlight; tat - of Him; mukha - of the face; ratnam - the jewel; ajasram - continually; bahala - great; masi - eye cosmetic; sravat - flowing; iha - here; yat - which; bhatam - 
manifested; pratipada - at every moment; sampatat - falling; asram - tears.

The nectar moonlight of Her face made the candrakānta jewel of His face melt. Tears washed away the black masi decorating His eyes.

Text 3

yasya hṛdayaṁ svantaram anu tat-kayaṁ bhaja-dava-kalitam
bahir api taṁ pratibimba-vyajad vyanañjatmani valitam

yasyaḥ - of whom; hṛdayam - the heart; sva-antaram - within; anu - following; tat - of Him; kayam - the body; bhaja-dava-kalitam - with a blazing forest-fire; bahiḥ - outside; api - although; tam - Him;  pratibimba - of a reflection; vyajat - on the pretext; vyanañja - manifesting; atmani - in the heart; valitam - manifested. 

She searched for Him in the forest-fire of Her heart. Although He appeared before Her, She thought He was in Her heart, and by some trick He was now reflected outside.

Text 4

yasyaṁ doṣa-trayam iti matibhiḥ prattaṁ kuṅkuma-ragam
mene mura-ripur atha sakṣad iva yataṁ kṛd-gata-ragam

yasyam - in whom; doṣa-trayam - grave illness; iti - thus; matibhiḥ - with thoughts; prattam - placed; kuṅkuma-ragam - red kuṅkuma powder; mene - thought; mura-ripuḥ - Lord Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of the Mura demon; atha - then; sakṣat - directly; iva - as if; yatam - gone; hṛt - from the heart; gata - gone; ragam - love.

She thought the red kuṅkuma powder on Her breast was the symptom of a burning sickness. He thought it was love that had overflowed Her heart.

Text 5
yaṁ paśyan sa tu satvika-bhavaṁ dadhad api citta-vikaram
bheje yatra pratikṛti-kṛd api pratikṛtir iti ca vicaram

yam - whom; paśyan - seeing; sah - He; tu - indeed; satvika - bhavam - ecstatic love; 
dadhat - manifesting; api - also; citta - of the heart;  vikaram - transformations of ecstasy; bheje - attained;  yatra - where; pratikṛti - a statue; kṛt - manifesting; api - also; pratikṛtiḥ - a statue; iti - thus; ca - also; vicaram - consideration.

As He gazed at Her, His heart became filled with love and symptoms of ecstasy appeared on His body. He stood like a motionless statue and He noted that She also appeared like a statue.

Text 6

samaya pratikṛtita-bhramam agad evaṁ bhavana-śalī 
bhava-parīkṣana-kṛn me kṛtako 'py etam indrakajalī

samaya - in time; pratikṛtita - the state of being a statue; bhramam - illusion; agat - attained; evam - in this way; bhavana-śalī - with the conception; bhava - love; 
parīkṣaṇa - testing; kṛt - doing; me - my; kṛtakaḥ - artificial; api - also; etam - to Her; indrakajalī - magical illusion.

Wishing to test Her love, He created a magical illusion that made Him appear like a statue.

Text 7
tad api ca yatra spṛhayann atha yam enaṁ mene radham
vṛnda-yacñaṁ pratyacaṣṭa ca dadhad api duḥkhad badham

tat api - nevertheless; ca - also; yatra - there; spṛhayan - desiring; atha - then; yam - whom; enam - Her; mene - thought; radham - Radha; vṛnda - Vṛnda; yacñam - request; pratacaṣṭa - replied; ca - also; dadhat - manifesting; api - also; 
duḥkhat - with difficulty; badham - cessation.

He remained rapt in thought of Radha. He yearned to attain Her. On Vṛndā's request, and with great difficulty, He gave up the magical illusion.

Text 8
sa punar yasya hetoḥ śocan vyajita-vṛnda-vananam
vidadhe yad-hṛdi nija-pada-pallavam abhito jīvana-jananam

saḥ - He; punaḥ - again; yasyaḥ - of whom; hetoḥ - for the reason; śocan - lamenting; vyajita - clever; vṛnda - of Vṛnda; vananam - the words; vidadhe - placed; yat - of whom; hṛdi - over the heart; nija - own; pada - feet; pallavam - flower; abhitaḥ - 
completely; jīvana - of life; jananam - the source.

He lamented for Rādhā's sake. Following wise Vṛndā's advice, He placed His life-restoring lotus-feet over Rādhā's heart.



Song 12 (1.22.35)
Text 1 - Refrain

kṛṣnam apaśyan pīta-dukulam
bibhratam arcitatamam arcir-nava-ghana-capala-ruci-mulam

kṛṣṇam - Kṛṣṇa; apaśyan - they saw; pīta - with yellow; dukulam - garments; bibhratam - wearing; arcitatamam - supremely worshippable; arciḥ - splendor; nava - new; ghana - raincloud; capala - and lightning; ruci - of the glory; mulam - the origin.

The yajña-patnis gazed on Kṛṣṇa. Dressed in yellow garments, He was the origin of the splendor of monsoon clouds and lightning.

Text 2

śirasi sikhaṇḍavalim urasi srajam api dadhataṁ giri-dhatum
indradhanur-yuga-madhya-madhuratara-sandhyaṁ dhruvam ati-yatum

sīrasi - on the head; śikhaṇḍa - of peacock feathers; avalim - a group; urasi - on the chest; srajam - a garland; api-also; dadhatam - wearing; giri-dhatum - mineral pigments from Govardhana Hill; indradhanuḥ - of rainbows; yuga - a pair; madhya - in the midst; madhuratara- very charming; sandhyam - sunset; dhruvan - certainly; ati-yatum - to excell.

He wore a peacock feather crown on His head and a flower garland on His chest. Decorated with mineral pigments from Govardhana Hill, He was more handsome than a rainbow at sunset.

Text 3 

udayad-aruṇa-dara-kiraṇaṁ tama iva viracita-ciratara-śobham
nava-kiśalaya-dala-valitaṁ kaca-kulam anu kalitakhila-lobham

udayat - rising; aruṇa - red; dara - faint; kiraṇam - light; tamaḥ - the darkness; iva - as if; viracita - made; ciratara - for a long time;  śobham - beauty; nava - new; kiśalaya - blossom; dala - petals; valitam - circled; kaca - kulam - hair; anu - following; kalita-done; akhila - all; lobham - desire.

The beautiful red sunrise that illuminates the darkness yearns to become like the flowers in His hair.

Text 4

bhalopari-milad-alaka-tatiṁ śruti-kumudam udañci kapolam 
smita-mukham upamita-lakṣana-tara-yuga-dhara-śaśadhara-
golam

bhala - forehead; upari-above; milat - meeting; alaka-tatim - hair; śruti - ears; kumudam - lotus flower; udañci-raised; kapolam-cheeks; smita - smiling; kukham - face; upamita - compared; lakṣana - characteristics; tara - of stars; yuga - a pair; 
dhara - holding; śaśadhara-golam - the circle of the moon.

With curling locks of hair on its forehead, and with lotus ears and raised cheeks, His smiling face was like a round moon with a pair of stars.

Text 5

kṛta-naṭa-veśa-viśeṣa-vilakṣana-lakṣanam upacita-rupam
kartum ivamṛta-vṛṣṭim uditam iha kañcana jaladhara-bhupam

kṛta - done; naṭa - of a dancer; veśa - appearance; viśeśa - specific; vilakṣaṇa - wonderful; lakṣaṇam - characteristics; upacita - expanded; rupam - handsomness; kartum - to do; iva - as if; amṛta - of nectar; vṛṣṭim - a shower; uditam - risen; iha - here; kañcana - a certain; jaladhara - of rainclouds; bhupam - king.

Very handsome, and wonderfully dressed as a dancing actor, He was like a regal cloud come to shower a rain of nectar.

Text 6

citraṁ tatra ca mitra-skandharpita-bandhavara-hastam
nirmala-kamala-vidhunana-dakṣiṇa-dakṣiṇa-kara-ruci-śastam

citram - wonderful; tatra - there; ca - and; mitra - of a friend; skandha - on the shoulder; arpita - placed; bandha-avara-hastam - arm; nirmala - splendid; kamala - lotus flowers; vidhunana-eclipsing; dikṣiṇa - glorious; dakṣiṇa - right; kara - of the hand; ruci - beauty; śastam - chastized.

His arm rested on a gopa friend's shoulder. The glory of His wonderful right hand eclipsed the splendid lotus flowers.


Song 13 (1.18.45)

Text 1

giri-pujeyaṁ vihita kena araci śakra-padam abhayaṁ yena
giri-pujeyam vihita kena putanika sa nihata yena

giri - of the hill; puja worship; iyam - this; vihita - arranged; kena - by whom? araci - arranged; śakra-padam - Indra; abhaya - without fear; yena - by whom; giri - of the hill; puja - worship; iyam - this; vihita - arranged; kena - by whom? putanika - the Putana witch; sa - she; nihata - killed; yena - by whom.

"Who ordered the worship of Govardhana Hill?"
"The same person who made us free from fear of Indra."
"Who ordered the worship of Govardhana Hill?"
"The same person who killed the Pūtanā witch."

Text 2

giri-pujeyaṁ vihita kena tṛnavarta-tanu-dalanaṁ yena
giri-pujeyaṁ vihita kena yamalarjuna-tarum udakali yena

tṛṇavarta - of Tṛṇavarta; tanu - the body; dalanam - breaking; yena - by whom; yamala-arjuna-tarum the yamala-arjuna trees; udakali - uprooted; yena - by whom.

"Who ordered the worship of Govardhana Hill?"
"The same person who crushed the Tṛṇāvarta whirlwind."
"Who ordered the worship of Govardhana Hill?"
"The same person who uprooted the yamala-arjuna trees."

Text 3

giri-pujeyaṁ vihita kena vatsa-bakasura-hananaṁ yena
giri-pujeyaṁ vihita kena vyomaghasura-maraṇaṁ yena

vatsa-baka-asura - of Vatsasura and Bakasura; hananam - the killing; yena - by whom; vyoma-agha-asura - of Vyomasura and Aghasura; maraṇam - the death; yena - by whom

"Who ordered the worship of Govardhana Hill?"
"The same person who killed Vatsāsura and Bakāsura."
"Who ordered the worship of Govardhana Hill?"
"The same person who brought death to Vyomāsura and 
Aghāsura.

Text 4

giri-pujeyaṁ vihita kena kaliya-damanaṁ kalitaṁ yena
giri-pujeyaṁ vihita kena khara-pralambaka-śamanaṁ yena

kaliya - of Kaliya; damanam - the conquest; kalitam - performed; yena-by whom; khara-bhenukasura; pralambaka - and Pralambasura; śamanam - the pacification; yena - by whom.

"Who ordered the worship of Govardhana Hill?"
"The same person who defeated the Kāliya serpent."
"Who ordered the worship of Govardhana Hill?"
"The same person who pacified Dhenukāsura and 
Pralambāsura."

Text 5

giri-pujeyaṁ vihita kena dava-yugmaṁ paripītam yena
giri-pujeyaṁ vihita kena trasyati kaṁśaḥ satataṁ yena

dava - of forest fires; yugmam - a pair; paripītam - swallowed; yena - by whom; trasyati - is afraid; kaṁsaḥ - Kaṁsa; satatam-always; yena - by whom.

"Who ordered the worship of Govardhana Hill?"
"The same person who swallowed two forest-fires.:
"Who ordered the worship of Govardhana Hill?"
"The same person whom Kaṁsa always fears.:




Song 23 (1.31.27)

Text 1

candraka-dhatu-dala-stabakadika-kṛta-mallottama-veśam
akarayati sa gaḥ sarid-alī labhate tatra viśeṣam

candraka - peacock feathers; dhatu - guñja - berries; dala - leaves; stabaka - flowers; adika - beginning with; kṛta - fashioned; mall-uttama-veśam - whose crown; akarayati - calls; saḥ - He; gaḥ - the cows; sarit - of rivers; alī - a host; labhate - attains; tatra - there; viśeśam - specifically.

Kṛṣṇa wears a crown of peacock feathers, guñjā, leaves, flowers, and other things. He calls the surabhi cows and they become like many rivers flowing to Him.

Text 2

kampita-bhaṅga-bhuja kila tat-pada-raja asuga-tati-nītam
laghu-su-kṛpasmad-dṛg iva spṛhayati vidati svam anabhinītam

kampita - moving; bhaṅga - waves; bhuja - arms; kila - indeed; tat - of Him; pada - of the feet; rajaḥ - the dust; asuga - of winds; tati - by the host; nītam - brought; laghu - quickly; su - great; kṛpa - mercy; asmat - of us; dṛk - the eye; iva - as if; 
spṛhayati - desires; vidati - places; svam - Himself; anabhinītam - not brought.

Although they know they are unqualified, our eyes, which have attained a tiny particle of Your mercy, yearn to attain the dust that the winds, waving their arms, carry from Your feet.


Song 24 (1.21.29)

Text 1 - Refrain

adi-puruṣa iva vaibhava-śalīanucara-varnita-vīrya-samunnatir ayam udayati vana-malī

adi-puruṣaḥ - The Supreme Personality of Godhead; iva - like; vaibhava - with glory; śalī - endowed; anucara - by His associates; varṇita - described; vīrya - of power; samunnatiḥ - with; greatness; ayam - He; udayati - is manifested; vana-malī - wearing a garland of forest flowers.

Kṛṣṇa's friends say He is very powerful. Wearing a garland of forest flowers, He is glorious as the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself.

Text 2

sa gavakaraṇa-muralī-kalam anu tanute yatra vanaṁ ca
tad-rupantaryami-sphuraṇaja-bhavan kalayati pañca

saḥ - He; gava - the surabhi cows; akaraṇa - calling; muralī - of the flute; kalam - the sweet music; anu - following; tanute - manifests; yatra - where; vanam - the forest; ca - and; tat - His; rupa - form; antaryami -within; sphurana - manifestation; ja - produced; bhavan - love; kalayati - arouses; pañca - five kinds.

With the sweet music of His flute He calls the surabhi cows. He awakens five kinds of ecstatic love in the forest.

Text 3

puṣpa-hasita-madhu-baṣpa-navaṅkura-pulaka-tatir anuyatam
ejan namad api śakha-tatibhir yat kila kalayati śatam

puṣpa - flowers; hasita - smiles and laughter; madhu - honey; baṣpa - tears; nava - new; aṅkura - sprouts; pulaka - tatiḥ - hairs standing up; anuyatam - imitated; ejat - trembling; namat - bowing down; api - also; śakha-tatibhih - with branches; yat - 
which; kila - indeed; kalayati - manifest; śatam - ecstatic bliss.

With blossoming flowers the trees smile and laugh, with drops of honey they shed tears, with new sprouts the hairs on their bodies stand erect, and with their branches they tremble and bow to the ground. In these five ways they exhibit ecstatic 
love for Kṛṣṇa.


Song 25 (1.31.32)

Text 1

ramya-tilaka-nava-tulasī-dala-bhara-vana-malati-vikasī
nija-saurabha-vaśa-madhupa-gītam anugayati veṇu-vilasī

ramya - charming; tilaka - tilaka; nava - new; tulasī - tulasi; dala - of petals; bhara - multitude; vana - forest; mala-garland; ati-vikasī - splendid; nija - own; saurabha - by the fragrance; vaśa - overwhelmed; madhupa - of the bees; gītam - the song; anugayati - accompanying; veṇu - the flute; vilasī - playing.

Kṛṣṇa is splendid with charming tilaka and garlands of fresh tulasi leaves and forest flowers. Playing the flute, He accompanies the buzzing bees intoxicated by the sweet fragrance of His transcendental form.

Text 2

atha sarasa-yuta-haṁsayuta-tatir alam anugamya parīta
parito nyaviśata tam aviśatī rutim iha ya hari-gīta

atha - then; sarasa - cranes; yuta - with; haṁsa - of swans; ayuta - a great host; tatiḥ - a multitude; alam - greatly; anugamya - following; parīta - surrounded; parītaḥ - on all 
sides; nyaviśata - entered; tam - that; aviśati - enters; rutim - sound; iha - here; ya - which; hari - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; gita - the music.

A great host of swans and cranes followed and surrounded Him. Their warbling joined in a concert with His flute.



Song 26 (1.31.36)

Text 1

dhṛta-vana-maly-avataṁsa-lasad-vana-veśa-tatir bala-saṅgī
giri-taṭam anu go-carana-karaṇa-veṇu-vinodana-raṅgī

dhṛta - wearing; vana - of forest flowers; malī - a garland; avataṁsa - crown; lasat - splendid; vana - of forest flowers; veśa - of ornaments; tatiḥ - a host; bala - of Balarama; saṅgī - in the company; giri - of the hill;taṭam - the slope; anu - following; go - of the surabhi cows; caraṇa - herding; karaṇa - doing; veṇu - of the flute; vinodana - in playing; raṅgī - enjoying pastimes.

Wearing a forest-flower garland, crown, and other splendid ornaments from the forest, accompanied by Balarāma, and happily playing the flute, Kṛṣṇa leads the surabhi cows to the slope of Govardhana Hill.

Text 2

viśvaṁ bhramayati karṣati varṣati mudam api ghana-gaṇa-harī
sandra-cchayam anu śītala-tanur anu sakhi-sukha-sañcarī

viśvam - the universe; bhramayati - enchants; karśati - attracts; varśati-showers; mudam - happiness; api - also; ghana - of rainclouds; gaṇa - a multitude; harī - enchanting; sandra - thick; chayam - shade; anu - following; śītala - cooling; tanuḥ - form; anu - following; sakhi - of His friends; sukha - of happiness; sañcarī - moving.

Eclipsing a host of monsoon clouds, Kṛṣṇa enchants the world, attracts it, and showers happiness on it. His cooling shade delights His cowherd friends.

Text 3

kusumaṁ varṣan nija-ruci-vitaraṇa-sauhṛdam enam upaste
ambudharaḥ sphuṭam upaganta na ca kintu chatram ivaste

kusumam - flower; varṣan - showering; nija - own; ruci - splendor; vitaraṇa - surpassing; sauhṛdam - friendship; enam - Him; upaste - worshipped; ambudharaḥ - the cloud; sphuṭam - clearly; upaganta - approached; na - not; ca - and; kintu - however; chatram - a parasol; iva - like; aste - stayed.

Friendly because his own splendor was eclipsed, the raincloud showered flowers on Kṛṣṇa. He did not directly approach, but stayed overhead like a parasol.



Song 27 (1.31.54)

Text 1

maṇi-malakṛta-go-gaṇa-gaṇanapuraṇam anu sanandam 
praṇayitaraṁsaga-bhujam udgana-hṛta-hariṇīkam amandam

maṇi - of jewels; mala - necklace; akṛta - form; go - of the surabhi cows; gaṇa - the herd; gaṇana - counting; apuraṇam - filling; anu - following; sa - with anandam - bliss; 
praṇayitara - of a cowherd friend; aṁsa - on the shoulder; ga - restin; bhujam - an arm; udgana - by singing; hṛta - enchanted; hariṇīkam - the does; amandam - completely.

Kṛṣṇa rests His arm on a friend's shoulder and happily counts the surabhi cows on the abacus of His jewel necklace. His singing charms the does.

Text 2

kṛṣṇaṁ kalayata mohana-mantragam eṇīm eṇī-nayanam
na yadi tada katham ubhaya-vyaktiṁ vīkṣe tad-apṛthag-ayanam

kṛṣṇam - Kṛṣṇa; kalayata - look! mohana - charming; mantra - mantra; gam - attained; eṇīm - a doe; eṇī-nayanam - a doe-eyed gopī; na - not; yadi - if; tada - then; katham - why? ubhaya - both; vyaktim - persons; vīkṣe - I see; tat-apṛthak-ayanam - in that one place.

Look! Kṛṣṇa now recites magic mantras. If He does not, then why do I now see both a doe and a doe-eyed gopi in the same place where He stands?



Song 28 (1.31.55)


Text 1

agatam iva harim aciram
kalayata suhṛdaṁ dayaya yad asau nagam api dadhre su-ciram

agatam - arived; iva - as if; harim - Kṛṣṇa; aciram - suddenly; kalayata - look; suhṛdam - of friends; dayaya - by the mercy; yat - which; asau - He; nagam - the hill; api - also; dadhre - held; su-ciram - for a very long time.

Look! Out of kindness for His friends, Kṛṣṇa has come here! He must have spent a long time lifting Govardhana Hill.

Text 2

kunda-srag-avita-kautuka-veśaṁ go-gopair viharantam
mṛdu-mṛdu-marud-anu-vījitam anu-lavam akhila-manaṁsi 
harantam

kunda - of jasmine flowers; srak - a garland; avita - kautuka-veśam - with wonderful garments; go - with the cows; gopaiḥ - and cowherd boys; viharantam - enjoying pastimes; mṛdu-mṛdu - very gentle; marut - by a breeze; anuvījitam - fanned; anu-lavam - for a moment; akhila - of all; manaṁsi - the hearts; harantam - enchanting.

He wears a jasmine-flower garland and wonderful garments and ornaments. He enjoys transcendental pastimes with the surabhi cows and gopas. The very gentle breeze fans Him for a moment. He enchants the hearts of all.

Text 3

sura-vandibhir abhivanditam avahita-tat-kṛta-nartana-vadyam
muni-samudaya-nuti-gunitam gunita-nipunaṁ jagad-abhivadyam

sura - demigod; vandibhiḥ - by the poets; abhivanditam - bowed down; avahita - performed; tat - by them; kṛta - done; nartana - dancing; vadyam - and music; nimi - of sages; samudaya - by the host; nuti-guṇitam - glorified in prayers; guṇita-nipuṇam - the most virtuous; jagat - by the entire world; abhivadyam - to be worshiped.

The demigod poets sing, dance, and bow down before Him. The sages glorify Him in many prayers. He is endowed with all transcendental virtues. He is worshiped by the entire world.

Text 4

atha go-dhana-gaṇam anu samam anugais tad-varṇita-garimaṇam
śrama-kantibhir api sukha-kariṇam ita-veṇu-kala-varimaṇam

atha - now; go-dhana-gaṇam - the surabhi cows; anu - following; samam - with; anugaiḥ - companions; tat - by them; varṇita - described; garimaṇam - greatness; śrama - by fatigue; kantibhiḥ - with splendor; api - even; sukha - kariṇam - 
delightful; ita - attained; veṇu - in playing the flute; kala - expertise; varimaṇam - best.

He and His gopa friends follow the surabhi cows. The gopas praise His greatness. The splendor of fatigue makes Him delightfully handsome. He is the most expert flutist.

Text 5

khura-reṇu-pluta-malya-manoharam īṣad-ghurṇita-nayanam 
etaṁ paśyata nija-jana-manadam īpsita-gavyanayanam

khura - of the hooves; reṇu - by the dust; pluta - drowned; malya - garland; manoharam - handsome; īśat - slightly; ghurṇita - rolling; nayanam - whose eyes; etam - Him; paśyata - see; nija-jana-His friends; manadam - glorifying; īpsita - 
desired; gavya - the cows; anayanam - to bring home.

Look! Wearing a garland of dust from the cows' hooves, He is very handsome. His eyes roll sightly. He praises His friends. He is eager to bring the surabhi cows home.

Text 6

kunḍala-lakṣmī-bhṛta-paṇḍu-dyuti-gaṇḍaṁ gaja-pati-
khelam
kṣaṇadapati-vat pramuditam uditam prag adhi-sandhya-velam

kuṇḍala - of earrings; lakṣmī - splendor; bhṛta - manifesting; paṇḍu - pale; dyuti - splendor; gaṇḍam - cheeks; gaja - of elephants; pati - as aking; khelam - pastimes; ṣaṇadapati - the moon; vat - like; pramuditam - jubilant; uditam - risen; prak - on the eastern horizon; adhi-sandhyavelam - at sunse
   
Glistening golden earrings illumine His cheeks. He sports like a regal elephant. He is like a moon joyfully rising onthe eastern horizon .



Second Campū

Song 1 (2.50.131)


Text 1


jaya kṛta-mathura-praveśa-bhavuka
mathura-janata-subhagam-bhavuka

     jaya - glory; kṛta - did; mathura - in Mathurā; praveśa - entrance; bhavuka - graceful; mathura-janata - the people of Mathurā; subhagam-bhavuka - delighting.


     Glory to You, O Lord who gracefully entered Mathurā, O Lord who delighted the people of Mathurā, . . .


Text 2


nana-vilasita-nandita-nagara
nagara-vadhu-jana-mohana-nagara

     nana - various; vilasita - pastimes; nandita - delighted; nagara - the people of the city; nagara-vadhu-jana - the women of the city; mohana - enchanting; nagara - O hero.


 . . . O Lord whose pastimes delighted the people of the city, O hero who enchanted the women of Mathurā, . . .


Text 3 


sa-rajaka-kaṁsaka-vasanadayaka
kṛta-ruci-vayini nija-ruci-dayaka

     sa-rajaka - from the washerman; kaṁsaka - of Kaṁsa; vasana - garments; adayaka - taking; kṛta-ruci - pleasing; vayini - with a tailor; nija - own; ruci - splendor; dayaka - giving.


 . . . O Lord who took Kaṁsa's garments from a washerman, O Lord who gave Your own splendor to a tailor that pleased You, . . .


Text 4 


bhakta-gaṇe dhṛta-karuṇa-puraka
malakara-manoratha-puraka

     bhakta-gaṇe - to the devotees; dhṛta-karuṇa - with mercy; puraka - flooded; malakara - of a florist; manoratha - the desires; puraka - fulfilling.


 . . . O Lord flooded with mercy for Your devotees, O Lord who fulfilled a florist's desires, . . .


Text 5 


tanu-tata-kubja-candana-citraka
kubja-vakrima-hṛti-kṛta-citraka

     tanu-tata - body; kubja - by a hunchback girl; candana - sandal paste; citraka - decorated wonderfully; kubja - of the hunchbak girl; vakrima - the crookedness; hṛti - removing; kṛta - made; citraka - wonderful.


 . . . O Lord whose body a hunchback girl artistically anointed with sandal paste, O Lord who removed the girl's crookedness and made her wonderfully beautiful, . . .


Text 6 


kaṁsa-makha-sthita-dhanur-anuyojaka
nagara-jananam sukha-śata-yojaka

     kaṁsa - of Kaṁsa; makha - in the yajna; sthita - situated; dhanuḥ - bow; anuyojaka - asking questions; nagara-jananam - of the people of the city; sukha-śata-yojaka - bringing a hundred happinesses.


 . . . O Lord who asked about the bow in Kaṁsa's yajña-arena, O Lord who brought a hundred happinesses to the people of Mathurā, . . .


Text 7 


kaṁsa-dhanur-makha-dhanur-anubhaṅgada
tad-asahanoddhata-yoddhṛṣu bhaṅgada

     kaṁsa - of Kaṁsa; dhanur-makha - of the dhanur-yajna; dhanuḥ - the boe; anubhaṅgada - breaking; tad-asahana - unbearable; uddhata - power; yoddhṛṣu - among warriors; bhaṅgada - breaking.


 . . . O Lord who broke the bow in Kaṁsa's dhanur-yajña, O Lord who defeated many ferocious and invincible warriors, . . .


Text 8 


hastipam anu nija-vartma-samardaka
tasmin dhṛta-ruṣi hasti-vimardaka

     hastipam anu - an elephant driver; nija - own; vartma - path; samardaka - blocked; tasmin - in him; dhṛta-ruṣi - angry; hasti - elephant; vimardaka - crushing.


 . . . O Lord whose path was blocked by an elephant driver, O Lord who crushed the angry elephant, . . .


Text 9 


bhratra saha kari-danta-vibhuṣaṇa
raṅgam praviśan bhoja-vibhuṣaṇa

     bhratra - brohter; saha - with; kari-danta-vibhuṣaṇa - decorated with the elephant's tusk; raṅgam - the arena; praviśan - entering; bhoja - of the bhoja dynasty; vibhuṣaṇa - O ornament.


 . . . O Lord who, in Your brother's company and decorated with the elephant's tusk, entered the arena, O ornament of the Bhoja dynasty, . . .


Text 10 


gaja-raktadibhir aṅgaṁ paricita
bahu-vidha-bhavair vividhaṁ paricita

     gaja - of the elephant; raktadibhiḥ - with blood; aṅgam - body; paricita - anointed; bahu-vidha - many kinds; bhavaiḥ - states; vividham - variously; paricita - considered.


 . . . O Lord whose body was sprinkled with drops of the elephant's blood, O Lord who was seen in different ways by the different groups in the arena, . . .


Text 11 


jagati samantad aprati-mallaka
kaṁsagre hata-tat-pratimallaka

     jagati - in the universes; samantat - everywhere; aprati-mallaka - without a rival; kaṁsagre - in Kaṁsa's presence; hata - killed; tat-pratimallaka - the wrestlers.


 . . . O Lord undefeated by anyone in the universe, O Lord who killed the wrestlers as Kaṁsa looked on, . . .


Text 12 


sadasi samaste nasti-samohana
malla-naṭana-kṛta-viśva-vimohana

     sadasi - in the assembly; samaste - entire; na - not; asti - is;samohana - bewildered; malla - with the wrestlers; naṭana - dancing; kṛta - did; viśva - of everyone; vimohana - enchantment.


 . . . O Lord whose unprecedented power bewildered the whole assembly, O Lord whose graceful battle with the wrestlers charmed everyone, . . .


Text 13 


kaṁsaja-guru-nindana-kampakula
dṛṣṭi-vikīrṇa-dyuti-śampakula

     kaṁsaja - created by Kaṁsa; guru - of the elders; nindana - offense; kampakula - trembling; dṛṣṭi - glance; vikīrṇa - spread; dyuti - splendor;śampakula - lightning.


 . . . O Lord who shook with anger as Kaṁsa offended his elders, O Lord whose glance was a glittering thunderbolt, . . . .


Text 14 


pluti-līlakṛta-mañca-kṣobhaka
krīḍa-vikrama-kaṁsa-kṣobhaka

     pluti - jumping; līla - pastime; kṛta - did; mañca - of the royal box; kṣobhaka - shaking; krīḍa - pastime; vikrama - power; kaṁsa - Kaṁsa; kṣobhaka - trembling.


 . . . O Lord who playfully jumped into the royal box, making in shake, O Lord whose playful power made Kaṁsa shake in fear, . . .


Text 15 


sahasa mañcat kaṁsa-nipataka
tena dhvasta-tri-jagat-pataka

     sahasa - violently; mañcat - from the royal box; kaṁsa - Kaṁsa; nipataka - throwing; tena - by Him; dhvasta - destroyed; tri-jagat - of the three worlds; pataka - the sinner.


 . . . O Lord who violently threw Kaṁsa from the royal box, O Lord who killed Kaṁsa, the greatest sinner in the three worlds, . . .


Text 16 


akhila-jananaṁ duḥkha-vimokṣada
kaṁsasyapi ca sahasa mokṣada

     akhila - of all; jananam - the people; duḥkha - sufferings; vimokṣada - removing; kaṁsasya - of Kaṁsa; api - and; ca - also; sahasa - at once; mokṣada - giving liberation.


 . . . O Lord who removed everyone's sufferings, O Lord who at once gave liberation to Kaṁsa, . . .


Text 17 


mocita-vasudevadika-bandhaka
sadhu-sukhaṁ prati dhṛta-nirbandhaka

     mocita - released; vasudeva - Vasudeva; adika - beginning with; bandhaka - bonds; sadhu - of the saintly devotees; sukham - happiness; prati - to; dhṛta - held; nirbandhaka - earnestness.


 . . . O Lord who released Vasudeva and the others from their shackles, O Lord eager to please Your devotees, . . .


Text 18 


viśrantiṁ prati kaṁsakarṣaka
vyañjita-nija-bala-valayotkarṣaka

     viśrantim - fatigue; prati - to; kaṁsa - of Kaṁsa; akarṣaka - dragging; vyañjita - manifested; nija - own; bala - power; valaya - in the circle; utkarṣaka - superiority.


 . . . O Lord who, to prove that he was dead, dragged Kaṁsa here and there, O Lord who revealed that You are the strongest of the strong, . . .


Text 19 


kaṁsa-pitari nija-rajya-nidhayaka
nija-yaśasakhila-śarma-vidhayaka

     kaṁsa - of Kaṁsa; pitari - to the father; nija - own; rajya - kingdom; nidhayaka - giving; nija - own; yaśasa - with fame; akhila - all; śarma - happiness; vidhayaka - giving.


 . . . O Lord who returned the kingdom to Kaṁsa's father (Ugrasena), O Lord whose fame delighted the entire world, . . . . 


Text 20 


vrajatah poṣyakhila-nistaraka
punar api ca vraja-sukha-vistaraka

     vrajataḥ - going; poṣya - to be protected; akhila - all; nistaraka - protecting; punaḥ - again; api - even; ca - and; vraja-sukha - the happiness of Vraja; vistaraka - giving.


 . . . O Lord who protect Your dependents, O Lord who will again bring happiness to Vraja, . . .


Text 21 


jaya jaya jaya jaya jaya jaya jaya jaya 
jaya jaya jaya jaya jaya jaya jaya jaya. vira. 

     jaya - glory; vira - O hero. 


 . . . O hero, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory, glory to You! 
 



Song 2 (2.9.57)


Text 1


saha-bhratṛ-varyaṁ guror grama-gamī
dhṛta-brahmacaryaṁ nijadhīti-kamī

     saha - with; bhratṛ - brother; varyam - excellent; guroḥ - of the Mathurā; grama-gamī - going to the twon; dhṛta - followed; brahmacaryam - brahmacari life; nijadhīti-kamī - eager to study His own Vedic literatures.


     Accompanied by His noble brother, Kṛṣṇa went to His guru's home. Now a brahmacāri, He eagerly studied His own Vedic literatures.


Text 2 


tadavantikayaṁ javal labdha-saṅgaḥ
guror antikayaṁ sabhayaṁ sad-aṅgaḥ

     tada - then; avantikayam - in Avantipura; javat - quickly; labdha - attained; saṅgaḥ - the association; guroḥ - of His guru; antikayam - near; sabhayam - in the assembly; sat - graceful; aṅgaḥ - limbs.


     He quickly went to Avantipura. He placed His transcendental form is His guru's assembly.


Text 3 


samasteṣu sattveṣu casīd atīva
priyaḥ sarva-tattveṣu yadvat tu jīvaḥ

     samasteṣu - in all; sattveṣu - states of being; ca - and; asīt - was; atīva - very; priyaḥ - dear; sarva-tattveṣu - in all truths; yadvat - as; tu - indeed; jīvaḥ - the living entity.


     Because He is the Supersoul in everyone's heart, He dearly loves all living entities.


Text 4 


samastad viviktaṁ guror bhakti-karī
sa-vargatiriktaṁ samit-patra-harī

     samastat - completely; viviktam - excellenr; guroḥ - of His guru; bhakti-karī - devoted; sa-varga - with the associates; atiriktam - excellent; samit-patra-harī - carrying firewood.


     He was very devoted to His guru. Accompanied by the other disciples, He brought firewood for His guru.


Text 5 


guror ittham apta-prasadatirekaḥ
svadhīyan samapta-vratantabhiṣekaḥ

     guroḥ - of His guru; ittham - thus; apta-prasadatirekaḥ - attained great mercy; svadhīyan - studied; samapta - attined; vrata - vow; anta - end; abhiṣekaḥ - abhiṣeka.


     By His guru's mercy, He became learned. When His vow had come to its conclusion, He performed the abhiṣeka ceremony. 


Text 6 


guror dakṣiṇaśaṁ drutaṁ bhartum īpsuḥ
gato dakṣiṇaśaṁ sutaṁ tasya lipsuḥ

     guroḥ - of His guru; dakṣiṇaśam - daksina; drutam - quickly; bhartum - to bring; īpsuḥ - desiring; gataḥ - went; dakṣiṇaśam - desiring daksina; sutam - son; tasya - of him; lipsuḥ - desiring.


     When He quickly approached to bring dakṣiṇā for His guru, His guru desired the return of his son as dakṣiṇā.


Text 7 


dara-grastam etaṁ vicinvan darantaḥ
ciran naśam etaṁ vijanan na śantaḥ

     dara - by a conch; grastam - taken; etam - him; vicinvan - seeking; dara - the conch; antaḥ - within; ciran - a long time; naśam - destruction; etam - him; vijanan - knowing; na - not; śantaḥ - pacified.


     Learning that the boy was swallowed by a conch, Kṛṣṇa searched for him inside the conch. Aware that the boy must certainly have died long ago, Kṛṣṇa did not stop searching for him.


Text 8 


pragṛhyatha tasmad daraṁ pañcajanyam
avadīd akasmat tad etyagrajaṇyam

     pragṛhya - taking; atha - then; tasmat - from him; daram - the conch; pañcajanyam - Pancajanya; avadīt - sounded; akasmat - from that; tat - that; etya - going; agrajaṇyam - His elder brother.


     Accompnied by His elder brother, Balarāma, Kṛṣṇa went to yamarāja's abode and then suddenly sounded the conchshell, which was named Pāñcajanya. 


Text 9 


sthalaṁ dharma-rajaḥ pratasthe 'ti-turṇam
tataḥ śarma-bhajaḥ sukhaṁ prapa purṇam

     sthalam - place; dharma-rajaḥ - yamarāja; pratasthe - stood; ati-turṇam - quickly; tataḥ - then; śarma-bhajaḥ - happy; sukham - happiness; prapa - attained; purṇam - full.


     Quickly coming, and greeting the Lord with all respect, Yamarāja was filled with happiness.


Text 10 


yada tarakaṇaṁ patis tatra yataḥ
tada narakaṇaṁ abhut tapa-ghataḥ

     yada - when; tarakaṇam - of the stars; patiḥ - the master; tatra - there; yataḥ - because; tada - then; narakaṇam - of the hells; abhut - was; tapa-ghataḥ - the killer of sufferings.


     Lord Kṛṣṇa, who stops the sufferings of the residents of hell, shone like a splendid moon, the master of the stars.


Text 11 


agṛhṇad guroḥ śavam antat pramuktam
yathavad vayo-bhava-dehadi-yuktam

     agṛhṇat - took; guroḥ - of the guru; śavam - the boy; antat - from death; pramuktam - released; yathavat - as; vayo-bhava-dehadi-yuktam - a youth.


     Freeing him from death, and giving him a new, youthful body, the Lord took the boy with Him.


Text 12 


guruṁ tasya bharyam api prapya tasmat
adhinviṣṭa karyat paran apy akasmat

     gurum - the guru; tasya - of him; bharyam - the wife; api - also; prapya - attaining; tasmat - then; adhinviṣṭa - became happy; karyat - from the deed; parak - great; api - also; akasma - suddenly.


     When Lord Kṛṣṇa returned their son, the guru and his wife became filled with happiness.


Text 13 


tam etaṁ samayatam īkṣasva goṣṭham
tad ananda-sampata-doha-smitoṣṭham

     tam etam - this; samayatam - arrived; īkṣasva - please see; goṣṭham - Vraja; tat - that; ananda - bliss; sampata - attained; doha - succes; smita - smiling; oṣṭham - lips.


     Kṛṣṇa has returned to Vraja. Gaze at His happily smiling face.

 



Song 3 (2.14.125)


Text 1


bhīṣmaka-pura-bhaga-calita-raja-nivaha-rajya-valita
sarva-vibudha-vṛnda-mahita tatra ca nija-garva-rahita

     bhīṣmaka - of King Bhiṣmaka; pura - of the city; bhaga - part; calita - movinh; raja - of kings; nivaha - multitude; rajya - kingdom; valita - filled; sarva - all; vibudha - demigods; vṛnda - multitudes; mahita - glorified; tatra - there; ca - and; nija-garva-rahita - prideless.


     O Kṛṣṇa who went to King Bhiṣmaka's kingdom filled with many visiting kings, O Kṛṣṇa worshiped by the hosts of demigods, O prideless Kṛṣṇa, . . .


Text 2 


mathura-pura-toṣa-valana khyati-kalita-śatru-dalana
kalayavana-labdha-vṛtika kalayavana-kala-kṛtika

     mathura-pura - of  Mathurā City; toṣa - satisfaction; valana - btinging; khyati - fame; kalita - heard; śatru - enemies; dalana - breaking; kalayavana - by Kalayavana; labdha - attained; vṛtika - hiding; kalayavana - of Kalayavana; kala - time; 
kṛtika - doing.

 . . . O Kṛṣṇa who delighted the people of Mathurā, O Kṛṣṇa whose glory tore apart Your enemies, O Kṛṣṇa who fled from Kālayavana, O Kṛṣṇa who led Kalayāvana to the moment of his death, . . .


Text 3 


svapa-gamana-līla-gamana keli-mahiṣi duṣṭa-śamana
anvaya-dari-durga-gamana narma-ghaṭana-paṇḍitatama

     svapa-gamana - returning to Your own city; līla-gamana - enjoying pastimes; keli-mahasi - ina  festival of pastimes; duṣṭa - the wicked; śamana - quelling; anvaya-dari-durga-gamana - who returns to Dvārakā; narma-ghaṭana-paṇḍitatama - most 
expert at speaking joking words.

 . . . O Kṛṣṇa who enjoys a festival of pastimes in Your own abode, O Kṛṣṇa who kills the demons, O Kṛṣṇa who stays in Dvārakā, O Kṛṣṇa most learned at speaking joking words, . . .


Text 4 


saṅgata-mucukunda-sadana klpta-sabhaya-kampa-vadana
viṣṭa-gamana-parvata-dara dṛṣṭa-śayita-tan-nara-vara

     saṅgata-mucukunda-sadana - who went to King Mucukunda's abode; klpta-sabhaya-kampa-vadanawho pretended to fear Kalayavana; viṣṭa-gamana-parvata-dara - who entered a mountain cave; dṛṣṭa-śayita-tan-nara-varawho was seen by the sleeping 
saint.

 . . . O Kṛṣṇa who entered Mucukunda's abode, O Kṛṣṇa who pretended to tremble in fear of Kālayavana, O Kṛṣṇa who entered a mountain cave, O Kṛṣṇa who was seen by the sleeping king, . . .


Text 5 


tatra yavana-raḍ-anugata gopana-kara-dhama-nirata
tad-duta-mucukunda-karuṇa tamasa-gaṇa-divyad-aruṇa

     tatra - there; yavana-raḍ - by the king of the yavanas; anugata - followed; gopana-kara - hiding; dhama-nirata - staying in a place; tad-duta-mucukunda-karuṇa - who gave mercy to Mucukunda; tamasa-gaṇa - the darkness; divyad-aruṇa - with splendor.


 . . . O Kṛṣṇa who was followed by the yavana king, O Kṛṣṇa who hid from the yavana king, O Kṛṣṇa who was merciful to Mucukunda, O Kṛṣṇa whose effulgence illumined the darkness, . . .


Text 6 


śastrita-mucukunda-nayana nirmita-yavaneśa-lavaṇa
tarṣita-mucukunda-hṛdaya bhakta-lasita-dana-sadaya

     śastrita - using as a weapon; mucukunda - of Mucukunda; nayana - the eyes; nirmita - did; yavaneśa - of the yavana king; lavana - cutting apart; tarṣita - thirsting; mucukunda - of Mucukunda; hṛdaya - heart; bhakta - by the devotees; laṣita - desire; 
dana - gift; sadaya - merciful.

 . . . O Kṛṣṇa who used Mucukunda's glance as a weapon to kill Kālayavana, O Kṛṣṇa whom Mucukunda's heart yearned to see, O Kṛṣṇa who mercifully fulfills Your devotees' desires, . . .


Text 7 


sṛṣṭa-yavana-koṭi-nidhana tatra ca yudhi samhata-dhana
aṅga-magadha-raḍ-anugata tyakta-ghṛṇita-tad-dhana-śata

     sṛṣṭa-yavana-koṭi-nidhana - who killed millions of yavanas; tatra - there; ca - and; yudhi - inj battle; samhata-dhana - devoid of wealth; aṅga-magadha-raḍ-anugata - followed by the king of Magadha; tyakta-ghṛṇita-tad-dhana-śata - who left behind hundreds of booty-prizes.


 . . . O Kṛṣṇa who killed millions of yavana soldiers in battle, O Kṛṣṇa who won their booty, O Kṛṣṇa who was pursued by Jarāsandha, O Kṛṣṇa who left the booty behind, . . . .


Text 8 


purvavad-apayana-kamana magadha-nṛpa-jaitra-gamana
varṣa-giri-murdha-valana utpluti-jita-dava-kalana

     purvavat - as before; apayana - fleeing; kamana - desiring; magadha-nṛpa-jaitra-gamana - defeated jarasandha; varṣa-giri-murdha-valanawent to the top of Mount Pravarsana; utpluti-jita-dava-kalana - jumped from the mountain.


 . . . O Kṛṣṇa who desired to flee from Jarāsandha, who was eager to defeat You, O Kṛṣṇa who climbed to the summit of Mount Pravarṣaṇa and then jumped from it to the ground, . . .


Text 9 


sindhuga-yadu-pattana-hita sarva-bhuvana-loka-mahita
sampratamita-goṣṭha-nilaya goṣṭha-nṛpati-putraka jaya

     sindhuga - by the ocean; yadu - of the Yadavas; pattana - the city; hita - auspiciousness; sarva - all; bhuvana - worlds; loka - by the people; mahita - glorified; 
sampratam - now; ita - come; goṣṭha-nilaya - to Vraja; goṣṭha-nṛpati-putraka - O prince of Vraja; jaya - glory.


 . . . O auspiciousness of the the Yādava's city in the ocean, O Kṛṣṇa glorified by everyone in all the worlds, O Kṛṣṇa who stays in Vraja, O son of Vraja's king, glory to You!

 



Song 4 (2.16.117)


Text 1


vraja-madhura-madhurī-hrasita-para-kamanam
manasi nṛpa-vaibhavaṁ dadhatam ati-vamanam

pariṇayana-vañchata-rahita-manasacitam
agamad atha kaścana dvijanir asurahitam

     vraja-madhura-madhurī - the sweetness of Vraja; hrasita - shortened; para-kamanam - desire; manasi - in the heart; nṛpa - of the king; vaibhavam - the power; dadhatam - placing; ati-vamanam - very short; pariṇayana - for marriage; vañchata - desire; rahita - without; manasa - by the heart; acitam - collected; agamat - went; atha - then; kaścana - one; dvijaniḥ - Dvārakā; asura - of the demons; ahitam - the inauspiciousness.


     One day a brāhmaṇa approached Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose sweet pastimes in Vraja had ended, who was the demons' enemy, and who, in His heart thinking of Himself as a king, had no desire for marriage.


Text 2 


nija-nṛpati-dehaja-vacanam upasandiśan
sa tad-ucita-caturīm amṛtam iva nirviśan

tam anu nijam ayayau nagaram ita-sammadaḥ
avadad api taṁ harer abhigamana-sampadaḥ

     nija-nṛpati-dehaja - of the daughter of his king; vacanam - teh words; upasandiśan - repeating; sa - he; tad-ucita - appropriate to the situation; caturīm - expertise; amṛtam - nectar; iva - as if; nirviśan - etering; tam - that; anu - following; nijam - own; ayayau - went; nagaram - to the city; ita - attained; sammadaḥ - joy; avadat - spoke; api - also; tam - to Him; hareḥ - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; abhigamana-sampadaḥ - respectful greetings

     The brāhmaṇa recited a message from Princess Rukmiṇi, and Lord Kṛṣṇa replied with eloquent words sweet like nectar. The happy brāhmaṇa returned to his own city and spoke to Rukmiṇi the good news of Lord Kṛṣṇa's arrival there.


Text 3 


atha sa-sukha-bhīṣmaja muhur anamad atra-sa
dvijam amukam icchati nija-bhavikam atra sa

iha mahasi sailaja-paricaraṇa-dambhika
bhavitum atha bhīṣmaja hari-caraṇa-lambhika

     atha - then; sa-sukha-bhīṣmaja - happy Rukmiṇi; muhuḥ - againa dn again; anamat - bowed down; atra-sa - staying there; dvijam - to the brahmana; amukam - eloquent; icchati - desires; nija-bhavikam - own welfare; atra - there; sa - she; iha - here; mahasi - in the glory; sailaja - of Pārvati; paricaraṇa - worship; dambhika - on the pretext; bhavitum - to be; atha - then; bhismaja - Rukmiṇi; hari-caraṇa - Lord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet; lambhika - yearning to attain.


     Bowing again and again before the brāhmaṇa, joyful Rukmiṇi desired that he become happy and prosperous. Yearning to attain Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet, Rukmiṇi worshiped Goddess Pārvati.


Text 4 


saratha-hariṇahṛtarucad amala-rociṣa
ripu-nicayam acinon malina-mukha-śociṣa

magadha-mukha-śatrave raṇa-vimukha-bhavake
yudham adhīta rukmavan asura-paribhavake

     saratha - with a chariot; hariṇa - by Lord Kṛṣṇa; ahṛta - taken; arucat - shone; amala-rociṣa - with great splenodr; ripu-nicayam - enemies; acinot; malina-mukha-śociṣa - were lamenting with unhappy faces; magadha-mukha-śatrave - the enemies 
headed by Jarasandha; raṇa - battle; vimukha-bhavake - turning; yudham - fight; adhīta - did; rukmavan - Rukmi; asura-paribhavake - who defeated the demons.


     Riding on a chariot, Lord Kṛṣṇa gloriously kidnaped Rukmiṇi as His enemies complained with unhappy faces. Lord Kṛṣṇa made Jarāsandha and His other enemies turn from the battle, and only Rukmi was willing to fight with Kṛṣṇa, the crusher of the demons.


Text 5 


vyadhīta khalu rukmiṇaṁ kṛta-vapana-muṇḍanam
na param ajitas tathakṛta-vikṛta-tuṇḍakam

murajid atha nirjayan sa-nṛpa-caya-bhīṣmajam
agamad atha tan nijaṁ nagaram ita-bhīṣmajam

     vyadhīta - defeated; khalu - indeed; rukmiṇam - Rukmi; kṛta-vapana-muṇḍanam - shaved head; na - not; param - more; ajitaḥ - invincible; tatha - so; akṛta-vikṛta-tuṇḍakam - made his face very odd-looking; murajit - Kṛṣṇa; atha - then; nirjayan - defeated; sa - with;nṛpa-caya - the kings; bhīṣmajam - Rukmi; agamat - went; atha - then; tan - that; nijam - own; nagaram - city; ita - gone; bhīṣmajam - Rukmi.


     Lord Kṛṣṇa defeated Rukmi, shaved his head, and made him very odd-looking. Defeated by Kṛṣṇa, Rukmi and the kings returned to their own cities.
 



Song 5 (2.17.18)


Text 1


agharir atha sabhyaiḥ sabhantar upaveśī
prajabhir abhiyataḥ sametya śubha-veśī

avadi punar etad ravis ca tava padau
vilokayitum agad ihodyad upasadau

     aghariḥ - the enemy of Agha; atha - the; sabhyaiḥ - with the members of the assembly; sabhantaḥ - in the assembly; upaveśī - entered; prajabhiḥ - with the citizens; 
abhiyataḥ - went; sametya - assembling; śubha-veśī - auspicios; avadi - spoke; punaḥ - again; etat - this; raviḥ - the sun; ca - and; tava - of You; padau - the feet; vilokayitum - to see; agat - went; iha - here; udyat - rising; upasadau - situated.


     When glorious Lord Kṛṣṇa entered the assembly, the people told Him,  The sun-god has come to see Your feet."

Text 2 


hasaṁs tu harir uce na cayam ahimaṁśuḥ
paraṁ tu bata satrajid eṣa maṇijaṁśuḥ

tad etad avakarṇya prajas tu gatavatyaḥ
sa kṛṣṇam abhi nagad yathaśu kṛta-hatyaḥ

     hasan - smiling; tu - indeed; hariḥ - Lord Kṛṣṇa; uce - said; na - not; ca - and; ayam - he; ahimaṁśuḥ - the sun; param - then; tu - indeed; bata - indeed; satrajit - Satrajit; eṣa - he; maṇijaṁśuḥ - with a splendid jewel; tat - that; etat - this; avakarṇya - hearing; prajaḥ - the people; tu - indeed; gatavatyaḥ - went; sa - he; kṛṣṇam - to Lord Kṛṣṇa; abhi - to; na - not; agat - went; yatha - as; aśu - quickly; kṛta-hatyaḥ - disappointed.


     Lord Kṛṣṇa smiled and said,  He is not the sun-god. He is King Satrājit holding a splendid jewel." Hearing this, the people left. Satrājit did not approach Lord Kṛṣṇa, but quickly left also.    


Text 3 


haris tad-ati-garva-prakaśa-kṛti-kamaḥ
nṛpaya maṇim asminn athardad anu ramaḥ

adatta maṇim eṣa praseṇam anu yarhi
prahasam anucakre murarir api tarhi

     hariḥ - Lord Kṛṣṇa; tad-ati-garva-prakaśa-kṛti-kamaḥ - desiring to show his great pride; nṛpaya - to the king; maṇim - the jewel; asmin - in that; atha - then; ardat - asked; anu - following; ramaḥ - Balarāma; adatta - goven; maṇim - jewel; esa - he; 
praseṇam - to Prasena; anu - following; yarhi - when; prahasam - laughter; anucakre - did; murariḥ - Lord; api - also; tarhi - then.


     Desiring to expose Satrājit's selfish pride, Lord Balarāma asked him to give the jewel to King Ugrasena. When Satrājit gave it to his brother Prasena instead, Lord Kṛṣṇa laughed aloud.


Text 4 


yada tu sa-maṇiṁ taṁ jaghana vana-siṁhaḥ
gabhīra-manasasīt tada ca yadu-siṁhaḥ

tadīya-jana-saṅghas tadatha mura-śatrum
apavadad avetya prati svam api śatrum

     yada - when; tu - indeed; sa-maṇim - with the jewel; tam - him; jaghana - killed; vana-siṁhaḥ - a lion in the jungle; gabhīra - deep; manasa - with a heart; asīt - was; tada - then; ca - and; yadu-siṁhaḥ - the lion of the Yādavas; tadīya-jana-saṅghaḥ - with His associates; tada - then; atha - then; mura-śatrum - the enemy of Mura; apavadat - denounced; avetya - understanding; prati - to; svam - own; api - also; śatrum - enemy.


     When a lion in the jungle killed Prasena, Lord Kṛṣṇa became heavy at heart. Then Satrājit and his friends spoke badly of Lord Kṛṣṇa, thinking Him their enemy.


Text 5 


haris tu puru-sadbhir vimṛgya parinaṣṭam
dadarśa haya-yuktaṁ tam eva hari-daṣṭam

mṛgendra-pada-cihnaiḥ prapadya giri-deśam
dadarśa saha sarvair hataṁ ca sa mṛgeśam

     hariḥ - the Lord Kṛṣṇa; tu - indeed; puru-sadbhiḥ - with many exalted persons; vimṛgya - searching; parinaṣṭam - killed; dadarśa - saw; haya-yuktam - with the horse; 
tam - him; eva - indeed; hari-daṣṭam - clawed by a lion; mṛgendra-pada-cihnaiḥ - with the lions claws; prapadya - attaining; giri-deśam - mountains place; dadarśa - saw; saha - with; sarvaiḥ - all; hatam - killed; ca - and; sa - He; mṛgeśam - the lion.


     Searching with many exalted persons, Lord Kṛṣṇa found Prasena's body mauled to death by a lion. Following the pawprints to a mountainous country, Kṛṣṇa found the 
lion was also dead.


Text 6 


athatra padam ṛkṣa-prabhos ca sa luloke
maṇiṁ tu na hi tac ca pratītavati loke

tadīya-padam ṛcchan jagama girir okam
viveśa tad amatvakhilasya nija-śokam

     atha - then; atra - there; padam - foor; ṛkṣa-prabhoḥ - of the kinf ofthe Rksas; ca - and; sa - He; luloke - saw; maṇim - the jewel; tu - indeed; na - not; hi - indeed; tat - that; ca - and; pratītavati - gone; loke - the people; tadīya-padam - his feet; ṛcchan - following; jagama - went; giri - mountain; rokam - cave; viveśa - entered; tat - that; amatva - not considering; akhilasya - of all; nija - own; śokam - grief.


     Lord Kṛṣṇa found Jāmbavān's footprints, but not the jewel. Leaving the other people behind, Lord Kṛṣṇa followed the footprints into a mountain cave.


Text 7 


praviśya sa maharkṣa-prakṛṣṭa-puru-gamī
apaśyad atha ratnaṁ tadīya-hṛti-kamī

yad eva kila dhatrīm upetya sukumaraḥ
vihara-padam agat tad ṛkṣa-kula-saraḥ

     praviśya - entering; sa - He; maharkṣa-prakṛṣṭa-puru-gamī - going to the place of Jāmbavān; apaśyat - saw; atha - then; ratnam - the jewel; tadīya-hṛti-kamī - desiring to take it from him; yat - what; eva - indeed; kila - indeed; dhatrīm - the nurse; upetya - approaching; sukumaraḥ - the delicate child; vihara-padam - playing; agat - attained; tat - that; ṛkṣa-kula-saraḥ - the best of the Ṛksas.


     Entering Jāmbavān's home, and seeing the jewel, Lord Kṛṣṇa wished to take it. Jāmbavān's son, the prince of the Ṛkṣas, who had been playing with the jewel, ran to his nurse.


Text 8 


sa-ratnam ajihīrṣan murarir iti dhatrī
akujad ati-bhīta sa-kampatara-gatrī

sa bhalla-kula-mukhyas tadatha hata-buddhiḥ
babhuva saha tena prakṛṣya kṛta-buddhiḥ

     sa-ratnam - with the jewel; ajihīrṣan - desiring to take; murariḥ - Lord Kṛṣṇa; iti - thus; dhatrī - the nurse; akujat - called out; ati - very; bhīta - afraid; sa-kampatara-gatrī - her limbs trembling; sa - he; bhalla-kula-mukhyaḥ - the king of the Ṛkṣas; tada - then; atha - then; hata-buddhiḥ - his intelligence lost; babhuva - was; saha - with; tena - Him; prakṛṣya - attacking; kṛta-buddhiḥ - intelligent.


     When Lord Kṛṣṇa wanted to take the jewel, the frightened and trembling nurse screamed. Intelligent Jāmabavān came at once and, his intelligence now clouded, attacked Lord Kṛṣṇa.


Text 9 


sahaṣṭadaśa-yugmaṁśa tena divasanam
vyadhata yugam uccair anudyad avasanam

vihṛtya mura-vairī sa tena cira-kalam
cakara karuṇaktaṁ svakīyam iva balam

     saha - with; aṣṭadaśa - eighteen; yugma - pairs; aṁśa - part; tena - by that; divasanam - of days; vyadhata - found; yugam - both; uccaiḥ - greatly; anudyat - not rising; avasanam - to the limit; vihṛtya - playing; mura-vairī - Lord Kṛṣṇa; sa - He; tena - with him; cira - for a long; kalam - time; cakara - did; karuṇaktam - mercy; svakīyam - own; iva - like; balam - boy.


     Kṛṣṇa and Jāmbavān fought for twenty-eight days, but neither could defeat the other. After playing in this way for a long time, Lord Kṛṣṇa finally bestowed his mercy on Jāmabavān as if Jāmabavān were His own son.


Text 10 


sa catha hrdi śuddhas tam etya gati-saram
nivedya nijam agaḥ prasannam akṛtaram

syamantam api kanyaṁ dade tu vara-bhaktya
sa jambavad-abhikhyaḥ paraṁ ca para-śaktya

     sa - he; ca - and; atha - then; hrdi - in his heart; śuddhaḥ - pure; tam - Him; etya - attaining; gati-saram - shelter; nivedya - praying; nijam - own; agaḥ - offense; prasannam - merciful; akṛtaram - not doing; syamantam - Syamantaka jewel; api - also; kanyam - daughter; dade - gave; tu - indeed; vara - with great; bhaktya - devotion; sa - He; jambavad-abhikhyaḥ - named Jāmabavān; param - then; ca - and; para-śaktya - with great power.

     Pure-hearted Jāmbavān surrendered to Lord Kṛṣṇa, begged forgiveness for his offense of fighting with the Lord, and with great devotion offered the jewel and his daughter, Jāmbavati, to the Lord.


Text 11 


sa-kanya-maṇi-ragan murarir atha geham
samarpya maṇim īśe nananda valiteham

traparta-mati-satrajid atra nija-kanyam
maṇiṁ ca mura-śatrav aditsad ati-dhanyam

     sa-kanya - with the daughter; maṇi - of the jewel; ragat - out of love; murariḥ - Lord Kṛṣṇa; atha - then; geham - home; samarpya - offering; maṇim - the jewel; ise - to the king; nananda - became happy; valita-iham - accomplished deed; traparta-mati - embarrassed at heart; satrajit - Satrājit; atra - there; nija-kanyam - his own daughter; maṇim - jewel; ca - and; mura-satrav - to Lord Kṛṣṇa; aditsat - desired to give; ati-dhanyam - very glorious.


     Returning with Jāmbavati and the jewel, and giving the jewel to King Satrājit, Lord Kṛṣṇa was happy at heart. Embarrassed, King Satrājit decided to give his own daughter, as well as the jewel, to Lord Kṛṣṇa.


Text 12 


murarir atha kanyam iyeṣa na tu ratnam
sa-bhaktir iha sa yat paraṁ tu kṛta-yatnam

dravantam atha satrajitas tu kṛta-ghatam
syamanta-haram akrurakadi-mata-yatam

upetya śata-capaṁ jaghana vana-malī
syamanta-maṇim akrurakac ca mati-śalī

     murariḥ - Lord Kṛṣṇa; atha - then; kanyam - the daughter; iyeṣa - wished; na - not; tu - but; ratnam - the jewel; sa-bhaktiḥ - with devotion; iha - here; sa - she; yat - what; param - then; tu - indeed; kṛta-yatnam - great effort; dravantam - fleeing; atha - then; satrajitaḥ - from Satrājit; tu - but; kṛta-ghatam - murdered; syamanta-haram - taking the Syamantaka jewel; akrurakadi-mata-yatam - planned by Akrūra and others; upetya - approaching; śata-capam - Satadhanva; jaghana - killed; vana-malī - Lord Kṛṣṇa; syamanta-maṇim - teh Syamantaka jewel; akrurakat - from Akrūra; ca - and; mati-śalī - noble-hearted.


     Lord Kṛṣṇa accepted Satrājit's daughter, Satyabhāmā, but not the jewel. With great devotion, Satyabhāmā had endeavored to attain Lord Kṛṣṇa. Then, in a conspiracy led by Akrūra and others, Śatadhanvā killed Satrājit, stole the jewel, and fled. Lord Kṛṣṇa pursued him, killed him, and later took the jewel from Akrūra.


Text 13 


sametya yadu-vṛndaṁ pratoṣya bahu-karma
sa eṣa tava goṣṭha-kṣitīśa kṛta-śarma

vrajasya nayanaliṁ bibharti jita-tandraḥ
sadapi paripurṇas tvadīya-kula-candraḥ

     sametya - meeting; yadu-vṛndam - the Yadavas; pratoṣya - pleasing; bahu-karma - many deeds; sa - He; eṣa - He; tava - of you; goṣṭha-kṣitīśa - O king of Vraja; kṛta-
śarma - auspiciousness; vrajasya - of Vraja; nayanalim - eyes; bibharti - holds; jita-tandraḥ - without fatigue; sada - always; api - also; paripurṇaḥ - perfect; tvadīya-kula-candraḥ - the moon of your family.


     O Nanda, O king of Vraja, Lord Kṛṣṇa then met with the Yādavas and pleased them in many ways. Lord Kṛṣṇa is a full moon eternally rising in your family, a full moon that is the life of all the eyes of Vraja.
 



Song 6 (2.18.98)


Text 1


śakra-śravita-bhaumatikrama
vakra-kṣmapati-mathi-prakrama

     śakra - by Indra; śravita - heard; bhauma - of Bhaumāsura; atikrama - defeat; vakra-kṣmapati-mathi-prakrama - defeat of many crooked kings.


     O Lord who defeated many crooked-hearted kings, O Lord who heard from Indra of Bhaumāsura's conquests, . . . 


Text 2 


bhama-lakṣita-tarkṣya-rohaṇa
namabhaṣaka-papa-drohaṇa

     bhama - by satyabhāmā; lakṣita - characterised; tarkṣya - on Garuḍa; rohaṇa - climbing; nama - of whose name; abhasaka - by the reflection; papa - of sins; drohaṇa - the destruction.


 . . . O Lord the dim reflection of whose holy name destroys all sins, O Lord who flew on Garuḍa with Satyabhāmā, . . .


Text 3 


kamad bhumija-durga-prekṣaka
rama-kautuka-dana/pekṣaka

     kamat - by desire; bhumija-durga-prekṣaka - seeing the fortress of Bhaumāsura; rama - of the goddess; kautuka - eager; dana - gift; apekṣaka - expectation.


 . . . O Lord who gazed at Bhaumāsura's great fortress, O Lord  who knew that Satyabhāmā expected a gift, . . .


Text 4 


vīrotkampaka-durga-mardaka
durga-locana-citra-niṣevaka

     vīra - heroes; utkampaka - tremble; durga - on the fort; amardaka - attack; durga - omn the fort; alocana - eyes; citra-niṣevaka - with wonder.


 . . . O Lord who became surprised to gaze at that fort, O Lord whose ferocious attack on that fort made the greatest heroes tremble, . . .


Text 5 


sṛṣṭa-kṣma-mukha-bhuta-prakṣaya
dṛṣṭa-kṣma-suta-sarvantaḥ-kṣaya

     sṛṣṭa - created; kṣma - of the earth; mukha - the face; bhuta - manifested; prakṣaya - destruction; dṛṣṭa - seen; kṣma-suta - of Bhaumāsura; sarva - all; antaḥ - within; kṣaya - destruction.


 . . . O Lord who destroyed Bhaumāsura's fortifications, O Lord who destroyed everything in the range of Bhaumāsura's sight, . . .


Text 6 


kṣaiteyaṁ prati nijiṣṇu-krama
daiteyaṁ laghu taṁ ghnan niṣklama

     kṣaiteyam - Bhaumasura; prati - to; nijiṣṇu-krama - desiring to defeat; daiteyam - the demon; laghu - easily; tam - himn; ghnan - killing; niṣklama - without trouble.


 . . . O Lord who yearned to crush Bhaumāsura, O Lord who easily killed him, . . .


Text 7 


tat-putraya ca raṣṭrady-arpaka
yat kutrapy anu-bhaktaṁ tarpaka

     tat - of him; putraya - to the son; ca - qand; raṣṭrady-arpaka - offering the kingdom and everything else; yat - what; kutrapi - somewhere; anu-bhaktam - devotee; 
tarpaka - pleasing.


 . . . O Lord who gave the kingdom to Bhaumāsura's son, O Lord who pleased that son, who was a great devotee, . . .


Text 8 


kanyanam api tasaṁ paraka
dhanyanaṁ nija-bhajaṁ taraka

     kanyanam - of girls; api - and; tasam - of them; paraka - pleasing; dhanyanam - fortunate; nija-bhajam - own; taraka - delivering.


 . . . O Lord who delivered the girls kept captive there, O Lord who made them fortunate and happy, . . .


Text 9 


deva-kṣma-pati-sac-chala-pujita
deva-kṣmaruha-hṛti-vañchacita

     deva - the demigods; kṣma-pati - and the brahmanas; sat-chala - on the pretext; pujita - worshiped; deva - of the demigods; kṣmaruha - tree; hṛti - the tree; vañchacita - desired.


 . . . O Lord who was then worshiped by the demigods and brāhmaṇas, O Lord who then desired to take a pārijāta tree from the demigods, . . .



Text 10 


taṁ karṣas tarum indra-pravṛta
aṅka-sthaṅgana-yuddhe cadṛta

     tam - that; karṣaḥ - taking; tarum - the tree; indra-pravṛta - attacked by Indra; aṅka-sthaṅgana-yuddhe - in a great battle; ca - and; adṛta - worshiped.


 . . . O Lord who took a pārijāta tree, O Lord whom was attacked by Indra and then worshiped in a great battle, . . .


Text 11 


jitva taṁ tarum urjad-vikrama
hitva vasavaṁ udyad-vibhrama

     jitva - defeating; tam - him; tarum - the tree; urjad-vikrama - powerful; hitva - taking; vasavam - Indra; udyad-vibhrama - thwarting.


 . . . O powerful Lord who defeated Indra and took the pārijāta tree, . . .


Text 12 


yatnaprapita-tac-chatradika
ratnakṣmadhara-hṛl-līladhika

     yatna - with effort; aprapita - not attained; tac-chatra - the parasol of Varuṇa; adika - beginning with; ratna - jewel; kṣmadhara - mountain; hṛt - takingh; līla - pastimes; adhika - great.


 . . . O Lord who took the unattainable parasol of Varuṇa and many other things, O Lord who playfully took a jewel mountain, . . .


Text 13 


bhakta-prīti-da tat-tad-viḍ-jaya
sakta-sva-vrajam aptas tvaṁ jaya. vīra.

     bhakta - to the devotees; prīti - love; da - giving; tat-tad-viḍ-jaya - O conqueror of the enemies; sakta-sva-vrajam - Vraja; aptaḥ - attained; tvam - You; jaya - glory; vīra - O hero.


 . . . O Lord who give spiritual love to Your devotees, O Lord who defeat all the enemies, O Lord who stay always in Vraja, glory to You!
 



Song 7 (2.21.68)


Text 1


tvaṁ puṇḍraka-śliṣṭa-sandiṣṭa-vismera
vacatata-dhvaṁsi-vak-paṭava-smera

     tvam - You; puṇḍraka - of Pundraka; śliṣṭa - with a double meaning; sandiṣṭa - message; vismera - surprised; vacatata-dhvaṁsi - refuting the words; vak - words; paṭava - expert; smera - smiling.


     O Lord who was very surprised to hear Pauṇḍraka's double-edged words, O Lord who smiled and refuted all of Pauṇḍraka's assertions, . . .


Text 2 


naṭyabha-tad-veṣam udraṣṭum utkaṇṭha
śaṅkha-dhvani-grama-visphori-sat-kaṇṭha

     naṭyabha-tad-veṣam - dressed like an actor; uddraṣṭum - to see; utkaṇṭha - eager; śaṅkha - of the conchshell; dhvani - the sound; grama - multitude; visphori - manifested; sat-kaṇṭha - on His transcendental voice.


 . . . O Lord eager to see Pauṇḍraka dressed as an actor, O Lord who sounded the transcendental conchshell, . . 


Text 3 


sanandam agatya sandṛṣṭa-tad-deśa
taṁ draṣṭum atyartham udyamya saveśa

     sanandam - happily; agatya - arriving; sandṛṣṭa-tad-deśa - in the range of vision; tam - him; draṣṭum - to see; atyartham - eager; udyamya - prepared; saveśa - dressed.


 . . . O Lord who happily approached Pauṇḍraka, O Lord eager to see Pauṇḍraka, . . . 


Text 4 


antardhim atratha tat-sainyam uddhuya
tan-mukhya-sammukhya-karyaya sambhuya

     antardhim - disappearance; atra - here; atha - then; tat-sainyam - that army; uddhuya - shaking; tan-mukhya-sammukhya - in thepresence; karyaya - for doing; sambhuya - being able.


 . . . O Lord who destroyed Pauṇḍraka's army, O Lord who stood face-to-face with Pauṇḍraka, . . . 


Text 5 


samveṣam utprekṣya tatralam utprasa
pratyarpaṇayeva sad-dhamni cakrasa

     samveṣam - decoration; utprekṣya - seeing; tatra - there; alam - loudly; utprasa - laughed; pratyarpaṇaya - to return; iva - as if; sad-dhamni - to its proper owner; cakrasa - gave the cakra.


 . . . O Lord who loudly laughed to see Pauṇḍraka dressed like Lord Viṣṇu, O Lord who, as if to return it to its proper owner, threw the cakra at Pauṇḍraka, . . . 


Text 6 


tasyaśuci-vidhvastamas tasya tatratha
mitra-cchidakari-naraca-sannatha

     tasya - of him; aśuci - impurity; vidhvastamaḥ - drestroyed; tasya - of him; tatra - there; atha - then; mitra - of his friend; chida - destruction; akari - did; naraca-sannatha - shooting arrows.


 . . . O Lord who removed Pauṇḍraka's impurity, O Lord who with arrows killed Pauṇḍraka's friend, the King of Kāśi, . . .


Text 7 


kaśī-naradhīśa-murdhanam utkṛtya
kaśyaṁ nirasyapi sampurṇa-tat-kṛtya

     kaśī-naradhīśa - of the King of Kasi; murdhanam - the head; utkṛtya - cutting; kaśyam - into Kasi; nirasya - throwing; api - even; sampurṇa-tat-kṛtya - completing that action.


 . . . O Lord who cut off the head of Kāśi's king and threw it into Kāśi City, . . .


Text 8 


svavasam asadya lekhapta-saṁsaṅga
tat-putra-kṛtyagnim akarṇya sad-raṅga

     svavasam - own abode; asadya - attaining; lekhapta-saṁsaṅga - approaching the boundary; tat-putra - by the son of the King of Kasi; kṛtya - created; agnim - fire; akarṇya - hearing; sad-raṅga - in the company of the devotees.


 . . . O Lord who returned to Your own home in Dvārakā, O Lord who, in the company of Your devotees heard that Kāśirāja's son had sent a fire-demon to destroy Dvārakā, . . .


Text 9 


parśva-stham adiśya cakraṁ ca sa-krīḍa
mitrat parajitya lekhasu sa-vrīḍa

     parśva-stham - at the side; adiśya - instruction; cakram - cakra; ca - and; sa-krīḍa - playfully; mitrat - from the friend; parajitya - defeating; lekhasu - at the boundary; sa-vrīḍa - shy.


 . . . O Lord who threw Your cakra, which easily defeated the fire-demon, . . .


Text 10 


kaśīśa-putrabhicaraṁ paravartya
cakreṇa kaśyadi dagdhaṁ ca nirvartya

     kaśīśa-putrabhicaram - the action of the King of Kasi's son; paravartya - turning around; cakreṇa - by the cakra; kaśyadi - beginning with Kasi;  dagdham - burned; ca - and; nirvartya - turning around.


 . . . O Lord whose cakra made the fire-demon sent by Kāśirāja's son turn around and burn Kāśi to ashes, . . .


Text 11 


yaṁ dvarakam aśu yasi sma tam eva
hitva vraje bhasi vṛndaṭavī-deva

     yam - which; dvarakam - Dvārakā; aśu - quickly; yasi - You go; sma - indeed; tam - that; eva - indeed; hitva - blessing; vraje - in Vraja; bhasi - You shine; vṛndaṭavī-deva - O Lord of Vṛndāvana forest.


 . . . O Lord You then returned to Dvārakā. O Lord of Vṛndāvana forest, leaving Dvārakā behind, You again shine with great splendor in the land of Vraja.
 



Song 8 (2.22.18)


Text 1


dviviḍa-duranta-caritra-kopin saj-jana-mitra
raivata-līlalakṣya prakṛta-dhībhir alakṣya

     dviviḍa - of Dvivida; duranta-caritra - at the mischief; kopin - angry; saj-jana-mitra - O friend of the devotees; raivata - on MountRRaivata; līla - pastimes; lakṣya - characterized; prakṛta-dhībhiḥ - by the unintelligent conditioned souls; alakṣya - unseen.

     O Lord who became angry at Dvivida's terrible mischief, O Lord who enjoyed pastimes on Mount Raivata, O Lord unseen by the foolish conditioned souls, . . .


Text 2 


nija-rama-gaṇa-juṣṭa tat-kapi-dharṣṭyad ruṣṭa
tena samaṁ kṛta-yuddha tad-yudhi kautuka-ruddha

     nija - own; rama-gaṇa - beautiful girls; juṣṭa - enjoying pastimes; tat-kapi-dharṣṭyat - by the audicaty of a gorilla; ruṣṭa - angered; tena - by him; samam - with; kṛta-yuddha - fought; tad-yudhi - in that fight; kautuka-ruddha - wonderfully fought.


 . . . O Lord who enjoyed pastimes with many beautiful gopis, O Lord who was angered by a gorilla's arrogant mischief, O Lord who wonderfully fought with the gorilla, . . .


Text 3 


cira-hata-kapi-kula-duṣṭa sura-muni-gaṇa-nuti-tuṣṭa
kurubhiḥ sambe vaddhe yadu-nivahe sannaddhe

     cira - long time; hata - killed; kapi - of the gorillas; kula-family; duṣṭa - wicked; sura - of the demigods; muni - sages; gaṇa - hosts; nuti - obeisances and prayers; tuṣṭa -  - pleased; kurubhiḥ - by the Kurus; sambe - when Sāmba; baddhe - was bound; yadu-nivahe - in the host of Yadus; sannaddhe - ready for battle.


 . . . O Lord who after a long duel finally killed the most wicked of gorillas, O Lord who was pleased by the prayers and obeisances of the demigods and sages, O Lord who gathered the Yādava armies when the Kauravas kidnaped Sāmba, . . .

Text 4 


svayam atha sandhiṁ kalayan śantan saṅge valayan
kuru-nagaraṁ laghu gatavan tad-durvacanaṁ śrutavan

     svayam - personally; atha - then; sandhim - truce; kalayan - doing; śantan - peaceful; saṅge - in the company; valayan - doing; kuru-nagaram - the city of the Kauravas; laghu - lightly; gatavan - going; tad-durvacanam - their insults; 
śrutavan - hearing.

 . . . O Lord who went to the Kauravas' capitol to make peace with them, O Lord who heard their insults, . . .

Text 5 


teṣaṁ purum utkalayan valita-krodhaṁ halayan
gaja-sahvayam akarṣan paritas citraṁ varṣan

     teṣam - of them; purum - the city; utkalayan - doing; valita-krodham - anger; halayan - plowing; gaja-sahvayam - Hastinapura; akarṣan - dragging; paritaḥ - along; citram - wonder; varṣan - showering.


 . . . O Lord who became very angry with the Kauravas, O Lord who with Your plow dragged Hastināpura, O Lord who filled everyone with wonder, . . .


Text 6 


bhīta-kuru-śrita-pada kṛpaya tyakta-vivada
vadhu-suta-yautuka-saṅgi gṛham aga bahu-raṅgi

     bhīta - frightened; kuru - Kurus; śrita - took shelter; pada - feet; kṛpaya - with mercy; tyakta-vivada - givingh up the aurrel; vadhu-suta - the girl and boy; yautuka-saṅgi - uniting; gṛham - home; aga - went; bahu-raṅgi - very happy.


 . . . O Lord of whose feet the frightened Kauravas took shelter, O Lord who thus ended the quarrel, O Lord who saw Sāmba and his wife reunited, O Lord who happily took them home, . . .


Text 7 


samprati saha saha-janma gokula-mainija-janma
jaya jaya jaya balarama kevala-manujarama

     samprati - now; saha - with; saha-janma - brother; gokula-mainija-janma - who tyook birth in Gokula; jaya - glory; jaya - glory; jaya - glory; balarama - O Lorde Balarāma; kevala-manujarama - enjoying pastimes like a human being.


 . . . O brother of Lord Kṛṣṇa, O Lord who took birth in Gokula, O Lord Balarāma who enjoys pastimes like those of a human being, glory, glory, glory to You!
 



Song 9 (2.33.19)


Text 1


radha-raka-śaśadhara muralī-kara gokula-pati-kula-pala jaya jaya kṛṣṇa hare
radha-badha-mocana mukha-rocana vidalita-gokula-kala jaya jaya kṛṣṇa hare

     radha - Rādhā; raka-śaśadhara - full moon; muralī-kara - golding a flute; gokula-pati-kula-pala - O protector of the family of Gokula;s king; jaya - glory; jaya - glory; kṛṣṇa - O Lord Kṛṣṇa; hare - O Lord Hari; radha - of Śri Rādhā; badha - obstacles; 
mocana - freeing; mukha - face; rocana - glorious; vidalita - broken; gokula - in Gokula; kala - time; jaya - glory; jaya - glory; kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; hare - O Hari.


     O full moon shining before Śri Rādhā! O Lord who holds a flute! O master of Gokula! O protector of Your kinsmen! O Kṛṣṇa! O Hari! Glory, glory to You! O Lord who free Rādhā from the obstacles that stop Her! O Lord whose face is glorious! O Lord who in Gokula breaks apart the bonds of time! O Kṛṣṇa! O Hari! Glory, glory to You!


Text 2


radha-parikara-puṇyada naipuṇyada gokula-ruciṣu viśala jaya jaya kṛṣṇa hare
radha-sukṛta-vaśī-kṛta maṅgala-bhṛta-tilakita-gokula-bhala jaya jaya kṛṣṇa hare

     radha - of Rādhā; parikara - to the associates; puṇyada - making pure; naipuṇyada - giving expertise; gokula-ruciṣu - among the splendors of Gokula; viśala - great; jaya 
jaya - glory!; kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; hare - O Hari; radha-sukṛta-vaśī-kṛta - conquered by Rādhā; maṅgala - auspicious; bhṛta - held; tilakita - marked with tilaka; gokula - of Gokula; bhala - forehead; jaya - glory; jaya - glory; kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; hare - O Hari.


     O Lord who makes Śri Rādhā's followers saintly and virtuous! O Lord who makes them expert and intelligent! O best of the Gokula's glories! O Kṛṣṇa! O Hari! Glory, glory to You! O Lord conquered by Rādhā's saintly deeds! O auspicious tilaka mark on 
Gokula's forehead! O Kṛṣṇa! O Hari! Glory, glory to You!

Text 3


radha-nija-gati-dharmada puru-śarmada hata-gokula-ripu-jala jaya jaya kṛṣṇa hare
radha-jīvana-jīvana go-vraja-dhana gokula-sarasi-marala jaya jaya kṛṣṇa hare

     radha - of Śri Rādhā; nija - own; gati - shelter; dharmada - giving religion; puru-śarmada - giving great happiness; hata - killed; gokula - of Gokula; ripu - of enemies; jala - the net; jaya - glory; jaya - glory; kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; hare - O Hari; radha - Śri 
Rādhā; jīvana - of the life; jīvana - the life; go-vraja-dhana - protector of the cows; gokula-sarasi - in the lake of Gokula; marala - swan; jaya - glory; jaya - glory; kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; hare - O Hari.


     O Lord who gives saintliness to they who take shelter of Śri Rādhā! O Lord who makes them happy! O Lord who kills the enemies of Gokula! O Kṛṣṇa! O Hari! Glory, glory to You! O Lord for whom Śri Rādhā is more dear than life! O protector of the cows! O swan swimming in the lake that is Gokula! O Kṛṣṇa! O Hari! Glory, 
glory to You!


Text 4


radha-moda-rasakara sarasija-vara gokula-maṇḍala-nala jaya jaya kṛṣṇa hare
radha-bhuṣaṇa bhuṣaṇa gata-duṣaṇa gokula-hṛdila-bhu-pala jaya jaya kṛṣṇa hare

     radha - of Śri Rādhā moda - of happiness; rasa - nectar; akara - mine; sarasija-vara - O best lotus flower; gokula - of Gokula; maṇḍala - of the circle; nala - resting place; jaya - glory; jaya - glory; kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; hare - O Hari; radha - of Śri Rādhā; 
bhuṣaṇa - the ornamnet; bhuṣaṇa - the ornament; gata-duṣaṇa - sinless; gokula - of Gokula; hṛdila - of the hearts; bhu-pala - O king; jaya - glory; jaya - glory; kṛṣṇa - O Kṛṣṇa; hare - O Hari.


     O nectar happiness of Śri Rādhā! O lotus flower growing in Gokula! O Kṛṣṇa! O Hari! Glory, glory to You! O ornament of Śri Rādhā's ornaments! O sinless one! O king of Gokula's hearts! O Kṛṣṇa! O Hari! Glory, glory to You!
 



Song 10 (2.33.58)


Text 1 (Refrain)


jaya jaya madhava-vidhu-saṅgini radhe
madhava-labha-vidhuta-vidhuradhe

     jaya - glory!; jaya - glory!; madhava - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vidhu - of the moon; saṅgini - O friend; radhe - O Rādhā; madhava - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; labha - attainment; vidhuta - shaken; vidhuradhe - the distress of separation.


     O Rādhā, O friend of Lord Kṛṣṇacandra, O Goddess whose meeting with Kṛṣṇa has shaken away all the pain of separation, glory to You! Glory to You!


Text 2


madhava-pariṇaya-lasad-adhivase
madhava-hṛdaya-sphurad-adhivase

     madhava - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; pariṇaya - wedding; lasat - glistening; adhivase - insistence; madhava - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; hṛdaya - in the heart; sphurat - manifested; adhivase - O abode.


     O Goddess splendid at the time of Your wedding to Lord Kṛṣṇa, O Goddess who resides in Lord Kṛṣṇa's heart, . . .


Text 3


madhava-netra-madhupa-madhu-madhavi
madhava-dayita-jana-gaṇa-madhavi

     madhava - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; netra - of the eyes; madhupa - of the bees; madhu - with honey; madhavi - madhavi flower; madhava - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; dayita-jana-gaṇa - of the girls dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa; madhavi - O springtime.


     O honey mādhavi flower that attracts the bumblebee of Lord Kṛṣṇa's eyes, O springtime glory of the gopis dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa, . . .


Text 4


madhava-madhukara-sukha-mukha-kamale
madhava-hṛdi rekhakṛti-kamale

     madhava - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; madhukara - of the bumblebee; sukha - happiness; mukha - mouth; kamale - lotus; madhava - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; hṛdi - on the chest; rekha - line; akṛti - form; kamale - goddess.


     O Goddess whose lotus face delights the bumblebee of Lord Kṛṣṇa, O Goddess who has become a line resting on Lord Kṛṣṇa's chest, . . .


Text 5


madhava-vakṣasi mada-sambadhe
madhava-bhavini rasa-jita-badhe

     madhava - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vakṣasi - on the chest; mada - passionate; sambadhe - embrace; madhava - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhavini - lover; rasa - by sweetness; jita - conquered; badhe - objection.


     O Goddess passionately embracing Lord Kṛṣṇa's chest, O Goddess passionately in love with Lord Kṛṣṇa, O Goddess whose sweetness has refuted every objection, . . .


Text 6


madhava-manasi ruca rasadapi
madhava-vanam anu vihara sadapi

     madhava - of Lord Kṛṣṇa; manasi - in the heart; ruca - with splendor; rasada - the giverb of sweetness; api - also; madhavavanam - Vṛndāvana; anu - following; vihara - enjoy pastimes; sada - always; api - also.


     You are the glory and sweetness in Lord Kṛṣṇa's heart. Please always enjoy pastimes with Him here in Vṛndāvana forest.
 



Song 11 (2.33.74)

Rādhā-Mādhava-yugalam
(Rādhā and Mādhava Together)


Text 1 (Refrain)


sneha-raga-maya-taila-haridra-parivalitaṁ muhur acalam

     sneha - love; raga - passion; maya - consisting; taila - oil; haridra - turmeric; parivalitam - turned; muhuḥ - again and again; acalam - steady. 


     Always anointed with the turmeric oil of passionate love, . . .


Text 2


navam idam avatan mithunaṁ gokulaṁ gokula-vasatīn sarvan
kurutad api puru-guru-sukha-santati-santata-santata-garvan

     navam - new; idam - this; avatat - may protect; mithunam - couple; gokulam - Gokula; gokula-vasatīn - to the residents of Gokula; sarvan - all; kurutat - may do; api - also; puru - great; guru - intense; sukha - happiness; santati - abundance; santata - expanded; santata - expanded; garvan - pride.


 . . . may the youthful Divine Couple always protect the residents of Gokula. May the Divine Couple fill them with the greatest and deepest bliss.


Text 3


bhṛśam api viharatu haratu ca cittaṁ hatau ca duḥkhaṁ nityam
grathayatu kantiṁ kantim apīha prathayatu mahimadityam

     bhṛśam - greatly; api - also; viharatu - may enjoy pastimes; haratu - may take; ca - and; cittam - the heart; hatau - may destriy; ca - and; duḥkham - sufferings; nityam - always; grathayatu - may arrange; kantim - splendor; kantim - beauty; api - also; iha - here; prathayatu - may expand; mahima - of glory; adityam - the sun.


 . . . may the youthful Divine Couple always enjoy transcendental pastimes. May They charm the devotees' hearts. May They remove the devotees' sufferings. May They reveal their beauty and splendor. May They allow the sun of Their glories to shine.


Text 4


sakala-sakala-guṇam iha guṇayatu punar anunayatan nija-lokam
nayana-nayana-pada-sampadam ayataṁ dayataṁ śaśvad aśokam

     sakala - all; sakala - all; guṇam - qualities; iha - here; guṇayatu - may add; punaḥ - again; anunayatan - the followers; nija-lokam - own realm; nayana - leading; nayana - eyes; pada - feet; sampadam - opulence; ayatam - limitless; dayatam - may be merciful; śaśvat - always; aśokam - without grief.


 . . . may the youthful Divine Couple show all their glories and virtues. May They give the gift of Their feet to the devotees' eyes. May they always remove the devotees' sufferings.


Text 5


jīva-sujīvana-nija-rupamṛta-bhṛtam api kurvad aśeṣam
rajatu raja-tulajayi vibhavaṁ vibhavatu vismita-śeṣam

     jīva - of the living entities; su-jīvana - the life; nija - own; rupa - of the beauty; amṛta - nectar; bhṛtam - holding; api - also; kurvat - do; aśeṣam - completely; rajatu - may shine; raja-tulajayi - glories like a king; vibhavam - glory; vibhavatu - may shine; 
vismita-śeṣam - completely wonderful.

 . . . may the youthful Divine Couple show the nectar glory of Their handsome transcendental forms, which are the life of all living entities. May They shine with regal glory. May they fill everyone with wonder.
 



Song 12 (2.35.38)


Text 1 (Refrain)


paśya sakhī-jana so 'yaṁ kasya
su-vicarayad api cittaṁ kvacid api nantaṁ labhate yasya

     paśya - see; sakhī-jana - O gopi friends; saḥ - He; ayam - He; kasya - of whom; su-vicarayat - may consider; api - also; cittam - heart; kvacit - somewhere; api - also; na - not; antaṁend; labhate - attains; yasya - of whom.


     O gopi friends, who are Kṛṣṇa's parents? Thinking again and again, my heart has not found an answer.


Text 2


su-ciroparjita-sukṛta-śatayuta-nirjita-taruṇa-samajau
varṣīyaṁsav api yaṁ tanayaṁ lebhate vraja-rajau

     su-cira - for a very long time; uparjita - accumulated; sukṛta - pious deeds; śatayuta - many hundreds and thousands; nirjita - defeated; taruṇa - of the young people; samajau - the assemblies;  varṣīyaṁsau - in old age; api - also; yam - which; tanayam - youth; lebhate - attains; vraja-rajau - the king and queen of Vraja.


     The king and queen of Vraja must have performed many hundreds and thousands of pious deeds for a very long time that in their old age they have attained such a son.


Text 3


yasya ca pitarav ati-saralav iti jagati samantad vittam
catura-śiromaṇi-varata yasya ca vaśayati jagataṁ cittam

     yasya - of whom; ca - and; pitarav - parents; ati-saralau - very righteous; iti - thus; jagati - in the universe; samantat - everywhere; vittam - wealth; catura-śiromaṇi-varata - the crest jewels of the wise; yasya - of whom; ca - and; vaśayati - conquers; jagatam - of the universes; cittam - the heart.


      Lord Kṛṣṇa's parents are very saintly and righteous." This statement, proclaimed everywhere in the universes, is their great wealth. They are the crest jewels of the wise. They have conquered the hearts of the world.


Text 4


sarvaḥ snihyati mamataṁ sacayati ghoṣo yatra sadaiva
matara-pitaradikam abhimanute yaś ca na sarvaṁ naiva

     sarvaḥ - all; snihyati - love; mamatam - possessiveness; sacayati - worships; ghoṣaḥ - sound; yatra - where; sada - always; eva - indeed; matara - mother; pitara - and father; adikam - beginning with; abhimanute - honors; yaḥ - who; ca - and; na - not; sarvam - all; na - not; eva - indeed.


     Everyone loves them. Everyone always praises them. No one refuses to honor them.


Text 5


vraja-pati-vaṁśe yadṛṅ na bhavati nabhud atra kadapi
so 'yaṁ guṇa-rupadikam īdṛg bhajate caru sadapi

     vraja - of Vraja; pati - of the king; vaṁśe - in the family; yadṛk - as much as; na - not; bhavati - is; na - not; abhut - was; atra - here; kadapi - ever; so 'yam - He; guṇa-rupadikam - in virtues, handsomeness, or other qualities; īdṛk - like that; bhajate - worships; caru - handsome; sada - always; api - also.

     In the family of Vraja's king there is not, nor in the past has there ever been, anyone virtuous, handsome, and glorious like Lord Kṛṣṇa.


Text 6


yasya ca labdhav api dhanimanī svayam api sarvaṁ data
vṛṣabhanv-anvaya-lakṣmīṁ yena ca yacayate vraja-yata

     yasya - of whom; ca - and; labdhav - attained; api - also; dhanimanī - jewels of the fortunate; svayam - personally; api - also; sarvam - all; data - giver; vṛṣabhanu - of King Vṛṣabhānu; anvaya - in the family; lakṣmīm - the goddess of fortune; yena - by 
whom; ca - and; yacayate - requests; vraja-yata - going to Vraja.

     Lord Kṛṣṇa's parents are the two jewels of the fortunate and wealthy. King Nanda is a philanthropist who gives to all. Now he has left Vraja to request the goddess of fortune from King Vṛṣabhānu.
 



Song 13 (2.35.65)


Text 1 (Refrain)


adya samastaṁ sa-phalaṁ jatam
śrī-radhaya vivahanam iha yac chrī-kṛṣṇena vibhatam

     adya - today; samastam - all; sa-phalam - fruitful; jatam - born; śrī-radhaya - of Śri Rādhā; vivahanam - the wedding; iha - here; yac - what; śrī-kṛṣṇena - with Śri Kṛṣṇa; vibhatam - manifested.


     Today everything is fruitful. Today is the marriage of Śri  Rādhā and Śri Kṛṣṇa.


Text 2


tasya jananī-janaka-maha-kulam api lokanaṁ sva-kulam
api sampat-kulam api līlakulam api sa-vayaḥ-kulam atulam

     tasya - of Her; jananī-janaka-maha-kulam - the family of the mother nad father; api - also; lokanam - of the people; sva-kulam - own family; api - also; sampat-kulam - good fortune and opulence; api - also; līlakulam - pastimes; api - also; sa-vayaḥ-kulam - contemporary friends; atulam - peerless.


     Her mother's and father's family are here. The families of all the people are here. Here are good fortune, wealth, transcendental pastimes, and Her peerless gopi friends.


Text 3


tatra bhava-kulam api saṅgati-kulam api virahaṇam
punar api saṅgati-śubha-kulam api kulam avirata-sukha-nivahanam

     tatra - here; bhava-kulam - love; api - also; saṅgati-kulam - meeting; api - also; virahaṇam - of separation; punaḥ - again; api - also; saṅgati-śubha-kulam - auspiciousness of meeting; api - also; kulam - family; avirata-sukha-nivahanam - eternal happinesses.


     Here are love, meeting, separation, auspicious reunion, and endless happiness.


Text 4


śvaśru-śvaśura-sukhanvayam asya gasyamaḥ sakhi kila kam
enam api pari pariṇayi jataṁ tad idaṁ tat-kula-tilakam

     śvaśru - mother-in-law; śvaśura - and father-in-law; sukhanvayam - happiness; asya - of Her; gasyamaḥ - I will sing; sakhi - O friend; kila - indeed; kam - what?; enam - this; api - even; pari pariṇayi - in the wedding; jatam - manifested; tat - that; idam - this; tat-kula-tilakam - the tilaka mark of the families.


     How can I describe in song all the happiness Rādhā's marriage has brought to the king and queen of Vraja, who are now Her father-in-law and mother in-law? This marriage is a glorious tilaka mark for the family.
 



Song 14 (2.35.116)


Text 1 (Refrain)


aho paśyatha citraṁ gokula-raji-mahimanam
ya iha suta-karmeṇa pariṇayana-śarmaṇe 'cinuta kamala-gaṇam amanam

     ahaḥ - Oh; paśyatha - see; citram - wonder; gokula-raji-mahimanam - the glory of Vraja; ya - who; iha - here; suta-karmeṇa - by the activities of her son; pariṇayana-śarmaṇe - in the happiness of the marriage; acinuta - collected; kamala-gaṇam - goddesses of fortune; amanam - without limit.


     Look at the wonderful glories of Gokula! Numberless goddesses of fortune have come to the auspicious ceremony of Lord Kṛṣṇa's wedding!


Text 2


yad anu kila radhikaṁ nikhila-sukha-sadhikam acita sakala-samudaya-saram
adhiyad api bhavatya muhur api ca navyataṁ vahati vahala-phalam aparam

     yat - what; anu - following; kila - indeed; radhikam - Śri Rādhā; nikhila-sukha-sadhikam - filled with all happinesses; acita - collected; sakala-samudaya-saram - the best of all; adhiyat - did; api - also; bhavatya - by you; muhuḥ - again and again; api - also; ca - and; navyatam - newness; vahati - brings; vahala-phalam - result; aparam - peerless.


     See how Rādhā is the happiest and the most beautiful of all. See how She stands in peerless, eternal youth.


Text 3


ucitam api tadṛśaṁ sa hi tanayam īdṛśaṁ labdham aracayad amala-rupam
apara-hṛtam apy alaṁ praṇaya-kṛta-sad-balaṁ sa-balam ahṛta nija-kula-bhupam

     ucitam - proper; api - also; tadṛśam - like that; sa - He; hi - indeed; tanayam - son; īdṛśam - like this; labdham - attained; aracayat - did; amala - pure; rupam - form; apara-hṛtam - without superior; api - even; alam - greatly; praṇaya-kṛta-sad-balam - great love; sa-balam - with Lord Balarāma; ahṛta - took; nija-kula-bhupam - with the king and the family.


     King Nanda has arranged that his son be gloriously dressed and decorated for the occasion. Filled with love, Balarāma and all the royal relatives have come from Dvārakā.


Text 4


tri-jagad ati-carakaṁ hṛdayam ati-bharakaṁ dhartum abhito 'pi na śakyate
tad iha paramaṁ sukhaṁ vivaha-vadyam unmukhaṁ hṛdi vasatīti ca vitarkyate

     tri - three; jagat - worlds; ati-carakam - the handsome groom; hṛdayam - the heart; ati-bharakam - become great; dhartum - to hold; abhitaḥ - completely; api - even; na - not; śakyate - is able; tat - that; iha - here; paramam - great; sukham - happiness; vivaha - of marriage; vadyam - the words; unmukham - eager; hṛdi - in the heart; 
vasati - resides; iti - thus; ca - and; vitarkyate - is guessed.


     Even the three worlds cannot hold all the joy in King Nanda's heart. I think his heart must be filled with joy as he yearns to hear the marriage vows.
 



Song 15 (2.36.113)


Text 1 (Refrain)


sakhi dam-patyor anayor yugalam
kurute kim api ca na smṛti-yugalam

     sakhi - O friend; dam-patyoḥ - of the Divine Couple; anayoḥ - of Them; yugalam - the couple; kurute - does; kim api - something; ca - and; na - not; smṛti - remembrance; yugalam - couple.


     Friend, you do not remember anything of the Divine Couple.


Text 2


kairaviṇī-kulam alir iha visṛjati
tad api viharaṁ kaṁ va na sṛjati

     kairaviṇī-kulam - many lotus flower; aliḥ - a bumblebee; iha - here; visṛjati - leaves; tat - that; api - also; viharam - pastimes; kam - what?; va -  - or; na - not; sṛjati - creates.


     At night a bumblebee leaves the lotus flowers. He will not 
play among them.


Text 3


visinī-kulam atha diśi diśi vilasati
tad api ca nataraṁ bahir anu vikasati

     visinī-kulam - a host of lotus flowers; atha - then; diśi diśi - in all directions; vilasati - is splendidly manifested; tat - that; api - also; ca - and; na - not; taram - the stars; bahiḥ - outside; anu - following; vikasati - blossoms.

     In the daytime the lotus flowers are splendid in every direction, but at night they close their petals. They refuse to follow the example of the glittering stars.


Text 4


dinakara-sarathir udayaṁ gacchati
tatra ca nayanaṁ naṇv api yacchati

     dinakara - of the sun-god; sarathiḥ - the charioteer; udayam - rising; gacchati - goes; tatra - theer; ca - and; nayanam - eyes; na - not; aṇu - an atom; api - even; yacchati - gives.


     The sun-god's charioteer, the dawn, has now come. Still, the lotus flowers will not open their eyes even slightly to see him.


Text 5


taravalir atha rucim utkalayati
etat punar iha tam ucchalayati

     tara - of stars; avaliḥ - the host; atha - now; rucim - splendor; utkalayati - abandons; etat - this; punaḥ - again; iha - here; tam - that; ucchalayati - revealing.


     Now the stars renounce their splendors. Now the Divine Couple splendidly appears berfore us.


Text 6


vīnaṁ tatir api kalam akalayati
tad api ca maunaṁ nitaraṁ valayati

     vīnam - of birds; tatiḥ - the host; api - also; kalam - cooing; akalayati - do; tat - that; api - also; ca - and; maunam - silence; nitaram - great; valayati - stop.


     Giving up their silence, the birds sing.


Text 7


dadhi-mathanaṁ vraja-nilaye ninadati
akaritam api tad idaṁ na vadati

     dadhi - yogurt; mathanam - churning; vraja-nilaye - in Vraja; ninadati - sounds; akaritam - done; api - also; tat - that; idam - this; na - not; vadati - speaks.


     The village of Vraja is filled with sounds of yogurt being churned. Still, no one tells anything about the Divine Couple's pastimes.


Text 8


udganad api tad idaṁ kavir api
bahir upalabhyaṁ na nayati ravir api

     udganat - from loud singing; api - also; tat - that; idam - this; kaviḥ - poet; api - also; bahiḥ - outside; upalabhyam - to be known; na - not; nayati - follows; raviḥ - the sun; api - even.


     The poet sings in a loud voice. The sun does not bring him to sing about anything else.
 



Virudāvali 1 (2.19.117)


aniruddha-bandha-viṣayanusandha gata-baṇa-dhama vitatatma-dhamahara-baddha-yuddha-yaśasati-śuddha tata-śastra-jala-bhava-vṛnda-kalabhava-jṛmbhakastra-jita-loka-śastra muhur apta-baṇa-jita-jaitra-baṇayudhi-madhya-yatṛ-bali-putra-matṛ-nibha-koṭaraṅga-kalanati-saṅga-parijata-lajja vimukhatva-sajja racita-jvarantara-para-jvaranta-kṛta-tat-prasada pṛthu-kīrti-vada punar agatasya bali-duḥ-sutasyabhuja-vṛnda-lava-valita-prabhava śiva-sukta-tuṣṭa kṛpayabhijuṣṭa-bhava-parṣadatvam anu datta-sattva bali-sunu-pala-kṛpaya viśalaśara-paśa-ruddha-sutajaniruddha-parimokṣa-dakṣa sukhita-sva-pakṣasa-vadhukam evam aniruddha-devam upanīya geham ati-manuṣehapunar atma-goṣṭham ita veṇukoṣṭha saripurya sarvam akṛtha sa-parvajaya gopa-raja-kulajadhiraja. vīra.

     aniruddha - of Aniruddha; bandha-viṣaya - bonds; anusandha - plan; gata - went; baṇa - of Bāṇāsura; dhama - to the abode; vitata - manifested; atma - own; dhama - abode; hara - with Lord Śiva; baddha - bound; yuddha - battle; yaśasa - with fame; ati-
śuddha - very pure; tata - manifested; śastra - of weapons; jala - net; bhava - being; vṛnda - multitude; kala - time; bhava - of Lord Śiva; jṛmbhaka - yawning; astra - weapon; jita - defeated; loka - people; śastra - weapon; muhuḥ - again and again; apta - attained; baṇa - Bāṇāsura; jita - defeated; jaitra - victory; baṇa - of Bāṇāsura; yudhi - of the fight; madhya - in the middle; yatṛ - going; bali - of Bali Mahārāja; putra - the son; matṛ - the mother; nibha - like; koṭara - of Koṭarā; aṅga - the body; kalana - seeing; ati-saṅga - contact;  parijata - born; lajja - embarrassment; vimukhatva-sajja - averse; racita - created; jvarantara - a jvara weapon; para - another; jvara - jvara wepaon; anta - end; kṛta - done; tat-prasada - by His mercy; pṛthu-kīrti-vada - proclaiming the great glories; punaḥ - again and again; agatasya - arrived; bali - of Bali Mahārāja; duḥ - wicked; sutasya - of the son; bhuja - of the arms; vṛnda - multitude; lava - cutting; valita - manifested; prabhava - power; śiva - of Lord Śiva; sukta - by the prayers; tuṣṭa - satisfied; kṛpaya - with mercy; abhijuṣṭa - endowed; bhava - of Lord Śiva; parṣadatvam - the status of an associate; anu - following; datta - given; sattva - nature; bali - of Bali Mahārāja; sunu - of the son; pala - protection; kṛpaya - by the mercy; viśala - great; śara - arrows; paśa - rope; ruddha - blocked; sutaja - grandson; aniruddha - of Aniruddha; parimokṣa - freeing; dakṣa - expert; sukhita - happy; sva-pakṣa - kinsmen; sa-vadhukam - with his wife; evam - thus; aniruddha-devam - Lord Aniruddha; upanīya - taking; geham - home; ati-manuṣa - more than human; īha - effort; punaḥ - again; atma - own; goṣṭham - to Vraja; ita - went; veṇuka - flute; oṣṭha - to the lips; śaripurya - filling; sarvam - all; akṛtha - did; sa-parva - with happiness; jaya - glory; gopa-raja-kulaja - O son of the gopa king; adhiraja - O great king; vīra - O hero.

     O Lord who made a plan to rescue Aniruddha, O Lord who left Your own abode and went to Bāṇāsura's kingdom, O Lord who fought with Śiva, O Lord whose fame is pure and glorious, O Lord fought in a battle with a great multitude of weapons, O Lord who with a yawning weapon defeated Śiva, O Lord who again and again defeated 
Bāṇāsura, O Lord who in the midst of the battle was embarrassed to see the limbs of Koṭarā, who was like a mother to Bāṇāsura, O Lord who turned away from her, O Lord who showed mercy by with Your own jvara weapon defeating Śiva's jvara weapon, O Lord whose glories are proclaimed again and again, O Lord who cut off the 
arms of Bali Mahārāja's demon-son, Bāṇāsura, O Lord who was pleased by Śiva's prayers, O Lord who is very merciful, O Lord who made Bāṇāsura a personal associate of Śiva, O Lord who expertly rescued Aniruddha from the prison of arrows and ropes, 
O Lord who pleased Your kinsmen, O Lord who returned home with Aniruddha and his bride, O Lord whose pastimes are beyond the power of human beings, O Lord who returned to Vraja, played the flute at Your lips, and pleased everyone, O prince of the gopas, O master, O hero, glory to You!

 
Virudāvali 2 (2.27.62)


jarasutanubandhana-kṣitīśa-vṛnda-bandhana-śruter atīva surataḥ surarṣiṇapi durataḥ
sametya partha-yacitaṁ kratu-kriyaśaya citaṁ sad-unnayartham uddhava-prayukta-mantra-suddhavaḥkṣayaya magadheśituḥ puragataḥ paraṁ pituḥ svasuḥ sutasya mandiraṁ sva-yogya-samsad-indiramtad-uddhavokta-mantraṇat tadīya-bhakti-yantraṇat kirīṭa-bhīma-saṅgataś chalena viprataṁ gataḥtada jarasutaṁ sajan niyodhum arthitaṁ bhajan yudhīha bhīmam unnayan mukhena tasya nirṇayannanena taṁ ca yodhayan svam enam atra bodhayan nijeṅgitadanekaśas tatana casya sad-yaśaḥsa magadheśa-ghatanaḥ kṣitīśa-bandha-śatanaḥ samasta-yatna-sarthakaḥ prananditatma-parthakaḥsva-klpta-rajasuyakas tad-apta-pujya-bhuyakaḥ tataś ca cedipe ruṣa kṣipaty api kṣamajuṣamupetya vartma su-sthiraḥ sva-bhakta-nindanacira-praruḍha-kopa-paddhatiḥ sva-cakra-sṛṣṭa-tad-dhatiḥsamapta-partha-yajñakaḥ prasiddhi-bhak samajñakaḥ. tad evam apy asau punaḥ sva-ghoṣa-vasinas tu naḥsamardhayan samagataḥ sukhī-karoti ragataḥ.

     jarasuta - Jarāsandha; anubandhana - in relation to; kṣitīśa-vṛnda - a host of kings; bandhana - bondage; śruteḥ - from hearing; atīva - very; surataḥ - from a wise man; surarṣiṇa - with Nārada; api - also; durataḥ - far away; sametya - meeting; partha-
yacitam - requested by King Yudhiṣṭhira; kratu-kriya - for the performance of a yajna; aśaya - with the desire; citam - filled; sad-unnayartham - to deliver the devotees; uddhava - by Uddhava; prayukta-mantra-suddhavaḥ - advised; kṣayaya - for the killing; magadheśituḥ - of the king of magadha; puragataḥ - arrived; param - then; pituḥ - of the father; svasuḥ - of the sister; sutasya - of the son; mandiram - the palace; sva-yogya - appropriate; samsat - assembly; indiram - the goddess of fortune; tad-uddhava - by Uddhava; ukta - said; mantraṇat - from the advice; tadīya-bhakti-yantraṇat - because of devotion to You; kirīṭa-bhīma-saṅgataḥ - with Bhima; chalena - in the disguise; vipratam - the state of being brāhmaṇas; gataḥ - attained; tada - then; jarasutam - to Jarāsandha; sajan - meeting; niyodhum - to fight; arthitam - requested; bhajan - engaging; yudhi - in the fight; iha - here; bhīmam - Bhima; unnayan - lifting; mukhena - with the face; tasya - of him; nirṇayann - concluding; anena - with him; tam - him; ca - and; yodhayan - fighting; svam - own; enam - him; atra - here; bodhayan - understanding; nija - own; iṅgita - hint; adanekaśaḥ - taking; tatana - manifested; ca - and; asya - of him; sad-yaśaḥ - glory; sa - he; magadheśa-ghatanaḥ - killing Jarāsandha; kṣitīśa - of the kings; bandha - teh bondage; śatanaḥ - ending; samasta - all; yatna - effort; sarthakaḥ - useful; pranandita - delighted; atma - own; parthakaḥ - Yudhiṣṭhira; sva - own; klpta - made; rajasuyakaḥ - rajasuya-yajna; tat - that; apta - attained; pujya - to be worshiped; bhuyakaḥ - greatly; tataḥ - then; ca - and; cedipe - in Siśupāla; ruṣa - with anger; kṣipati - threw; api - also; kṣama - forgiveness; ajuṣam - unworthiness; upetya - attaining; vartma - path; su-sthiraḥ - steady; sva-bhakta - own devotees; nindana - insulting; acira - for a long time; praruḍha - increased; kopa - anger; paddhatiḥ - abundance; sva-cakra - own cakra; sṛṣṭa - performed; tat - of him; hatiḥ - the killing; samapta - concluded; partha - of King Yudhiṣṭhira; yajñakaḥ - the yajna; prasiddhi-bhak - famous; samajñakaḥ - famous; tat - that; evam - thus; api - also; asau - he; punaḥ - again; sva-ghoṣa-vasinaḥ - staying in His village of Vraja; tu - indeed; naḥ - of us; samardhayan - making prosper; samagataḥ - arruved; sukhī-karoti - make happy; ragataḥ - with love.

     Lord Kṛṣṇa, who from a learned devotee heard of many kings imprisoned by Jarāsandha, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who met with Nārada, Lord Kṛṣṇa, whom Yudhiṣṭhira asked to arranged for a yajña, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who heard Nārada's advice that He should deliver His devotees, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who on devoted Uddhava's advice went to the palace to kill Jarāsandha, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who, arriving with Bhima and Arjuna, and all of the disguised as brāhmaṇas, begged Jarāsandha for a duel, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who arranged that Bhima fight with Jarāsandha, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who with a hint told Bhima how to kill Jarāsandha, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who thus killed Jarāsandha, glorious Lord Kṛṣṇa, who freed the imprisoned kings, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who made all these endeavors successful, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who delighted King Yudhiṣṭhira, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who arranged for the Rājasūya-yajña, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who was worshiped at the Rājasūya-yajña, Lord Kṛṣṇa, ho with the cakra killed Śiśupāla when he insulted the devotees and was no longer worthy to be forgiven, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who saw the successful completion of the Rājasūya-yajña, famous Lord Kṛṣṇa returned and with great love filled us, the people of Vraja, with bliss. 


Virudāvali 3 (2.28.38)


Text 1


partha-kratu-raja-pratha divya-drava-sampad-ratha-śabda-pluta-
dig-dantika apta-svaka-pury-antika

     partha - of King Yudhiṣṭhira; kratu - of yajnas; raja - the king; pratha - arranged; divya - transcendental; drava - things; sampat - opulence; ratha - chariot; śabda - sound; pluta - flooded;  dig-dantika - the elephnats that hold up the directions; apta-
svaka-pury-antika - in Your own city.

     O Lord who arranged for King Yudhiṣṭhira to perform the rājasūya-yajña, O Lord whose rumbling chariot could be heard even by the elephants holding up the directions, O Lord who returned to Your own city, . . .


Text 2


dṛṣṭodbhaṭa-saubha-krama-spṛṣṭonnati-bhag-vikrama
baṇa-cchita-salvadika-śastra-pratiśastradhika

     dṛṣṭa - seen; udbhaṭa - excellent; saubha - saubha airplane; krama - movement; spṛṣṭa - touched; unnati-bhak - the sky; vikrama - powerful; baṇa - with arrows; cchita - cut; salva - Śālva; adika - beginning with; śastra-pratiśastradhika - weapon against 
weapon.

 . . . O Lord who saw the great Saubha airplane flying in the sky, O Lord who with arrows destroyed that airplane, O Lord who, weapon against weapon, fought with Śālva, . . .


Text 3


kaṇḍa-stṛta-saubha-sthala salva-cchala-laṅghi-cchala
ajñaṁ prati datta-bhrama vijñaṁ prati sad-vibhrama

     kaṇḍa-stṛta - broken apart; saubha-sthala - Saubha; salva - of Salva; cchala - trick; laṅghi - manifested; cchala - trick; ajñam - bewilderment; prati - to; datta-bhrama - bewildering; vijñam - wise; prati - to; sad-vibhrama - bewildering the saintly 
persons.

 . . . O Lord who broke apart the Saubha airplane, O Lord who pretended to be bewildered by Śālva's mystic tricks, O Lord whose pretended bewilderment bewildered the saintly sages, . . .


Text 4


chinna-prati-hantrastraka tat-taḍana-jic chatraka
saubha-kṣaya-kṛt-sad-gada dhuta-prati-kṛt-tan-mada

     chinna - broken; prati-hantrastraka - weapons; tat-taḍana-jit - defeating with blows; śatraka - enemy; saubha - of Saubha; kṣaya-kṛt - destroying; sad-gada - with the club; dhuta - taken away; prati-kṛt-tan-mada - his pride.


 . . . O Lord who broke Śālva's weapons, O Lord who with many blows defeated Śālva, O Lord who with a club broke the Saubha airplane to pieces, O Lord who removed Śālva's pride, . . .


Text 5


tad-dakṣiṇa-dor-hṛc-chara cakra-kṣita-tat-kandhara
evaṁ kṛta-tat-tat-kriya tvaṁ rajasi goṣṭha-priya. vīra.

     tad-dakṣiṇa-doḥ - his right hand; hṛt - removing; aara - arrow; cakra - with the cakra; kṣita - cut; tat-kandhara - his neck; evam - thus; kṛta - done; tat-tat-kriya - these activities; tvam - You; rajasi - shine; goṣṭha-priya - dear to the people of Vraja; vīra - O hero.


 . . . O Lord who with an arrow cut off Śālva's right hand, O Lord who with the cakra cut Śālva's neck, O Lord who thus performed many wonderful activities, O hero, O beloved of Vraja, You are very glorious and splendid.
 


Virudāvali 4 (2.37.143-152)


Text 1


yaḥ śrīman-vraja-raja-sindhuja-vidhuḥ svaṁ kīrti-kantiṁ kirann
     acchidraṁ tri-jagat pupoṣa nitaram astaṁ vrajantaḥ-katha
gatva durataraṁ ca guḍha-manasaṁ naśaya bhuyaḥ sama-
     gacchad baḍham asau sada vijayatam asmadṛśaṁ gocare

     yaḥ - who; śrīmat - bautiful; vraja - of Vraja; raja - of the king; sindhuja - born from the ocean; vidhuḥ - moon; svam - own; kīrti-kantim - splendor of fame; kiran - spreading; acchidram - faultless; tri-jagat - the three worlds; pupoṣa - maintained; nitaram - greatly; astam - is; vrajantaḥ - in Vraja; katha - the talk; gatva - going; 
durataram - very far away; ca - and; guḍha - concealed; manasam - heart; naśaya - for destruction; bhuyaḥ - greatly; samagacchat - returned; baḍham - indeed; asau - He; sada - always; vijayatam - may be glorious; asmadṛśam - of us; gocare - in the vision.


     May Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is a spotless moon rising from the beautiful ocean of the king of Vraja and shining with great moonlight of glory, who maintains the three worlds, who is the talk of Vraja, who went away and for a long time and killed many black-hearted demons, and who has now returned to Vraja, always appear before our eyes.


Text 2


śyama-purandara-dhama-dhurandhara duṣṭa-vinaśana juṣṭa-vipasanasammada-sagara-janma-daśadhara puta-nibhakṛti-putanikamṛti-tan-mṛti-taraka-sat-kṛti-paraka śakaṭa-bhañjana-bhag atad-añjana-locana-mardana-rocana-nardana-saṁhita-rodana-vaṁhita-todanagarga-kṛtahvaya-varga-bhṛtanvaya dana-vamaruta-dana balanvitabandhu-raselita bandhura-khelita bhakṣita-mṛttika lakṣita-vṛttikadarśita-viśvaka marśitara-svaka-matṛ-su-vismaya dhatṛ-śucismayatarṇaka-mocaka varṇaka-rocaka śobhana-cauryaka lobhana-śauryakamatṛ-samīkṣaṇa-yatṛ-sabhīkṣaṇa matur urojapa jatu rudann apa-hṛtya havir-druta-kṛtyatayadbhuta duṣṭu-bhayad ita suṣṭhu taya sitabhinna-naga-dvaya-bhinna-naman-maya jata-viśocita-tata-vimocitaharyaga-kanana-varya-ratanana go-kula-saṅgata gokula-śaṅgatavatsa-vanardana vatsa-bakardana dīrṇa-mayatmaja tīrṇa-maha-vrajasarva-janad-agha-garva-jayanagha kaliya-jin naṭanali-yaśo-naṭacarita-dhenuka marita-dhenuka aṣṭa-pralambaka śasta-kṛd-ambakabhava-mudha-bhaya dava-sudha-dhaya bodhana-gardhana go-dhana-vardhana-parvata-yajana parvata-yajana-dharma-vara-pratha śarma-bhara-gratha-tad-dharaṇī-dhara-sad-dharaṇī-dhara dhṛṣṭa-sureśvara-vṛṣṭa-su-jitvarakama-gavī-sura-dhama-ga-ṭhakkura-sikta tad-adika-niktatamadhika. vīra.

     śyama - dark; purandara - king; dhama - splendor; dhurandhara - great; duṣṭa - of the demons; vinaśana - destrucvtion; juṣṭa - by the devotees; vipasana - conquered; sammada - of happiness; sagara - an ocean; janma - births; daśa - ten; adhara - accepting; puta - pure; nibha - like; akṛti - whose form; putanika - to Pūtanā; amṛti - immortality; tan-mṛti-at her death; taraka - the savior; sat-kṛti - pious deeds; paraka - delivering; śakaṭa - of the cart; bhañjana-bhag - breaking; atad-añjana - without mascara; locana - eyes; mardana - rubbing; rocana - splendor; nardana-saṁhita - bellowing; rodana - crying; vaṁhita - increased; todana - striking; garga - by Garga Muni; kṛta - done; ahvaya - names; varga - group; bhṛta - held; anvaya - explanation; danava - demon; maruta - whirlwind; dana - gift; balanvita - powerful; bandhu - of friendship; rasa - nectar; ilita - glorified; bandhura - charming; khelita - pastimes; bhakṣita - eaten; mṛttika - dirt; lakṣita - seen; vṛttika - activites; darśita - shown; viśvaka - universe; marśitara - examination; svaka - own; matṛ - of the mother; su - great; vismaya - wonder; dhatṛ - of the creator; śuci - splendid; smaya - surprise; tarṇaka - the calves; mocaka - delivering; varṇaka - with sandal paste; rocaka - splendid; śobhana - with handsomeness; cauryaka - charming; lobhana - śauryaka - most charming; matṛ - by the mother; samīkṣaṇa - seeing; yatṛ - going; sa - with; bhī - fear; īkṣaṇa - eyes; matuḥ - of the mother; uroja - breast; pa - drinking; jatu - once; rudann - crying; apahṛtya - removing; haviḥ - butter; druta - running; kṛtyataya - activity; adbhuta - wonderful; duṣṭu - of the offense; bhayat - fear; ita - gone; suṣṭhu - indeed; taya - by her; sita - bound; bhinna - broken; naga - of trees; dvaya - two; bhinna - distinct; namat - bowing down; maya - consisting of; jata - born; viśocita - lamenting; tata - father; vimocita - freed; haryaga - by Govardhana Hill; kanana - forest; varya - excellent; ratanana - eager; go-kula - of the cows; saṅgata - in the company; gokula - of Gokula; śaṅgata - auspiciousness; vatsa - calves; vana - to the forest; ardana - taking; vatsa - Vatsasura; baka - and Bakasura; ardana - killing; dīrṇa - killed; mayatmaja - the son of Mayasura; tīrṇa - rescued; maha-vraja - Vrajabhūmi; sarva-jana-at - all-devouring; agha - of Aghasura; garva - pride; jaya - defeating; anagha - sinless; kaliya-jin - defeating Kaliya; naṭana - dancing; ali - multitude; yaśo-naṭa - famous; carita-dhenuka - herding the cows; marita-dhenuka - killing Dhenukasura; asta-pralambaka - killed Pralambasura; śasta - praise; kṛt - doing; ambaka - mother; bhava - meditation; mudha - useless; bhaya - fears; dava - forest fire; sudha - nectar; dhaya - drinking; bodhana - teaching; gardhana - eager; go-dhana - the cows; vardhana - causing to prosper; parvata - Govardhana Hill; yajana - worshiping; parvata-yajana-dharma-vara-pratha - preaching the glories of worshiping Govardhana Hill; śarma - auspiciousness; bhara - great; gratha - making; tad-dharaṇī-dhara - Govardhana Hill; sad-dharaṇī-dhara - holding; dhṛṣṭa - arrogant; sureśvara - king of the demigods; vṛṣṭa - rains; su-jitvara - defeating; kama-gavī - surabhi cow; suradhama-ga - from Suraloka; ṭhakkura-sikta - abhiṣeka; tad-adika-niktatama-adhika - O most purifying; vīra - O hero.


     O splendid dark Lord, O killer of the demons, O Lord conquered by the devotees, O ocean of bliss, O Lord who was born as the ten avatāras, O Lord whose form is pure and transcendental, O Lord who liberated Pūtanā and gave her immortality, O Lord who delivers the saintly devotees, O Lord who broke a cart, O Lord who rubbed the añjana from Your eyes, O Lord who was a crying infant, O Lord who kicked a cart, O Lord whose holy names were explained by Garga Muni, O powerful Lord who killed a whirlwind demon, O Lord whose nectar friendship is glorified by the great sages, O Lord whose pastimes are charming, O Lord who ate dirt, O Lord who showed the entire universe in Your mouth, O Lord who filled Your mother with wonder, O Lord who delivered the calves, O Lord splendid with sandal paste, O charming and handsome Lord, O Lord whose mother saw the fear in Your eyes, O Lord who drank from Your mother's breast, O Lord who was a crying infant, O Lord who stole butter, O Lord who, afraid for the mischief You had done, fled wonderfully, O Lord tied up by Your mother, O Lord who broke two trees, O Lord to whom two persons manifested from the trees bowed down, O Lord released by Your lamenting father, O Lord eager to go to the forest by Govardhana Hill, O Lord who stayed with the cows, O happiness and auspiciousness of Gokula, O Lord who took the calves to the forest, O Lord who killed Vatsāsura and Bakāsura, O Lord who killed Mayāsura's son, O Lord who rescued Vraja, O Lord who crushed the pride of all-devouring Aghāsura, O sinless one, O Lord who defeated Kāliya, O Lord famous as a dancer, O Lord who herds the cows, O killer of Dhenukāsura, O killer of Pralambāsura, O Lord glorified by Your mother, O Lord love for whom and meditation upon whom makes all fears useless, O Lord who drank a forest fire as if it were a cup of nectar, O Lord eager to teach the science of devotional service, O Lord who made the cows prosper, O Lord who worshiped Govardhana Hill, O Lord who proclaimed the glories of worshiping Govardhana Hill, O Lord who brought great auspiciousness by lifting Govardhana Hill, O Lord who thwarted the great rainstorm sent by arrogant Indra, O Lord bathed by a surabhi cow and an elephant from Suraloka, O supremely glorifying Lord, O hero, . . 

Text 3


sa eṣa kṛṣṇa samprati tvam atra go-patiṁ prati
     praśastam aṅkam aśritaḥ sa-lobha-cetasarditaḥ
bhavantam enam ikṣituṁ nimer jayaya śikṣituṁ
     manas tu vaṣṭi yogitaṁ na yad bhajed viyogitam

     saḥ eṣaḥ - that same person; kṛṣṇa - O Lord Kṛṣṇa; samprati - now; tvam - You; atra - here; go-patim - the master of the cows; prati - to; praśastam - praised; aṅkam - side; aśritaḥ - sheltered; sa-lobha - with eagerness; cetasa - with a heart; arditaḥ - agitated; bhavantam - to You; enam - Him; ikṣitum - to see; nimeḥ - of King Nimi; jayaya - for 
victory; śikṣitum - to teach; manaḥ - the heart; tu - indeed; vaṣṭi - wishes; yogitam - association; na - not; yat - what; bhajet - may be; viyogitam - separation.


 . . . O Kṛṣṇa, at this moment, with an eager heart You stand by the side of glorious Nanda, the master of many cows. King Nimi spoke words to teach how one can be able to see You. My heart yearns for Your association. Please never stay away from me.


Text 4


paitra-vimoṣaka-jaitra-vidoṣaka-paśi-bhaya-bhrama-naśi-jaya-kramasantata-go-kula santata-gokula-darśanaya yuta darśana-saṁstutanaga-sudarśana-bhaga-sudarśana ratna-nipatana-yatna-nighatana-takṣita-yakṣaka rakṣita-pakṣaka tarjad-ariṣṭada-garjad-ariṣṭadaveśita-sad-bhuja-keśi-tanu-ruja kaṁsaka-maraṇa-śaṁsaka-karaṇa-saṅgata tat-pura-raṅgatataḥ pura eva vapur-hara devavad-ambarasad-vara-vayaka-sad-vara-dayaka mali-sudamaka-pali-sudhamakakubji-vapuḥ-sadṛg-ubjita-tada-dhṛg-aṅga tad-arpita-saṅgata-kalpita-candana-ruṣita-vandana-tuṣita pṛṣṭha-makha-sthala sṛṣṭa-maha-bala-
khaṇḍita-capaka daṇḍita-śapaka saṅga-paradima raṅga-padagrima-hasti-padaraka hastipa-maraka aṁsaga-dantaka kaṁsa-sad-antaka-malla-jana-kratha tallajam utpratha marita-kaṁsaka tarita-śaṁsakaprajyadayahuka rajyadayahuka jaṅgata yadava-saṅgata-madhava-yuktatayasajad-ukta-cayad vraja-yapita-tataka dhapita-śataka-tan-nijata-pratha sad-dvijata-vrata-gaurava-bhumata gaurava-bhu-gata-śastra-kathañcita śastra-kalañcita pañca-janadara-sañcaya-sundaradharma-nṛparcita-śarma-kṛtañcita kala-vaśaṁ guru-bala-vapuḥ purudakṣinayann atha dakṣiṇa-sat-patha-sadma-samagata sadma-samayata-locana-bandhura-rocana sandhura saṁsmṛta-go-vraja-sambhṛta-sug-vrajatat-prahitoddhava tat-prahitoddhava-tac-chruta-śantika sampluta-kantika
duta-samagama-bhuta-śamaśama-magadhayodhana-savadha-rodhana

     paitra - of Your father; vimoṣaka - rescuer; jaitra - victorious; vidoṣaka - offender; paśi - Varuṇa; bhaya - fear; bhrama - bewilderment; naśi - destroying; jaya-krama - victorious; santata - always; go-kula - with the cows; santata - always; gokula - of Gokula; darśanaya - with sight; yuta - endowed; darśana - by the scriptures; saṁstuta - offered prayers; naga - the snake; sudarśana - Sudarśana; bhaga-sudarśana - handsome; ratna - jewels; nipatana - making fall; yatna - effort; nighatana - struck; takṣita - killed; yakṣaka - yaksa; rakṣita - protected; pakṣaka - own people; tarjat - rebuking; ariṣṭada - bringing calamities; garjat - bellowing; ariṣṭada - Aristasura; veśita - entered; sat - transcendental; bhuja - arm; keśi - of Kesi; tanu - body; ruja - killing; kaṁsaka - Kaṁsa; maraṇa - killing; śaṁsaka - words; karaṇa - cause; saṅgata - meeting; tat-pura-raṅga-tataḥ - delighting the city; pura - in the presence; eva - indeed; vapuḥ - the body; hara - removing; devavat - like a demigod; ambara - garments; sad-vara-vayaka - saintly tailor; sad-vara-dayaka - giving a transcendental benediction; mali - florist; sudamaka - Sudāmā; pali - protecting; sudhamaka - beautiful garland; kubji - hunchback; vapuḥ - body; sadṛk - like; ubjita-tada-dhṛg-aṅga - making limbs straight; tat - to her; arpita - offered; saṅgata - company; kalpita - considered; candana - sandal paste; ruṣita - anointed; vandana - bowed down; tuṣita - pleased; pṛṣṭha - asked; makha - yajna; sthala - place; sṛṣṭa - created; maha - great; bala - strength;  khaṇḍita - broken; capaka - bow; daṇḍita - punished; śapaka - they who spoke harshly; saṅga - associates; paradima - leading; raṅga - to the arena; padagrima - walking; hasti - of an elephant; pada - feet; araka - going; hastipa - the elephant driver; maraka - killing; aṁsaga-dantaka - taking the elephant's tusk; kaṁsa - Kaṁsa; sad-antaka - the end; malla-jana-kratha - killing the wrestlers; tallaja - to the saintly devotees; mut - happiness; pratha - giving; marita - killed; kaṁsaka - Kaṁsa; tarita - delivered; śaṁsaka - the glorious devotees; prajya-dayahuka - merciful to the living entities; rajya - the kingdom; dayahuka - giving; jam - glory; gata - attaining; yadava - of the yādavas; saṅgata - company; madhava - the husband of the goddess of fortune; yuktatayasajad-ukta-cayat - with appropriate words; vraja - to Vraja; yapita - sent; tataka - father; dhapita - placed; śataka - happiness; tan-nijata - being His own; pratha - praising; sad-dvijata - being a saintly brahmana; vrata - vow; gaurava - of the guru; bhumata - to the place; gaurava-bhu-gata - gone to the guru's place; śastra-kathañcita - absorbed in study of scripture; śastra-kalañcita - expert in the arts described in scripture; 
pañcajanadara - killing the Pancajana demon; sañcaya-sundara - glorious; dharma - aintly; nṛpa - king; arcita - worshiped; śarma - auspiciousness and happiness; kṛtañcita - made; kala - of ime; vaśam - under the control; guru-bala-vapuḥ - the form of the guru's son; puru - greatly; dakṣinayann - for daksina; atha - then; dakṣiṇa - daksina; sat-patha - the path of the sainlty persons; sadma - the abode; samagata - met; sadma-samayata - at the abode; locana - eyes; bandhura - beautiful; rocana - glorious; śandhura - auspicious; saṁsmṛta - remembered; go-vraja - with cows; sambhṛta - filled; sug-vraja - the abode of Vraja; tat-prahita - praising that; uddhava - to Uddhava; tat-prahita - sent there; uddhava - Uddhava; tat - that; śruta - heard; śantika - saintly; sampluta-kantika - flooded with glory and handsomeness; duta - of the messenger; samagama - arrival; bhuta - become; śama - peace; aśama - war; magadha - of Jarasandha; yodhana - fighting; savadha - without killing; rodhana - stopping.

     O Lord who rescued Your father, O Lord who removed the fear and bewilderment caused by the offender Varuṇadeva, O victorious Lord, O Lord who always stays with he surabhi cows, O Lord always seen by the people of Gokula, O Lord glorified in the 
scriptures, O Lord who released Sudarśana from a serpent's form and made him a handsome demigod, O Lord who killed the yakṣa Śankhacūḍa, removed his jewel, and protected Your own devotees, O Lord who rebuked bellowing Ariṣṭāsura, the bringer of calamities, O Lord who thrust an arm into the demon Keśi's mouth and killed him, O Lord whom Kaṁsa ordered should be killed, O Lord who delighted the city of Mathurā, O Lord who killed a washerman and took garments like those of the demigods, O Lord who blessed a saintly tailor, O Lord who accepted a beautiful garland from the florist Sudāmā, O Lord who was satisfied when a hunchback girl 
anointed You with sandal paste and bowed down before You, O Lord who transformed her into a beautiful straight girl, O Lord who accepted her as one of Your liberated associates, O Lord who asked about the dhanur-yajña, O powerful Lord who broke the great bow, O Lord who punished they who harshly rebuked You, O Lord who walked with Your associates, O Lord whose path to the arena was blocked by an elephant, O Lord who killed the elephant-driver, O Lord who took one of the elephant's tusks, O Lord who killed the wrestlers Kaṁsa had ordered to kill You, O Lord who delighted the saintly devotees, O Lord who killed Kaṁsa, O Lord who rescued the glorious devotees, O Lord merciful to the people, O Lord who gave the kingdom to Ugraseṇa, O glorious Lord who stayed among the Yādavas, O husband of the goddess of fortune, O Lord who with appropriate words sent King Nanda back to Vraja, O Lord who filled him with happiness, O Lord who proclaimed that Nanda was Your true father, O Lord who observed the sacred-thread ceremony, O Lord who went to the place of Your guru, O Lord who became absorbed in scripture study, O Lord who became expert at the arts described in scripture, O Lord who killed the demon Pañcajana, O glorious Lord worshiped by the saintly kings, O Lord who brings happiness and auspiciousness, O Lord who as dakṣiṇā returned Your guru's youthful son, O goal of the saintly devotees, O Lord whose eyes are handsome, O auspicious and glorious Lord, O Lord who always remembered the land of Vraja where there are many surabhi cows, O Lord who described the people of Vraja to Uddhava, O Lord who sent Uddhava to Vraja, O Lord flooded with glory, O Lord who heard news from a messenger, O Lord who decided to avoid a full-scale war with Jarāsandha, O hero, . . .

Text 5


aho sa eṣa bho bhavan vrajeśa-gocare bhavan
     nijaṁ kathaṁ paramṛśan sukhayase hriyaṁ spṛśan
tadasmadīyam antaraṁ madena madyad antaraṁ
     na canyad anyad īhate kṛpedṛśī yad īhate

     ahaḥ - Oh; saḥ eṣaḥ - He; bhaḥ - Oh; bhavan - being; vrajeśa-gocare - in the sight of Vraja's king; bhavan - being; nijam - own; katham - topics; paramṛśan - thinking; sukhayase - You are happy; hriyam - shyness; spṛśan - touching; tada - then; asmadīyam - of us; antaram - within; madena - with happiness; madyat - pleasing; antaram - within; na - not; ca - and; anyat - another; anyat - another; īhate - tries; kṛpa - mercy; īdṛśī - like this; yat - what; īhate - tries.

 . . . O Lord gazed upon by the king of Vraja, when You hear the description of Your glories You become both shy and happy. If You are merciful to us, our hearts will become wild with happiness. We do not wish for anything else. We wish only for Your mercy.

Text 6


raja-payacita-raja-padarcita saptadaśahava-tapta-daśa-dravad-andha-jarasuta-bandha-jayanuta yavana-raḍ-bhaya-bhavanatamaya-vidrava-paṇḍita viśvam amandita-bhasmita-kalaka sa-smita-bhalakaaṅga-jarasuta-raṅga-java-druta abdhi-puri-cira-labdhi-punaḥ-sthirabhīṣmakajahṛti-bhīṣma-kalakṛti-sandita-durjana nandita-purjanasatyatayajita-satya tatha-hita-jambavad-īḍita jambavatī-śritaheli-suta-varakeli-sudhakara ujjayanī-janur ujjayanad anu-bhadritayabhṛta-bhadrikayavṛta saptaukṣaṇa-jaya-nagnajatī-priyaayita-bhadrika jayita-madrika bhumija-kalaka bhumija-palakaanya-sutamara-dhanya-sutakara pīḍana-sajjita-pīḍana-varjitanirjara-padapa-nirjara-padapa-hara-jagan-mada sara-jaya-hradaśambara-daraṇa-ḍambara-laraṇa-śaṅkara-mohita śaṅkaraṇohana-baṇakarayita-dana-kalayuta paṇḍita-puṇḍraka-daṇḍita-puṇḍrakakaśipa-cakraka-naśita-cakraka kaurava-bhu-gata-paurava-saṅgata-nanda-nṛpadika nanda-kṛpadhika garbhaka-melaya-darbhaka-nirbhayabalya-tulañcita balya-kularcita caidya-maha-gada-vaidya-matagadasaubha-vilapaka kau bhavikapaka ragatamat puram agata-mathuramatra ca narada-mantra-cayadada kulya-mataṅgaja-tulyaka-ruṣaja-pañca-mukha-pluta pañcamukha-stuta vandya punar-vraja-nanda punar-vraja-nagati-sammada-bhagati-śarmada data-ku-vikriya tata-kula-priyaśarma-tuladhṛta-karma-kulavṛta

     raja - of the king; payacita - protection; raja - of the king; pada - feet; arcita - worshiped; saptadaśa - seventeen; ahava - yajnas; tapta - afflicted; daśa - state; dravat - melting; andha - blind; jarasuta - Jarasandha; bandha - bondage; jaya - victory; anuta - praised; yavana-raḍ - of the yavana king; bhaya - fear; bhavanatamaya - state; vidrava - chasing away; paṇḍita - expert; viśvam - completely; amandita - quickly; bhasmita - burned to ashes; kalaka - Kalayavana; sa-smita - smiling; bhalaka - splendid; aṅga-jarasuta-raṅga-java-druta - persued by Jarasandha; abdhi - in the ocean; puri - in a city; cira - for a long time; labdhi - attainment; punaḥ - again; sthira - staying; bhīṣmakaja - of the daughter of King Bhiṣmaka; ahṛti - kidnapping; bhīṣmakalakṛti-sandita-durjana - who defeated Rukmi; nandita - delighted; purjana - the people of the city;  satyatayajita-satya - who conquered Satyabhāmā; tatha - so; hita-jambavad-īḍita - worshiped by Jāmbavān; jambavatī-śrita - of whom Jāmbavati took shelter; heli-suta - the daughter of the sun-god; vara - transcendental; keli - pastimes; sudhakara - nectar; ujjayanī-januḥ - of the princess of Ujjayani; ujjayanat - by winning; anubhadritaya - with auspiciousness; bhṛta - held; bhadrikaya - Bhadrā; avṛta - with; saptaukṣaṇa-jaya - defeating seven bulls; nagnajitī - to Nagnajiti; priya - dear; ayita-bhadrika - auspicious; jayita-madrika - who won Lakṣmaṇā; bhumija-kalaka - the time of death for Bhaumāsura; bhumija - of the living beings who live on the earth; palaka - protector; anya-sutamara-dhanya-sutakara - who accepted the other princesses and made them fortunate like demigoddesses; pīḍana-sajjita - they who had suffered; pīḍana-varjita - without siffering; nirjara-padapa-nirjara-padapa-hara - stole Indra's parijata tree; jagan-mada - delighting the universe; sara-jaya-hrada - lake of transcendental glories; śambara-daraṇa - killed Sambarasura; ḍambara-laraṇa - bringing happiness; śaṅkara-mohita - bewildered Śiva; śaṅkaraṇa-uhana - bringing auspiciousness; baṇakarayita-dana - who cut off Banasura's arma; kalayuta - expert; paṇḍita - learned; puṇḍraka - mark; daṇḍita - punished; puṇḍraka - Paundraka; kaśipa - the king of Kasi; cakraka - circle; naśita - destroyed; cakraka - cakra; kaurava - of the kauravas; bhu - to the land; gata - gone; paurava - of the Pauravas; saṅgata - met; nanda - Nanda; nṛpa - King; adika - beginning; nanda-kṛpadhika - merciful to King Nanda; garbhaka-melaya - returned the sons of Devaki; darbhaka-nirbhaya - bringing fearlessness; balya-tulañcita - worshiped by King Bali; balya-kularcita - worshiped with many offerings; caidya-maha-gada-vaidya-matagada - the physician who cured the disease known as Sisupala; saubha-vilapaka - destroyed the airplain Saubha; kau - to the earth; bhavikapaka - bringing auspiciousness; ragatamat - out of love; puram - the village of Vraja; agata - returned; mathuram - to Mathurā; atra - here; ca - and; narada-mantra-cayadada - accepting Nārada's advice; kulya-mataṅgaja-tulyaka - powerful like an elephant; ruṣaja - angry; pañca-mukha-pluta - pounced on Dantavakra; pañcamukha-stuta - offered prayers by Lord Śuva; vandya - bowed down; punaḥ - again; vraja - Vraja; nanda - happiness; punaḥ - again; vrajanagati - return; sammada - joy; bhagati-śarmada - bringing auspiciousness; data-ku-vikriya - destroyed all inauspiciousness; tata-kula-priya - dear ot the father's family; śarma-tuladhṛta-karma-kulavṛta - whose activities are filled with joy.


     O Lord who protected the saintly kings, O Lord whose feet were worshiped by the saintly kings, O Lord who rescued many kings from the grip of Jarāsandha, who was planning to offer seventeen yajñas, O Lord who expertly removed the fear caused by a yavana king, O Lord who arranged that Kālayavana be quickly burned to ashes, O Lord who smiled gloriously, O Lord who was chased by Jarāsandha, O Lord who for a long time stayed in Dvārakā City in the middle of the ocean, O Lord who kidnaped Rukmiṇi, O Lord who defeated Rukmi, O Lord who delighted the people of Dvārakā, O Lord who won Satyabhāmā, O Lord who was worshiped by Jāmbavan, O Lord of whom Jāmbavati took shelter, O Lord who enjoyed nectar pastimes with Kālindi, the daughter of the sun-god, O Lord who won the hand of Mitravindā, the princess of Avantipura, O Lord who won the hand of Bhadrā, O Lord who defeated seven bulls and became the dear husband of Nagnajiti, O all-auspicious Lord who won the hand of Lakṣmaṇā, O Lord who became the time of death for Bhaumāsura, O Lord who protects the residents of the earth, O Lord who accepted the hand of many princesses and made them fortunate like demigoddesses, O Lord who removed their sufferings and made them happy, O Lord who stole Indra's pārijāta tree, O Lord who delights the worlds, O Lord who is a lake of transcendental glories, O Lord who killed Śambarāsura, O Lord who made everyone happy, O Lord who bewildered Śiva, O Lord who brought auspiciousness, O Lord who cut off Bāṇāsura's many arms, O Lord who is most artistic and learned, O Lord who punished Pauṇḍraka, who pretended to be wise and learned, O Lord who with Your cakra destroyed the realm of Kāśi's king, O Lord who visited the realm of the Kauravas, O Lord who met with the Pauravas, O Lord who was merciful to Nanda and the other kings, O Lord who returned Devaki's sons, O Lord who brings fearlessness, O Lord who was worshiped by King Bali, O Lord who was worshiped with many offerings, O Lord who was the physician that cured the disease known as Śiśupāla, O Lord who destroyed the Saubha airplane, O Lord who brings auspiciousness to the earth, O Lord who returned to the village of Vraja in Mathurā-maṇḍala, O Lord who accepted Nārada's advice, O Lord who is powerful like an elephant, O Lord who angrily pounced on Dantavakra, O Lord who received the prayers and obeisances of Śiva, O Lord who returned to Vraja, O Lord whose return brought great joy, O Lord who brings auspiciousness, O Lord who destroys all inauspiciousness, O Lord who is dear to Your father's family, O Lord whose pastimes bring great joy, . . .

Text 7


vrajeśa-dṛṣṭi-vaśyataṁ yata tvaya ca dṛśyataṁ
     niriṅgataṁ gato 'py asi tvam atra napi tṛpyasi
kathaṁ vayaṁ tavedṛśaṁ sukhaṁ stavama ye bhṛśaṁ
     niruddha-kaṇṭhatatataḥ sphuṭaṁ sa-mukata mataḥ

     vrajeśa - of the king of Vraja; dṛṣṭi - of the glance; vaśyatam - the state of being submissive; yata - struiving; tvaya - by You; ca - and; dṛśyatam - may be seen; niriṅgatam - not understood; gataḥ - gone; api - also; asi - are; tvam - You; atra - here; 
na - not; api - also; tṛpyasi - are satisfied; katham - why?; vayam - we; tava - of You; īdṛśam - like this; sukham - happiness; stavama - we praise; ye - who; bhṛśam - greatly; niruddha-kaṇṭhatatataḥ - voices choked up; sphuṭam - clearly; sa-mukata - unable to speak; mataḥ - considered.


 . . . You are now stunned, conquered by King Nanda's glance and filled with a bliss that does not end. O Lord, how can we please You with our prayers? Now our voices are choked up and we cannot speak.


Text 8


tata-janany-apa-yatapathi-glapa-natha samastaka-natha sa-śastaka-mitra-rati-hrada-citra-gati-prada udvahanagama-mud-vahanasamalakṣa-vivahaka pakṣa-vigahaka ullasad-antara-phullad-anantara-lajjana-majjaka sajjana-sajjaka purva-vanaṁ para-purva-manaḥ-paramagata sat-kṛta-ragatayavṛta sad-vraja-rañjaka sad-vraja-sañjakaaccha-vanacala-kaccha-gaṇacala śīla-kulakula-līla tulatulatata-janany-anuyata-kulany anu śantida śarmada kantida narmadaindramaṇi-dyuṣad indra-maho-juṣa tuṇḍala-sattama-kuṇḍala-sattamaśubhratara-smita śubhra-kara-śrita-rocaka khañjana-locana-rañjanasundara-nasika kunda-radadhika yatna-vasat-kala-ratna-lasad-galaaṅgada-kaṅkana-saṅga-sad-aṅkana hari-hṛd-antara hari-hṛd-antara-tuṇḍa ramalaya sundaratamaya-nabhi-sarovaratabhimanoharacīna-paṭī-vṛta-pīna-kaṭī-bhṛta sakthi-gataklama śakti-gaṇasamajanu-yugasita-bhanutayacita citrad-alaṅkṛti-citrada-jhaṅkṛti-lobhita-ṣaṭpada śobhi-naṭat-pada go-gaṇa-balaka go-gaṇa-palakamandraka-veṇuka candraka-veṇuka vetraga-hastaka netraga-śastakamitra-ruci-smṛta citra-ruci-smṛta keli-kala-hasa-keli-sa-lalasasannata-vatsala sannata-vatsala-sauhṛda-dakṣaka sauhṛda-rakṣakasaj-hanitacana-tad-vinatadhana nitya-navaṁ sukham ity alam unmukhamaśrita-taparam adritam acara gopa-sad-anvaya gopa-samanvayakṛṣṇa sadaśaya-tṛṣṇa sada jaya. dhīra.

     tata-janany-apa-yatapathi-glapa-natha - bringing auspiciousness to Your mother and father; samastaka-natha - Lord of all; sa-śastaka - glorious; mitra - friends; rati - pastimes and love; hrada - laske; citra - wonderful; gati - shelter; prada - giving; 
udvahana - wedding; agama - arrival;  mut - happiness; vahana - bringing; asama - unequalled; lakṣa-vivahaka - thousands of marriages; pakṣa-vigahaka - staying with the devotees; ullasat - splendid; antara - within; phullat - blossoming; anantara - limitless; lajjana-majjaka - in shyness plunged; sajjana-sajjaka - staying with the saintly devotees; purva - eastern; vanam - forest; para-purva-manaḥ-param - before in the heart; agata - arruved; sat-kṛta-ragatayavṛta - filled with the happiness of transcendental pastimes; sad-vraja-rañjaka - delighting the people of Vraja; sad-vraja-sañjaka - staying with the people of Vraja; accha-vanacala-kaccha-gaṇacala - staying in splendid Vṛndāvana forest and Govardhana Hill; śīla-kulakula-līla - enjoying transcendental pastimes; tulatula - incopmparable; tata-janany-anuyata-kulani - the families of father and mother; anu - following; śantida - giving peace; śarmada - giving happiness and auspiciousness; kantida - giving splendor and beauty; narmada - giving joking words; indramaṇi-dyuṣat - splendid like a sapphire; indra-maho-juṣa - with regal splendor; tuṇḍala-sattama-kuṇḍala-sattama - excellent earrings glistening on the cheeks; śubhratara-smita - splendid smile; śubhra-kara-śrita-rocaka - splendid and delightful; khañjana-locana-rañjana - with playful khanjana bird eyes; sundara-nasika - a graceful nose; kunda-radadhika - teeth more beautiful than jasmine flowers; yatna-vasat-kala-ratna-lasad-gala - a splendid neck decorated with jewel necklaces; aṅgada-kaṅkana-saṅga-sad-aṅkana - with splendid bracelets and armlets; hari-hṛd-antara - with a charming chest; hari-hṛd-antara-tuṇḍa - with a handsome face that delights the heart; ramalaya - the abode of the goddess of fortune; sundaratamaya - handsome; nabhi - navel; sarovarata - lake; abhimanohara - charming the heart; cīna-paṭī-vṛta - dressed in silken garments; pīna-kaṭī-bhṛta - with broad hips; sakthi-gataklama - graceful thighs; śakti-gaṇasama - uncomparably powerful; janu - knees; yuga - pair; asita-bhanutaya - dark splendor; acita - with; citrat - splendid; alaṅkṛti - ornaments; citrada - wonder; jhaṅkṛti - tinkling;  lobhita - made greedy; ṣaṭpada - bumblebees; śobhi - splendid; naṭat - dancing; pada - feet; go-gaṇa-balaka - with the cows and boys; go-gaṇa - of the cows; palaka - protector; mandraka-veṇuka - playing the flute; candraka-veṇuka - splendid with moonlight; vetraga-hastaka - a stick in the hand; netraga-śastaka - splendid eyes; mitra-ruci-smṛta - remembering the love of the friends; citra-ruci-smṛta - whose glories are described in the Smṛti-śāstra; keli-kala - playful pastimes; hasa - laughter; keli - pastimes; sa-lalasa - with yearning; sannata-
vatsala - filled with love for the surrendered souls; sannata-vatsala-sauhṛda-dakṣaka - a dear friend of they who love Him; sauhṛda-rakṣaka - a protector of the friends; saj-janitacana-tad-vinata - of the girls who took birth in Vraja; dhana - the wealth; 
nitya - eternally; navam - new; sukham - happiness; iti - thus; alam - greatly; unmukham - eager; aśrita-taparam - takign shelter; adritam - melting with love; acara - please do; gopa-sad-anvaya - born in the family og gopas; gopa-samanvaya - accompanied by the gopas; kṛṣṇa - O Lord Kṛṣṇa; sat - od the saintly devotees; aśaya - in the hearts; tṛṣṇa - thirst; sada - always; jaya - all glories; dhīra - O saintly one.

     O Lord who bring auspiciousness to Your father and mother, O Lord of all, O Lord who are a wonderful lake of loving pastimes with Your friends, O shelter of the devotees, O Lord whose marriage to Śri Rādhā filled the land of Vraja with unequaled 
joy, O Lord who married thousands of queens, O Lord who stay with the devotees, O Lord whose heart glistens with limitless happiness, O Lord plunged into graceful shyness, O Lord who stay with the saintly devotees, O Lord who are come to Vṛndāvana forest in the east of Vraja where Your heart enjoyed pastimes before, O Lord filled with bliss of many transcendental pastimes, O Lord who delight the people of Vraja, O Lord who stay with the people of Vraja, O Lord who stay on Govardhana Hill and in splendid Vṛndāvana forest, O Lord who enjoy peerless transcendental pastimes, O Lord who bring peace, happiness, auspiciousness, splendor, glory, beauty, and playful joking words to Your father and mother's families, O Lord splendid like a sapphire, O Lord splendid like the greatest of king, O Lord whose cheeks glisten with splendid earrings, O splendidly smiling Lord, O playful and delightful Lord, O Lord whose eyes are like playful khañjana birds, O Lord whose nose is graceful, O Lord whose teeth are more beautiful than jasmine flowers, O Lord whose splendid neck is decorated with jewel necklaces, O Lord splendid with bracelets and armlets, O Lord whose chest is handsome and glorious, O Lord whose handsome face delights the heart, O abode of the goddess of fortune, O handsome Lord, O Lord whose navel-lake charms the heart, O Lord dressed in silken garments, O Lord with broad hips, O Lord with graceful thighs, O incomparably powerful Lord, O Lord whose knees are splendid like dark suns, O Lord whose tinkling ornaments make the humming bees greedy, O Lord whose splendid feet dance gracefully, O Lord who stay with the cows and boys, O protector of the cows, O Lord who play the flute, O Lord splendid like a full moon, O Lord holding a stick in Your hand, O Lord with glistening eyes, O Lord who remember the love of Your friends, O Lord whose glories are described in the Smṛti-śāstra, O Lord who enjoy pastimes of joking words, O Lord who yearn to enjoy pastimes, O Lord who love the surrendered souls, O Lord who are the friend of they who love You, O Lord who protect Your friends, O Lord who are the wealth of the girls who took birth in Vraja, please stay with the devotees who have taken shelter of You and who melt with love for You. Please fill them with bliss that is eternally new and fresh. O Lord who took birth in a family of gopas, O Lord who stay with the gopas, O Lord Kṛṣṇa, O Lord whom the saintly devotees in their hearts thirst to attain, all glories always to You!


Text 9


nijaṁ padaṁ vrajabhidhaṁ samitya nitya-mud-vidhaṁ
     priyair janair virajase paraṁ kiyat kṛpayase
na bhavam avṛṇīmahe na yat pṛthag vṛṇīmahe
     tad-anya-dug dhunīmahe manas tataḥ punīmahe

     nijam - own; padam - abode; vrajabhidham - named Vraja; samitya - attaining; nitya - eternal; mud-vidham - with bliss; priyaiḥ - dear; janaiḥ - with people; virajase - You shine; param - greatly; kiyat - how much?; kṛpayase - You are merciful; na - not; bhavam - nature; avṛṇīmahe - we choose; na - not; yat - what; pṛthag - specific; vṛṇīmahe - we choose; tad-anya-another; duk - milk; dhunīmahe - we shake; manaḥ - the heart; tataḥ - then; punīmahe - we purify.


     O Lord Kṛṣṇa, accompanied by Your dear associates You are splendidly manifested in Your eternally blissful abode, which bears the name Vraja. How merciful are You? We cannot understand how merciful. We cannot understand. Rejecting everything else, we choose only You. In this way we will become pure in heart.


Text 10


bhṛtyan palaya vatsalan pramadaya krīḍa-sahayan ava
     praṇa praṇa-samaḥ paraś ca janataḥ samrakṣa rakṣa-maṇe
tac ca śrī-varaja-vanya-dhanya-vihṛti-pracuryataḥ sidhyati
     tvaṁ tat kṛṣṇa sa-dainya-kaku vṛṇumas tan nityam aviṣkuru

     bhṛtyan - servants; palaya - please protect; vatsalan - parents; pramadaya - dleight; krīḍa-sahayan - they who help Your pastimes; ava - protect; praṇa - life; praṇa-samaḥ - equal to life; paraḥ - more; ca - and; janataḥ - of the people; samrakṣa - please protect; rakṣa-maṇe - O jewel of protectors; tat - that; ca - and; śrī-varaja-vanya-dhanya-vihṛti-pracuryataḥ - from the greatness of Your glorious pastimes in Vraja; sidhyati - is perfect; tvam - You; tat - that; kṛṣṇa - O Lord Kṛṣṇa; sa-dainya-kaku - humble words; vṛṇumaḥ - we choose; tan - that; nityam - always; aviṣkuru - please accept.

     Please protect Your servants! Please delight Your parents! Please protect they who help Your pastimes! O jewel of protectors, O our life, please protect the devotees who think You are dear as life! Your wonderful pastimes in Vraja are all glorious and perfect. O Lord Kṛṣṇa, speaking humble words, we always choose You. Please accept us always.



