Folio Archives
Kalyana-Kalpataru

Part 0 Maṅgalācaraṇa-Invoking Auspiciousness

Song 1

Text 1

vande vṛndāṭavī-candraṁ
     rādhikākṣi-mahotsavam
brahmātmānanda-dhik-kāri-
     pūrṇānanda-rasālayam

     vande—I offer my respectful obeisances; vṛndāṭavī-candram—to the moon of Vṛndāvana; rādhikā—of Śrī Rādhā; akṣi—of the eyes; mahā—great; utsavam—festival; brahmātma—of the impersonalists; ānanda—the happiness; dhik-kāri—mocking; pūrṇa—full; ānanda—bliss; rasālayam—nectar.

     I offer my respectful obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the moon of Vṛndāvana, a moon that is the abode of wonderful nectar and bliss, a moon that is a festival of joy for Śrī Rādhā's eyes, a moon that with the nectar and bliss tasted by both Lord Kṛṣṇa and His devotees mocks the realizations of the impersonalists rapt in meditation on "tat tvam asi" and other mahā-vākyas.

     Note: This English translation of this and the following seven Sanskrit verses is based on Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura's own Bengali translations of them.

Text 2 

caitanya-caraṇaṁ vande
     kṛṣṇa-bhakta-janāśrayam
advaita-mata-dhaureya-
     bhārāpanodanaṁ param

     caitanya—of Lord Caitanya; caraṇam—to the feet; vande—I bow; kṛṣṇa-bhakta-jana—of the devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa; āśrayam—the shelter; advaita—of the impersonalists; mata—of the ideas; dhaureya-bhāra—the heavy burdens; apanodanam—throwing away; param—great.

     I offer my respectful obeisances to the feet of Lord Caitanya, which are the place where Lord Kṛṣṇa's devotees, devotees who have thrown far away the heavy burden that is Śaṅkarācārya'a theory of impersonalism, take shelter.

Text 3 

guruṁ vande mahā-bhāgaṁ
     kṛṣṇānanda-svarūpakam
yan-mude racayiṣyāmi
     kalyāṇa-kalpa-pādapam

     gurum—spiritual master; vande—I bow; mahā-bhāgam—glorious; kṛṣṇānanda-svarūpakam—Kṛṣṇananda-svarupa; yat—of whom; mude—for the pleasure; racayiṣyāmi—I will write; kalyāṇa-kalpa-pādapam—this Kalyana-kalpataru.

     I offer my respectful obeisances to worshipable Kṛṣṇānanda-svarūpa Gurudeva Gosvāmī Prabhu, for whose pleasure I will now write this Kalyāṇa-kalpataru.

Text 4 

aprākṛta-rasānande
     na yasya kevalā ratiḥ
tasyedaṁ na samālocyaṁ
     pustakaṁ prema-sampuṭam

     aprākṛta—not material; rasa—mellows; ānande—in the bliss; na—not; yasya—of whom; kevalā—exclusive; ratiḥ—edlight; tasya—of him; idam—this; na—not; samālocyam—to be considered; pustakam—book; prema—of spiritual love; sampuṭam—the jewelry chest.

     A person who does not like spiritual nectar and bliss will not read this book, which is a jewelry-case of spiritual love.

     Note: Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura explains that the word “prākṛta" (material) refers to the five material eleements, the five material sense-objects, the five material working senses, the five material knowledge-acquiring senses, and the material mind, intelligence, false-ego, and mahat-tattva. What is beyond these 24 material elements is called "aprākṛta". The word "aprākṛta" then refers to that which is made of spiritual bliss and nectar. Persons who do not like spiritual bliss will not read this book, which is like a jewelry-case where spiritual love is kept. Because they have no power to taste the sweetness of spiritual nectar, these persons think only of the dull material pleasures present in the material body. In this way they are always plunged in an ocean of pathetic material desires.

Text 5 

ayaṁ kalpa-taror nāma
     kalyāṇa-padapaḥ śubhaḥ
vaikuṇṭha-nilaye bhāti
     vane niḥśreyasāhvake

     ayam—this; kalpa-taroḥ—desire tree; nāma—named; kalyāṇa-padapaḥ—kalyana-kalpataru; śubhaḥ—auspicious; vaikuṇṭha-nilaye—in the abode of Vaikuṇṭha; bhāti—is splendidly manifest; vane—in the forest; niḥśreyasa—the best; āhvake—named.

     In the world of Vaikuṇṭha, in the forest of Niḥśreyasa-vana (the forest of the supreme good), this auspicious kalyāṇa-kalpataru desire-tree is splendidly manifest.

Text 6 

tasya skandha-trayaṁ śuddhaṁ
     vartate viduṣāṁ mude
upadeśas tathā copa-
     labdhis tūcchvāsakaḥ kila

     tasya—of it; skandha—branches; trayam—three; śuddham—pure; vartate—are; viduṣām—of the wise; mude—for the delight; upadeśaḥ—instruction; tathā—then; ca—and; upalabdhiḥ—realization; tu—and; ucchvāsakaḥ—ecstasy; kila—indeed.

     To please the wise, this tree has three main branches: 1. upadeśa (instruction), 2. upalabdhi (realization), and 3. Ucchvāsa (ecstasy).

Text 7 

aśrītya pādapaṁ vidvān
     kalyāṇam labhate phalam
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-vilāseṣu
     dāsyaṁ vṛndāvane vane

     aśrītya—taking shelter; pādapam—of this tree; vidvān—wise; kalyāṇam—auspiciousness; labhate—attains; phalam—fruit; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-vilāseṣu—in Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa's transcendental pastimes; dāsyam—service; vṛndāvane—in Vṛndāvana; vane—forest.

     Taking shelter of this tree, a wise person will pick its auspicious fruit, fruit that is service to Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Their pastimes in Vṛndāvana forest, the innermost, most private part of the spiritual world.

Text 8 

sampūjya vaiṣṇavān viprān
     sarva-jīvāṁś ca nityaśaḥ
kīrtayāmi vinīto 'haṁ
     gītaṁ vraja-rasāśrītam

     sampūjya—worshiping; vaiṣṇavān—the Vaiṣṇavas; viprān—brāhmaṇas; sarva-jīvān—all living entrities; ca—and; nityaśaḥ—always; kīrtayāmi—I glorify; vinītaḥ—humble; aham—I; gītam—song; vraja-rasa—the nectar of Vraja; āśrītam—taking shelter.

     Worshiping the Vaiṣṇavas, who live in Vraja, Jagannātha Purī, and Navadvīpa, worshiping the brāhmaṇas, who are attached either to karma (pious rituals) or jñāna (philosophical speculation), and worshiping all living entities, from the demigod Brahmā down to the cāṇḍālas and dogs, again and again I humbly sing these songs about Vraja.




Song 2

Text 1

jaya jaya śrī-caitanya patita-pābana
jaya nityānanda prabhu anātha-taraṇa

     jaya—glory; śrī-caitanya—to Śrī Caitanya; patita-pābana—the purifier of the fallen; nityānanda—to Nityānanda; prabhu—Lord; anātha-taraṇa—the savior of the shelterless.

     Glory, glory to Śrī Caitanya, the savior of the fallen! Glory to Lord Nityānanda, the savior of the shelterless!

Text 2 

jaya jayādwaitacandra kṛpāra sāgara
jaya rūpa-sanātana jaya gadādhara

     jaya—glory; adwaitacandra—to Advaitacandra; kṛpāra—of mercy; sāgara—an ocean; rūpa-sanātana—Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī; gadādhara—Gadādhara Paṇḍita.

     Glory to Advaitacandra, who is an ocean of mercy! Glory to Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī! Glory to Gadādhara Paṇḍita!

Text 3 

śrī-jība gopāla-bhaṭṭa raghunātha-dwoya
jaya braja-dhāma-bāsī baiṣṇaba-nicoya

     śrī-jība—Śrī Jiva; gopāla-bhaṭṭa—Gopala Bhatta; raghunātha-dwoya—the two Raghunathas; braja-dhāma-bāsī—the residents of Vraja; baiṣṇaba-nicoya—the Vaiṣṇavas.

     Glory to Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, the residents of Vraja, and all the Vaiṣṇavas!

Text 4 

jaya jaya nabadwīpa-bāsī bhakta-gaṇa
sabe mili' kṛpā more koro bitaraṇa

     jaya—glory; nabadwīpa-bāsī—the residents of Navadvipa; bhakta-gaṇa—the devotees; sabe—all; mili'—meeting together; kṛpā—mercy; more—to me; koraḥ—please do; bitaraṇa—gift.

     Glory to the devotees who live in Navadvīpa! All of you please give your mercy to me.

Text 5 

nikhila-baiṣṇaba-jana doyā prakāsiyā
śrī-jāhnabā-pade more rākhaho taniyā

     nikhila-baiṣṇaba-jana—all the Vaiṣṇavas; doyā—mercy; prakāsiyā—manifesting; śrī-jāhnabā—of Śrī Jāhnavā-devī; pade—at the feet; more—me; rākhahaḥ—please protect; taniyā—bringing.

     O Vaiṣṇavas, please be merciful to me. Bring me to Jāhnavā-devī's feet and give me shelter there.

Text 6 

āmi to' durbhaga ati baiṣṇaba nā cini
more kṛpā koribena baiṣṇaba āpani

     āmi—I; to' durbhaga—unfortunate; ati—very; baiṣṇaba—Vaiṣṇavas; nā—not; cini—think; more—to mer; kṛpā—mercy; koribena—will do; baiṣṇaba—Vainsava; āpani—personally.

     I am very unfortunate. I do not understand the Vaiṣṇavas. I pray that the Vaiṣṇavas will be merciful to me.

Text 7 

śrī-guru-caraṇe more bhakti koro dāna
je caraṇa-bale pāi tattwera sandhāna

     śrī-guru-caraṇe—to the feet of the spiritual master; more—to me; bhakti—devotion; koraḥ—please do; dāna—gift; je—which; caraṇa-bale—byth epower of the feet; pāi—I attain; tattwera—of the truth; sandhāna—search.

     O Vaiṣṇavas, please give me the gift of devotion to my spiritual master's feet. By the power of his feet, I will find the truth. 

Text 8 

brāhmaṇa sakala kori' kṛpā mora prati
baiṣṇaba-caraṇe more deho dṛḍha-mati

     brāhmaṇa—brāhmaṇas; sakala—all; kori'—doing; kṛpā—mercy; mora—to me; prati—to; baiṣṇaba—of the Vaiṣṇavas; caraṇe—at the feet; more—of me; dehaḥ—please give; dṛḍha—firm; mati—heart.

     O brāhmaṇas, please be kind to me. Please make my heart steady at my spiritual master's feet.

Text 9 

ucca nīca sarba-jība caraṇe saraṇa
loilāma āmi dīna hīna akiñcana

     ucca—high; nīca—low; sarba-jība—all living entities; caraṇe—at the feet; saraṇa—shelter; loilāma—attained; āmi—I; dīna—poor; hīna—insignificant; akiñcana—who has nothing.

     I, who am poor, lowly, and have nothing of value, take shelter of the feet of all living entities, both high and low.

Text 10 

salake koriyā kṛpā deho' more bara
baiṣṇabe koruṇā ei granthera ādara

     salake—all; koriyā—doing; kṛpā—mercy; deho'—give; more—to me; bara—boon; baiṣṇabe—of the Vaiṣṇavas; koruṇā—mercy; ei—this; granthera—book; ādara—attention.

     O Vaiṣṇavas, please be merciful and give to me this boon: Please give your attention to this book.

Text 11 

grantha-dwārā baiṣṇaba-janera kṛpā pāi
baiṣṇaba-kṛpāya kṛṣṇa-lābha hoya bhāi

     grantha—book; dwārā—by; baiṣṇaba-janera—the Viasnavas; kṛpā—mercy; pāi—I attain; baiṣṇaba—of the Vaiṣṇavas; kṛpāya—by the mercy; kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; lābha—attainment; hoya—is; bhāi—O my brothers.

     By writing this book I will attain the Vaiṣṇavas' mercy. O my brothers, by the Vaiṣṇavas' mercy I will attain Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 12 

baiṣṇaba-bimukha jā're tāhāra jībana
nirarthaka jāno' bhāi prasiddha bacana

     baiṣṇaba—to the Vaiṣṇavas; bimukha—aversion; jā're—of whom; tāhāra—of him; jībana—life; nirarthaka—wasted; jāno'—please know; bhāi—O my brothers; prasiddha—famous; bacana—words.

     O my brothers, please know that a person who turns away from the Vaiṣṇavas lives in vain. This everyone knows.

Text 13 

śrī-baikuṇṭha-dhāme āche niḥśreyasa bana
tāhe śobhā pāya kalpa-taru agaṇana

     śrī-baikuṇṭha-dhāme—in the abode of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha; āche—is; niḥśreyasa—best; bana—in the forest; tāhe—there; śobhā—beauty; pāya—attaining; kalpa-taru—a kalpa-taru tree; agaṇana—numberless.

     In the realm of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha, in the forest of Niḥśreyasa-vana are numberless beautiful kalpataru trees.

Text 14 

tāhā mājhe e kalyāṇa-kalpa-taru-rāja
nitya-kāla nitya-dhāme korena birāja

     tāhā—of them; mājhe—in the midst; e—this; kalyāṇa—of auspciiousness; kalpa-taru—of kalpataru trees; rāja—the king; nitya—eternal; kāla—time; nitya—eternal; dhāme—in the abode; korena—does; birāja—manifestation.

     Among the trees in that eternal abode this tree, king of the kalpataru trees of auspiciousness, is manifest eternally.

Text 15 

skandha-troya āche tā'ra apūrba darśana
upadeśa upalabdhi ucchwāsa gaṇana

     skandha—branches; troya—three; āche—are; tā'ra—of that; apūrba—wonderful; darśana—sight; upadeśa—teaching; upalabdhi—realization; ucchwāsa—ecstasy; gaṇana—counting.

     That tree is very wonderful to see. It has three branches: 1. upadeśa (teaching), 2. upalabdhi (realization), and 3. ucchwāsa (ecstasy).

Text 16 

su-bhakti-prasūna tāhe ati śobhā pāya
kalyāṇa nāmaka phala agaṇana tāya

     su—excellent; bhakti—of devotional service; prasūna—flowers; tahe—there; ati—very; śobhā—beautiful; pāya—attaining; kalyāṇa—auspiciousness; nāmaka—named; phala—fruits; agaṇana—numberless; tāya—of that.

     On that tree are beautiful flowers of pure devotional service and numberless fruits that bear the name “kalyāṇa" (auspiciousness).

Text 17 

je sujana e biṭapī korena āśroya
kṛṣṇa-sebā-su-kalyāṇa-phala tāṅra hoya

     je—who; sujana—good people; e—; biṭapī—tree; korena—do; āśroya—shelter; kṛṣṇa—to Lord Kṛṣṇa; sebā—service; su—great; kalyāṇa—of auspiciousness; phala—fruits; tāṅra—of him; hoya—are.

     Good people who take shelter of that tree may gather many kalyāṇa fruits of devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 18 

śrī-guru-caraṇa-kṛpā-sāmarthya labhiyā
e heno apūrba bṛkha dilāma āniyā

     śrī-guru—of the spiritual master; caraṇa—of the feet; kṛpā—the mercy; sāmarthya—ability; labhiyā—attaining; e—this; henaḥ—like; apūrba—wonderful; bṛkha—tree; dilāma—I give; āniyā—taking.

     Becoming powerful by the mercy at my spiritual master's feet, I brought that wonderful tree here.

Text 19 

taniyā ānite bṛkha e karkaśa mana
naśilo ihāra śobhā śuno sādhu-jana

     taniyā ānite—bringing; bṛkha—tree; e—this; karkaśa—heard; mana—heart; naśilaḥ—destroyed; ihāra—of it; śobhā—the beauty; śunaḥ—please hear; sādhu-jana—O saintly devotees.

     My heart is very hard. When I carried it, I destroyed that tree's beauty. O saintly devotees, please hear this.

Text 20 

tomāra sakala ha-o e bṛkhera mālī
śraddhā-bari diyā punaḥ koro rūpaśālī

     tomāra—of you; sakala—all; ha-aḥ—please do; e—this; bṛkhera—of the tree; mālī—gardeners; śraddhā—of faith; bari—water; diyā—giving; punaḥ—again; koraḥ—make; rūpaśālī—beautiful.

     All of you please become the gardeners of this tree. Nourishing on with the water of Your faith, please make it beautiful again.

Text 21 

phalibe kalyāṇa-phala jugala-sebana
koribo sakale mili' tāhā āswādana

     phalibe—will bear; kalyāṇa-phala—the fruit of auspiciousness; jugala—for the divine couple; sebana—service; koribaḥ—will do; sakale—all; mili'—gathering together; tāhā—of that; āswādana—taste.

     Then the tree will bear the auspicious fruits of service to the divine couple, and you will all taste the sweetness of those fruits.

Text 22 

nṛtya kori' hari bolo' kha-o sebā-phala
bhakti-bale koro' dūra kutarka-anala

     nṛtya—danicng; kori'—doing; hari—Hari; bolo'—chant; kha-aḥ—taste; sebā-phala—the fruits of devotional service; bhakti-bale—by the power of devotional service; koro'—please do; dūra—far away; kutarka—of faulty logic; anala—the flames.

     Stay far away from the flames of faulty, materialistic logic. Chant, "Hari!", dance, and taste these fruits of devotional service.




Part 1 Updeśa-Teaching
Song 0

Text 1

dīkṣā-guru kṛpā kori' mantra-upadeśa
koriyā dekhāna kṛṣṇa-tattwera nirdeśa

     dīkṣā—initiating; guru—spiritual master; kṛpā—mercy; kori'—doing; mantra—mantra; upadeśa—teachin; koriyā——doing; dekhāna—see; kṛṣṇa-tattwera—of the truth of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nirdeśa—instruction.

     The dīkṣā-guru (initiating spiritual master) mercifully teaches the mantra. In this way he shows the truth about Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 2 

śikṣā-guru-bṛnda kṛpā koriyā apāra
sādhake śikhāna sādhanera aṅga-sāra

     śikṣā-guru—instructing spiritual masters; bṛnda—many; kṛpā—mercy; koriyā—doing; apāra—limitless; sādhake—to the aspirign devotee; śikhāna—instruction; sādhanera—of sadhana; aṅga—of the body; sāra—the essence.

     With limitless kindness, the many śikṣā-gurus (instructing spiritual masters), instruct the aspiring devotee in the practices of sādhana-bhakti.

Text 3 

śikṣā-guru-gaṇa-pāde koriyā praṇati
upadeśa-mālā boli nija-manaḥ prati

     śikṣā-guru—of instructing spiritual masters; gaṇa—of the multitude; pāde—at the feet; koriyā—doing; praṇati—obeisances; upadeśa—of teaching; mālā—garland; boli—I say; nija—my own; manaḥ—heart; prati—directed to.

     I bow down before the feet of my many śikṣā-gurus. To my own heart I will now speak what is a garland of good instruction.




Song 1

Text 1

mana re, keno miche bhajicho asāra?
bhūta-moya e soṁsāra          jībera pakhete chāra
amaṅgala-samudra apāra

     mana—mind; re—O; kenaḥ—why?; miche—falsely; bhajichaḥ—worship; asāra?—what is useless; bhūta-moya—made of the material elements; e—this; soṁsāra—material world; jībera—of the soul; pakhete—to the side; chāra—a pile of ashes; amaṅgala—of what is inauspicious; samudra—an ocean; apāra—shoreless.

     O my heart, why do you worship something that is worthless? For the soul this world made of material elements, this world of birth and death, is worthless like a pile of ashes. It is like a shoreless ocean of inauspiciousness.

Text 2 

bhūtātīta śuddha-jība,        nirañjana sadā-śiba
māyātīta premera ādhāra
taba śuddha-satta tāi,        e joḍa-jagate bhāi
keno mugdha ha-o bāra bāra

     bhūta—material elements; atīta—beyond; śuddha—pure; jība—soul; nirañjana—untouched; sadā—always; śiba—auspicious; māyā—Maya; atīta—beyond; premera—of love; ādhāra—the abode; taba—of You; śuddha—pure; satta—existence; tāi,—manifests; e—this; joḍa—material; jagate—in the world; bhāi—O my brothers; kenaḥ—why?; mugdha—bewildered; ha-aḥ—are; bāra—again; bāra—and again.

     The pure soul is beyond the material elements, beyond māyā, untouched by matter, always auspicious, the abode of spiritual love. O my brothers, your true nature is pure and spiritual. Why are you bewildered again and again by this material world?

Text 3 

phire dekho eka-bāra          ātma amṛtera dhāra
tā'te buddhi ucita tomāra
tumi ātma-rūpī ho'ye          śrī-caitanya-samāśroye
bṛndābane thāko anibāra

     phire—again; dekhaḥ—look; eka-bāra—one time; ātma—soul; amṛtera—of nectar; dhāra—a flood; tā'te—manifests; buddhi—intelligence; ucita—appropriate; tomāra—of you; tumi—you; ātma-rūpī—the form of the soul; ho'ye—are; śrī-caitanya—of Lord Caitanya; samāśroye—in the shelter; bṛndābane—in Vṛndāvana; thākaḥ—stay; anibāra—always.

     Just once see that the soul is flooded with nectar. That is the right understanding. Understanding that you are a pure soul, please take shelter of Lord Caitanya and always stay in Vṛndāvana.

Text 4 

nitya-kāla sakhī-saṅge,       parānanda-sebā-raṅge
jugala-bhajana koro' sāra
e heno jugala-dhana      chāre jei mūrkha jana
tā'ra gati nāhi dekhi āra

     nitya—eternal; kāla—time; sakhī—of the gopīs; saṅge—in the company; parānanda—transcendental bliss; sebā—service; raṅge—with joy; jugala—the divine couple; bhajana—worship; koro'—do; sāra—best; e—this; henaḥ—like; jugala—of the divine couple; dhana—treasure; chāre—turn; jei—this; mūrkha—fool; jana—persons; tā'ra—of them; gati—goal; nāhi—not; dekhi—I see; āra—other.

     For eternal time stay among the gopīs and happily serve the divine couple. I cannot see what will happen to the fools who turn away from the treasure that is the divine couple.




Song 2

Text 1

mana tumi bhālabāsa kāmera taraṅga
joḍa-kāma parihori'          śuddha-kāma-sebā kori'
bistaraho aprākṛta raṅga

     mana—O heart; tumi—you; bhālabāsa—love; kāmera—of desire; taraṅga—waves; joḍa-kāma—material desire; parihori'—renouncing; śuddha—pure; kāma—desire; sebā—service; kori'—doing; bistarahaḥ—please manifest; aprākṛta—spiritual; raṅga—pleasure.

     O my heart, why do you play in the waves of material desire? Turn from material desire. Try to fulfill spiritual desires. Enjoy spiritual pleasures.

Text 2 

anitya jaḍiyā kāma      śānti-hīna abiśrāma
nāhi tahe pipāsāra bhaṅga
kāmera sāmagrī cāo       tabu tāhā nāhi pāo
pāileo chāre taba saṅga

     anitya—temporary; jaḍiyā—material; kāma—desire; śānti—peacefulness; hīna—without; abiśrāma—without rest; nāhi—not; tahe—of you; pipāsāra—of thirst; bhaṅga—breaking; kāmera—of desire; sāmagrī—things; cāaḥ—desire; tabu—of you; tāhā—of that; nāhi—not; pāaḥ—attain; pāileaḥ—attained; chāre—leave; taba—of you; saṅga—the company.

     Material desire will give you only temporary things. It will never let you be peaceful. It will never let you rest. Your thirst for material things will never be slaked. You desire many material things, but you will never attain them, or if you do attain them, they will soon flee far away.

Text 3 

tumi sebā koro' jāre          se tomā' bhajite nāre
duḥkha jwāle binodera aṅga
chāro tabe micha-kāma         hao tumi satya-kama
bhajo bṛndābanera anaṅga
jāṅhāra kusuma-śare      taba nitya-kalebare
byapta ha'be prema antaraṅga

     tumi—you; sebā—service; koro'—do; jāre—to which; se—that; tomā'—you; bhajite—worship; nāre—not; duḥkha—suffering; jwāle—burns; binodera—of Bhaktivinoda; aṅga—limbs; chāraḥ—turn; tabe—of you; micha-kāma—illusory desire; hao—be; tumi—you; satya—true; kama—desire; bhajaḥ—worship; bṛndābanera—of Vṛndāvana; anaṅga—the Kāmadeva; jāṅhāra—of whom; kusuma—flower; śare—arrows; taba—of you; nitya—eternal; kalebare—body; byapta—manifested; ha'be—will be; prema—of love; antaraṅga—internal.

     You served material desire, and it gave you nothing. It only made Bhaktivinoda's limbs burn with flames of suffering. Turn from desiring what is false. Desire what is real. Worship the Kāmadeva of Vṛndāvana. Wounded by His flower-arrows, you will manifest a different, an eternal body, a body filled with spiritual love. 




Song 3

Text 1

mana re, tumi boro sandigdha-antara
āsiyācho e soṁsāre       baddha hoye joḍādhare
joḍāsakta ho'le nirantara

     mana—heart; re—O; tumi—you; boraḥ—very; sandigdha—full of doubts; antara—within; āsiyāchaḥ—come; e—this; soṁsāre—in the world of birth and death; baddha—bound; hoye—are; joḍa—of matter; ādhāre—in the abode; joḍa—to dull material things; āsakta—attached; ho'le—are; nirantara—always.

     O my heart, you are very suspicious. You came to this world of birth and death. You were imprisoned in this world of matter. Now you are attached to dull material things.

Text 2 

bhuliyā swakīya dhāma         sebi' joḍa-gata kāma
joḍa bina nā dekho apara
tomāra tumitwa jini      ācchādita ho'ye tini
lupta-prāya dehera bhitora

     bhuliyā—forgetting; swakīya—own; dhāma—home; sebi'—serving; joḍa-gata—material; kāma—desire; joḍa—matter; bina—except for; na—not; dekhaḥ—see; apara—other; tomāra—of you; tumitwa—identity; jini—which; ācchādita—covered; ho'ye—is; tini—that; lupta-prāya—almost lost; dehera—the body; bhitora—within.

     Forgetting your true home, you serve material desires. You see nothing but matter. Your true identity is covered, almost lost, hidden inside your body.

Text 3 

tumi to' joḍiyā jñāna        sadā koritecho dhyāna
tahe sṛṣṭi koro' carācara
e duḥkha kohibo kā're         nitya-pati parihari'
tuccha-tattwe korile nirbhara

     tumi—you; to'—indeed; joḍiyā—material; jñāna—knowledge; sadā—always; koritechaḥ—do; dhyāna—mediattion; tahe—in that; sṛṣṭi—creation; koro'—do; carācara—moving and unmoving; e—this; duḥkha—suffering; kohibaḥ—will tell; kā're—to whom?; nitya—eternal; pati—master; parihari'—leaving; tuccha—insignificant; tattwe—truth; korile—do; nirbhara—dependence.

     You always think of material things. Your actions are all material. To whom will I tell my sufferings? Turning away from your eternal master, you take shelter of something worthless and pathetic.

Text 4 

nāhi dekho' ātma-tattwa       chāḍi dile śuddha-sattwa
ātma ho'te nile abasāra
ātma āche ki nā āche          sandeha tomāra kāche
krame krame pāilo ādara

     nāhi—not; dekho'—see; ātma-tattwa—own truth; chāri—turning away; dile—give; śuddha-sattwa—pure identity; ātma—self; ho'te—is; nile—not; abasāra—opportunity; ātma—self; āche—is; ki—wh;at na—not; āche—is; sandeha—doubt; tomāra—of you; kāche—near; krame krame—gradually; pāilaḥ—attains; ādara—respect.

     You don't see the truth of the soul. You have turned from the pure truth. You are not interested in the soul. More and more you like to doubt, "Does the soul exist, or not?"

Text 5 

ei rūpe krame krame      paḍiyā joḍera bhrame
āpana āpani ho'le para
ebe kathā rākho mora          nāho hao ātma-cora
sādhu-saṅga koro' ataḥ para

     ei rūpe—in this way; krame krame—gradually; paḍiyā—falling; joḍera—of matter; bhrame—in illusion; āpana—own; āpani—in the self; ho'le—is; para—other; ebe—now; kathā—talk; rākhaḥ—keep; mora—of me; nāhaḥ—not; hao—is; ātma—of the soul; cora—thief; sādhu-saṅga—associatuion with saintly devotees; koro'—please do; ataḥ para—then.

     In this way you gradually fell in the illusions of matter. You became different from what you really are. Please take my advice. Don't be a thief who robs the soul. Associate with the Lord's devotees.

Text 6 

baiṣṇabera kṛpā-bale          sandeha jaibe ca'le
tumi punaḥ hoibe tomāra
pā'be bṛndābana-dhāma         sebibe śrī-rādhā-śyāma
pulakāśru-moya kalebara

     baiṣṇabera—of the Vaiṣṇavas; kṛpā—of the mercy; bale—by the power; sandeha—doubts; jaibe—conquer; ca'le—go; tumi—you; punaḥ—again; hoibe—will be; tomāra—of you; pā'be—attain; bṛndābana-dhāma—the abode of Vṛndāvana; sebibe—will serve; śrī-rādhā-śyāma—Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; pulaka—hairs standing erect in ecstasy; aśru—tears; moya—consisting of; kalebara—body.

     By the power of the Vaiṣṇavas' mercy, you will conquer all doubts. Your soul will be yours again. You will go to the world of Vṛndāvana. Tears in your eyes and the hairs of your body erect with joy, you will serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Text 7 

bhaktibinodera dhana          rādhā-kṛṣṇa-śrī-caraṇa
tāhe rati rahuṅ nirantara

     bhaktibinodera—of Bhaktivinoda; dhana—the treasure; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-śrī-caraṇa—the graceful feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; tāhe—in them; rati—love; rahun—I keep; nirantara—always.

     Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's graceful feet are the great treasure carefully kept by Bhaktivinoda. That treasure I will always love.




Song 4

Text 1

mana, tumi boḍai pāmora
tomāra īśwara hari       taṅke kena parihari'
kāma-mārge bhajo' debantora

     mana—O heart; tumi—you; boḍai—very; pāmora—sinful; tomāra—of you; īśwara—Lord; hari—Kṛṣṇa; taṅke—Him; kena—why?; parihari'—abandoning; kāma-mārge—the path of material desires; bhajo'—follow; debantora—other deities.

     O my wretched heart, why do you turn away from your Lord Kṛṣṇa? Why do you walk on the path of material desires and worship the demigods?

Text 2 

para-brahma eka-tattwa        tāṅhāte saṅpiyā sattwa
niṣṭhā-guṇe koroho ādara
āra jata deba-gaṇa       miśra-sattwa agaṇana
nija nija kārjera īśwara

     para-brahma—the Supreme; eka-tattwa—one truth; tāṅhāte—Him; saṅpiyā—manifesting; sattwa—goodness; niṣṭhā-guṇe—virtue of faith; korohaḥ—do; ādara—honor; āra—and; jata—which; deba-gaṇa—demigods; miśra—mixed; sattwa—goodness; agaṇana—countless; nija—own; nija—own; kārjera—of work; īśwara—master.

     Please faithfully worship the one Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in transcendental goodness. The numberless demigods, whose goodness is mixed with other modes, are entrusted with specific duties.

Text 3 

se sabe sammāna kori'         bhajo' eka-mātra hari
jini sarba-īśwara-īśwara
māyā jāṅra chāyā-śakti        tāṅ'te aikāntikī bhakti
sādhi' kāla kāṭo nirantara

     se sabe—all of them; sammāna—honor; kori'—doing; bhajo'—worship; eka-mātra—only; hari—Lord Kṛṣṇa; jini—in whom; sarba—all; īśwara—of controllers; īśwara—the conttoller; māyā—Maya; jāṅra—of whom; chāyā—shadow; śakti—potency; tāṅ'te—of Him; aikāntikī—unmotivated; bhakti—devotion; sādhi'—doing; kāla—time; kāṭaḥ—pass; nirantara—always.

     Honor all the demigods, but worship Lord Kṛṣṇa alone. He is the master of all masters. Goddess Māyā is His shadow potency. Please pass your time always serving Him with unalloyed devotion.

Text 4 

mūlete siñcile jala      śākhā-pallabera bala
śire bari nāhi kārjakara
hari-bhakti āche jaṅra        sarba-deba bandhu tāṅra
bhakte sabe korena ādara

     mūlete—the root; siñcile—water; jala—with water; śākhā-pallabera—the branches and leaves; bala—strength; śire—on the head; bari—water; nāhi—not; kārjakara—to be done; hari-bhakti—devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa; āche—is; jaṅra—of whom; sarba-deba—all the demigods; bandhu—friend; tāṅra—of Him; bhakte—devoted; sabe—all; korena—do; ādara—worship.

     If one waters a tree's roots, the leaves and branches will become strong. One should not water the top part of the tree. All the demigods become friends of Lord Kṛṣṇa's devotee. They honor him.

Text 5 

binoda kohiche mana      rādhā-kṛṣṇa-śrī-caraṇa
bhajo bhajo bhajo nirantara

     binoda—Bhaktivinoda; kohiche—says; mana—O heart; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-śrī-caraṇa—the graceful feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; bhajaḥ—worship; nirantara—always.

     O my heart, Bhaktivinoda tells you this: Please always worship, worship, worship the graceful feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.




Song 5

Text 1

mana, keno e saṁśoya
joḍa prati ghṛṇā kori'       bhajite premera hori
swarūpa lakhite koro bhoya

     mana—O heart; kenaḥ—why?; e—this; saṁśoya—world of birth and death; joḍa—matter; prati—to; ghṛṇā—hatred; kori'—doing; bhajite—to worship; premera—of love; hori—Lord Kṛṣṇa; swarūpa—form; lakhite—to attain; koraḥ—do; bhoya—fear.

     O my heart, you hate the material world. Why do you hesitate to worship Lord Kṛṣṇa with love? You are afraid to think of a form.

Text 2 

swarūpa korite dhyāna         pache joḍa pāya sthāna
ei bhoye bhabā' bhrama-moya
nirākāra nirañjana       sarba-byāpī sanātana
aswarūpa koricho niścoya

     swarūpa—own nature; korite—to do; dhyāna—maeditation; pache—behind; joḍa—matter; pāya—ataining; sthāna—place; ei—this; bhoye—fear; bhabā'—meditating; bhrama-moya—full of illusion; nirākāra—formless; nirañjana—without qualities; sarba-byāpī—all pervading; sanātana—eternal; aswarūpa—intangible; korichaḥ—do; niścoya—certainty.

     You think that if you meditate on a form you will remain entangled in the world of matter. Pushed by that fear, you meditate on the impersonal Brahman. You are certain the Supreme is formless, qualityless, all-pervading, eternal, and intangible.

Text 3 

abhāba-dharmera baśe          swabhāba nā citta paśe
bhābera abhāba tahe hoya
tyaja ei tarka-pāśa      parānanda-parakāśa
kṛṣṇacandra koroho āśroya

     abhāba-dharmera—of this untrue nature; baśe—under the control; swabhāba—own nature; na—not; citta—heart; paśe—enter; bhābera—of the nature; abhāba—without a nature; tahe—in that; hoya—is; tyaja—renounce; ei—this; tarka-pāśa—ropes of logic; parānanda—transcendental bliss; parakāśa—manifestation; kṛṣṇacandra—Lord Kṛṣṇa; korohaḥ—do; āśroya—shelter.

     O my heart, in the grip of these illusions you do not understand the form of the Supreme Lord. What is true you think is an illusion. Please cut the ropes of false logic and take shelter of supremely blissful Lord Kṛṣṇacandra.

Text 4 

sac-cid-ānanda-moya      kṛṣṇera swarūpa hoya
sarbānanda-mādhurya niloya
sarbatra sampūrṇa-rūpa        ei eka aparūpa
sarba-byāpī brahme tāhā noya

     sac-cid-ānanda-moya—eternal and full of knowledge and bliss; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; swarūpa—form; hoya—is; sarbānanda—all bliss; mādhurya—sweetness; niloya—abode; sarbatra—everywhere; sampūrṇa-rūpa—perfect abnd complete; ei—this; eka—one; aparūpa—wonderful; sarba-byāpī—all pervading; brahme—Brahman; tāhā—Him; noya—not.

     Lord Kṛṣṇa's form is eternal and full of knowledge and bliss. It is the abode of sweetness and bliss. These wonderful features are not present in the all-pervading impersonal Brahman

Text 5 

ata eva brahma tā'ra          aṅga-kānti su-bistāra
brhat boliyā taṅre koya
brahma para-brahma jei        śrī-kṛṣṇa-swarūpa sei
binodera jāhāte praṇoya

     ata eva—therefore; brahma—Brahman; tā'ra—of Him; aṅga—of the body; kānti—the effulgence; su-bistāra—expanded; brhat—great; boliyā—saying; taṅre—of Him; koya—says; brahma—Brahman; para-brahma—Supreme Brahman; jei—which; śrī-kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; swarūpa—form; sei—this; binodera—of Bhaktivinoda; jāhāte—to Him; praṇoya—love.

     The impersonal Brahman is the effulgence emanating fro Lord Kṛṣṇa's body. This I say. The words "Brahman" and “Supreme Brahman" refer to Lord Kṛṣṇa's form. With that form Bhaktivinoda has fallen in love.




Song 6

Text 1

mana, tumi paḍile ki chāra?
nabadwīpa pāṭha kori'         nyāya-ratna nāma dhori'
bhekera kac kaci koile sāra

     mana—O heart; tumi—you; paḍile—fallen; ki—why?; chāra—pile of ashes; nabadwīpa—Navadvipa; pāṭha—study; kori'—doing; nyāya-ratna—the jewel of logic; nāma—named; dhori'—holding; bhekera—of a frog; kac—kac!; kaci—kac!; koile—does; sāra—best.

     O my heart, what piles of ashes are you studying now? Studying in Navadvīpa, you earned the title "Nyāya-ratna" (jewel of logic). But the truth is that all your words are like the frogs' announcement, "Kach! Kach!" 

Text 2 

drabyādi padārtha-jñana       chalādi nigraha-sthāna
samabāya korile bicāra
tarkera carama phala          bhoyaṅkara halāhala
nāhi bicārile durṇibāra

     drabya—things; ādi—beginning with; padārtha—the meanings of words; jñāna—knowledge; chala—trickery; ādi—beginning with; nigraha-sthāna—logical errors; samabāya—connection; korile—did; bicāra—consideration; tarkera—of logic; carama—finbal; phala—fruit; bhoyaṅkara—fearful; halāhala—poison; nāhi—not; bicārile—considered; durṇibāra—difficult to overcome.

     You thought and spoke of the different branches of logic, about the meanings of words (padārtha), about "things as they are (dravya), about flaws in logical arguments (nigraha-sthāna), about similarities between things (chala), and about relationships between things (samavāya). But you did not know that the fruit of logic was filled with a fearful deadly poison.

Text 3 

hṛdoya kathiṇa ho'lo          bhakti-bīja nā bārilo
kise ho'be bhaba-sindhu-pāra?
anumile je iśwara        se kulāla-cakrādhāra
sādhana kemone ho'be tāra?

     hṛdoya—heart; kathiṇa—hard; ho'laḥ—is; bhakti-bīja—the seed of devotional service; nā—not; bārilaḥ—groes; kise—what kind?; ho'be—will be; bhaba—of birth and death; sindhu—of the ocean; pāra—the farther shore; anumile—conjectures; je—who; iśwara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; se—He; kulāla-cakrādhāra—of a potter; sādhana—action; kemone—like what; ho'be—will be; tāra—of him.

     O my heart, you are very hard. How will the seed of devotion grow in you? How will you take me to the farther shore of the ocean of birth and death? You think the Supreme Lord creates the world like a potter makes a pot. To what kind of spiritual life will you lead me?

Text 4 

sahaja-samādhi tyaji'         anumiti māna bhaji
tarka-niṣṭhā hṛdoya tomāra
se hṛdoye kṛṣṇa-dhana         nāhi pana sukhāsana
adho dhik sei tarka chāra

     sahaja—natural; samādhi—meditation; tyaji'—renouncing; anumiti—of logic; māna—pride; bhaji—worship; tarka—in logic; niṣṭhā—faith; hṛdoya—O heart; tomāra—of you; se—this; hṛdoye—heart; kṛṣṇa-dhana—the treasure that is Śrī Kṛṣṇa; nāhi—not; pana—attains; sukhāsana—a comfortable seat; adhaḥ—below; dhik—fie!; sei—this; tarka—logic; chāra—pile of ashes.

     Turning from meditation on the Supreme, you worship logic. O my heart, you have faith only in logic. That is why the great treasure Śrī Kṛṣṇa will not happily sit in my heart. Ah! To hell with this logic! This logic is worthless like a pile of ashes!

Text 5 

anyāya nyāyera mata      dūra koro abirata
bhajo kṛṣṇacandra sārāt-sāra

     anyāya—illogical; nyāyera—of logic; mata—ideas; dūra—far away; koraḥ—do; abirata—without stop; bhajaḥ—worship; kṛṣṇacandra—Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra; sārāt-sāra—the geratest of the great.

     Please throw this illogical logic far away. Please worship Lord Kṛṣṇacandra, the greatest of the great.




Song 7

Texts 1 and 2

mana, jogī ho'te tomāra bāsanā
joga-śāstra adhyayana         niyama-yama-sādhana
prāṇāyama āsana-racanā

pratyāhāra dhyāna dhṛti       samādhite ho'le bratī
phala kibā hoibe bolo nā
deho mana śuṣka kori'         rohibe kumbhaka dhori'
brahmātmatā koribe bhābanā

     mana—O my heart; jogī—yogi; ho'te—is; tomāra—of you; bāsanā—the desire; joga-śāstra—teh yoga scriptures; adhyayana—study; niyama-yama-sādhana—with practices of yama and niyama; prāṇāyama—with controlling the breath; āsana-racanā—sitting postures; pratyāhāra—withdrawing from the external world; dhyāna—meditation; dhṛti—rapt meditation; samādhite—trance; ho'le—is; bratī—vowed; phala—fruit; kibā—what?; hoibe—will be; bolaḥ—say; nā—not; dehaḥ—body; mana—heart; śuṣka—dry and withered; kori'—doing; rohibe—will keep; kumbhaka—stopping the breathing; dhori'—manifesting; brahma—the Supreme Brahman; ātmatā—the identity; koribe—will be; bhābanā—meditation.

     O my heart, now you want to be yogī. Now you study the yoga scriptures. Now you vow to practice yama (controlling the senses), niyama (controlling the mind), prāṇāyāma (breath control), āsana (sitting postures), pratyāhāra (withdrawing from the material world), dhyāna (meditation), dhṛti (rapt meditation), and samādhi (trance). What wonderful benefit will you gain from all this? You cannot say. Making the body and heart dry and withered, and stopping the breath, you will imagine I have become the Supreme Brahman.

Text 3 

aṣṭādaśa siddhi pā'be         paramārtha bhule jā'be
aiśwaryādi koribe kāmanā
sthūla joḍa parihari'        sukṣmete prabeśa kori'
punarāya bhugibe jatanā

     aṣṭādaśa—18; siddhi—perfections; pā'be—will attain; paramārtha—supreme benefit; bhule—forget; jā'be—will be; aiśwarya—opulences; ādi—beginning; koribe—will do; kāmanā—desires; sthūla—gross; joḍa—matter; parihari'—renouncing; sukṣmete—in what is subtle; prabeśa—manifestation; kori'—doing; punarāya—again; bhugibe—will experience; jatanā—torment.

     Attaining the eighteen mystic perfections, you will forget the true goal of life. You will hanker for more and more mystic powers. Leaving the gross world behind, you will enter the world of subtle matter, but still you will suffer.

Text 4 

ātmā nitya śuddha dhana       hari-dāsa akiñcana
joge tā'ra ki phala ghaṭanā
koro' bhakti-jogāśroya        nā thākibe kona bhoya
sahaja amṛta sambhābanā

     ātmā—soul; nitya—eternal; śuddha—pure; dhana—wealth; hari-dāsa—servant of Kṛṣṇa; akiñcana—without any other property; joge—in yoga; tā'ra—of him; ki—what; phala—fruit; ghaṭanā—occurance; koro'—do; bhakti-jogāśroya—taking shelter of the yoga of devotional service; nā—not; thākibe—will stay; kona—what?; bhoya—fear; sahaja—natural; amṛta—nectar; sambhābanā—possibility.

     The eternal soul already possesses a great wealth. He has nothing to do with matter. He is a servant of Lord Kṛṣṇa. What benefit will yoga bring to the soul? Therefore please take shelter of devotional service. Then you will not have any fears. Then you will taste nectar.

Text 5 

binodera e minati        chāri' anya-joga-gati
koro' rādhā-kṛṣṇa-arādhāna

     binodera—of Bhaktivinoda; e—this; minati—prayer; chāri'—renounicng; anya-joga-gati—other yoga paths; koro'—do; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-arādhāna—worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

     Here is Bhaktivinoda's request: Turning away from all other yogas, please worship Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.




Song 8

Text 1

ohe bhāi, mana keno brahma ho'te cāya
ki āścarja ko'bo kā'ke        sadopāsya bolo jā'ke
tā'te keno āpane misāya

     ohe—O; bhāi,—brother; mana—mind; kenaḥ—why?; brahma—Brahman; ho'te—who; cāya—desiring; ki—what?; āścarja—wonder; ko'baḥ—will be; kā'ke—to which; sadopāsya—always the object of worship; bolaḥ—please tell; jā'ke—to which; tā'te—to that; kenaḥ—why?; āpane—own; misāya—merging.

     O my dear brother heart, why do you hanker after the impersonal Brahman? What wonderful thing will you obtain by always worshiping Brahman? Please tell me. Why do you wish to merge with Brahman?

Text 2 

bindu nāhi hoya sindhu        bāmana nā sparśe indu
reṇu ki bhūdhara-rūpa pāya
lābha mātra aparādha          paramārtha hoya bādha
sāyujya-bādhīra hāya hāya

     bindu—a drop; nāhi—not; hoya—becomes; sindhu—the ocean; bāmana—a dwarf; nā—not; sparśe—touches; indu—the moon; reṇu—dust; ki—whether?; bhūdhara-rūpa—the form of a mountain; pāya—attaining; lābha—attainment; mātra—only; aparādha—offense; paramārtha—the supreme benefit; hoya—is; bādha—obstruction; sāyujya-bādhīra—the obstacle of impersonal liberation; hāya—alas; hāya—alas.

     A drop of water cannot become an ocean. A dwarf cannot touch the moon. Can a grain of dust become a mountain? Impersonal liberation is an obstacle. It blocks the true goal of life. It is only an offense.

Text 3 

e heno duranta buddhi         tyaji' koro' sattwa-śuddhi
anweṣaha pritīra upāya
sājujya-nirbāṇa-ādi          śāstre śabda dekho jadi
se sabe bhaktira aṅge jāya

     e—this; henaḥ—like; duranta—mischievous; buddhi—intelligence; tyaji'—abandoning; koro'—do; sattwa-śuddhi—purity of existence; anweṣaha—seek; pritīra—of love; upāya—the means; sājujya-nirbāṇa-ādi—beginning with impersonal liberation and nirvana; śāstre—in the scriptures; śabda—words; dekhaḥ—see; jadi—if; se—they; sabe—all; bhaktira—of devotional service; aṅge—parts; jāya—attaining.

     Turning away from all these horrible misconceptions, please become pure. Seek the path of spiritual love. If you see them in the scriptures, please know that words like "sāyujya" or "nirvāṇa" are meant to describe the stages of devotional service.

Text 4 

kṛṣṇa-prīti-phalamoya         tat-twam-asi-ādi hoya
sādhaka carame kṛṣṇa pāya
akhaṇda ānandamoya       bṛndābana kṛṣṇāloya
para-brahma-swarūpa jānāya

     kṛṣṇa—for Lord Kṛṣṇa; prīti—love; phala—fruit; moya—consisting; tat-twam-asi-ādi—beginning with the words "tat tvam asi"; hoya—is; sādhaka—the spiritual aspirant; carame—at the end; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; pāya—attaining; akhaṇda—unbroken; ānandamoya—blissful; bṛndābana—Vṛndāvana; kṛṣṇāloya—Lord Kṛṣṇa's abode; para-brahma-swarūpa—the form of the Supreme Brahman; jānāya—make to experience.

     "Tat tvam asi" and other teachings of the scriptures give love for Kṛṣṇa as their final fruit. In the end they bring the devotee to Kṛṣṇa. They make the devotee see Vṛndāvana, Lord Kṛṣṇa's eternal, blissful, spiritual abode.

Text 5 

tā' ho'te kiraṇa-jāla         brahma-rūpe śobhe bhālo
māyika jagat camatkāra
māyā-baddha jība tāhe         nirbṛta hoite cāhe
sūrjābhābe khadyotera prāya

     tā'—of Him; ho'te—is; kiraṇa—of light; jāla—network; brahma-rūpe—in the form of Brahman; śobhe—shines; bhālaḥ—good; māyika—of maya; jagat—of the world; camatkāra—wonder; māyā-baddha—bound by maya; jība—souls; tāhe—in that; nirbṛta—free from sufferings; hoite—become; cāhe—desire; sūrja—of the sun; abhābe—in the absence; khadyotera—of fireflies; prāya—like.

     The impersonal Brahman is Lord Kṛṣṇa's bodily effulgence. It fill's Māyā's world with wonder. The souls in Māyā's prison may sometimes escape into it. As fireflies seem brilliant when the sun does not shine, so the impersonal Brahman is glorious only when Lord Kṛṣṇa's form remains unseen.

Text 6 

jadi kabhu bhāgyodoye         sādhu-guru-samāśroye
bṛndābana sammukhete bhāya
kṛṣṇākṛṣṭa ho'ye tabe         khudra-rasa-anubhabe
brahma chāri' para-brahme dhāya

     jadi—if; kabhu—when; bhāgya—of good fortune; udoye—arisal; sādhu—of the devotees; guru—and the spiritual master; samāśroye—in the shelter; bṛndābana—Vṛndāvana; sammukhete—in the presence; bhāya—splendidly manifest; kṛṣṇa—to Lord Kṛṣṇa; ākṛṣṭa—attracted; ho'ye—is; tabe—then; khudra—insignificant; rasa—nectar; anubhabe—in the perception; brahma—Brahman; chāri'—renouncing; para-brahme—to the Supreme Brahman; dhāya—runs.

     If your good fortune arises, you will take shelter of the spiritual master and the Lord's devotees. Then the world of Vṛndāvana will be splendidly manifest before you. You will attracted to Lord Kṛṣṇa. Turning from the paltry so-called nectar of the impersonal Brahman, you will run to the supreme personal Brahman.

Text 7 

śukādira su-jībana       koro' bhāi ālocana
e dāsa dhoriche taba pāya

     śukādira—of the sages headed by Sukadeva Gosvami; su-jībana—the life; koro'—do; bhāi—O my brother; ālocana—seeing; e—this; dāsa—servant; dhoricheholds; taba—of you; pāya—attaining.

     This servant grasps your feet and begs: O my brother, please try to understand Lord Kṛṣṇa, the life of Śukadeva and the sages.




Song 9

Text 1

mana re, keno āra barṇa abhimāna
marile pātakī ho'ye      jamadūte jā'be lo'ye
nā koribe jātira sammāna

     mana—heart; re—O; kenaḥ—why?; āra—or; barṇa—caste; abhimāna—pride; marile—dies; pātakī—sinner; ho'ye—is; jamadūte—Yamadutas; jā'be—will go; lo'ye—accepts; nā—not; koribe—will do; jātira—of birth; sammāna—honor.

     O my heart, why are you proud of my caste? When a sinner dies, the yamadūtas carry him away. They don't respect his noble birth.

Text 2 

jadi bhālo karma koro'        swarga-bhoga ataḥ para
tā'te bipra cāṇḍāla samāna
narake-o dui jane        daṇḍa pā'be eka sane
janmāntare samana bidhāna

     jadi—if; bhālaḥ—good; karma—deeds; koro'—you do; swarga-bhoga—happiness of Svargaloka; ataḥ para—then; tā'te—manifest; bipra—brāhmaṇa; cāṇḍāla—outcaste; samāna—the same; narake-aḥ—Narakaloka; dui—both; jane—persons; daṇḍa—punishment; pā'be—attain; eka sane—together; janma—birth; antare—another; samana—the same; bidhāna—arrangement.

     If they do good deeds, the brāhmaṇa and the outcaste alike go to Svargaloka. If they act badly, the brāhmaṇa and the outcaste alike are punished in hell. The same rules govern the future births of the brāhmaṇa and the outcaste.

Text 3 

tabe keno abhimāna       lo'ye tuccha barṇa-māna
maraṇa abadhi jā'ra māna
ucca barṇa-pada dhori'        barṇāntare ghṛṇā kori'
narakera nā koro' sandhāna

     tabe—of you; kenaḥ—why?; abhimāna—pride; lo'ye—accepts; tuccha—insignificant; barṇa-māna—pride of caste; maraṇa—death; abadhi—op to; jā'ra—old age; māna—pride; ucca—great; barṇa-pada—attainment of caste; dhori'—holding; barṇāntare—another caste; ghṛṇā—contempt; kori'—doing; narakera—of hell; nā—not; koro'—do; sandhāna—search.

     Why are you proud? Pride of caste is petty. If till the moment of death you remain proud of your high caste and contemptuous of other castes, you will only beg to be sent to hell.

Text 4 

sāmājika māna lo'ye      thāko bhāi bipra ho'ye
baiṣṇabe nā koro apamāna
ādara byāpāri ho'ye      bibada jāhāja lo'ye
kabhu nāhi kore' buddhimāna

     sāmājika—social; māna—pride; lo'ye—accepts; thākaḥ—stay; bhāi—O my brother; bipra—brāhmaṇa; ho'ye—is; baiṣṇabe—in a Vaiṣṇava; nā—not; koraḥ—does; apamāna—disrespect; ādara—honor; byāpāri—merchant; ho'ye—is; bibada—dispute; jāhāja—a ship; lo'ye—accepts; kabhu—when; nāhi—not; kore'—does; buddhimāna—intelligent.

     O my brother, you may live as a brāhmaṇa and accept the honors others offer. Still, do not dishonor any Vaiṣṇava. A petty merchant is naturally respectful to a great merchant who owns many ships. He will not pick a fight, if he is intelligent 

Text 5 

tabe jadi kṛṣṇa-bhakti        sādha' tumi jathā-śakti
sonāya sohāga pā'be sthāna
sārthaka hoibe sūtra          sarba-lābha ihā-mūtra
binoda koribe stuti-gāna

     tabe—then; jadi—if; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa; sādha'—attaining; tumi—you; jathā-śakti—as you have the power; sonāya—a great treasure; sohāga—affection; pā'be—will attain; sthāna—place; sārthaka—successful; hoibe—will be; sūtra—the string; sarba—all; lābha—attainment; ihā-mūtra—in this life and the next; binoda—Bhaktivinoda; koribe—will do; stuti-gāna—prayers.

     If you serve Lord Kṛṣṇa as far as you are able, you will attain a great treasure. Your efforts will meet success. You will attain everything in this life and the next. Bhaktivinoda will sing your glories.




Song 10

Text 1

mana re, keno koro bidyāra gauraba
smṛti-śāstra byākaraṇa        nānā-bhāṣā-ālocana
bṛddhi kore' jaśera saurabha

     mana—heart; re—O; kenaḥ—why?; koraḥ—you do; bidyāra—of knowledge; gauraba—respect; smṛti-śāstra—the smrti-sastras; byākaraṇa—grammar; nānā—various; bhāṣā—languages; ālocana—study; bṛddhi—increase; kore'—does; jaśera—of fame; saurabha—the fragrance.

     O my heart, why do you worship material knowledge? Your learning in smṛti-śāstra, Sanskrit grammar, and various languages expands the sweet fragrance of your fame.

Text 2 

kintu dekho cinta kori'       jadi nā bhajile hori
bidyā taba kebala rauraba
kṛṣṇa prati aurakti      sei bīje janme bhakti
bidyā ho'te tāhā asambhaba

     kintu—however; dekhaḥ—look; cinta—thinking; kori'—doing; jadi—if; nā—not; bhajile—worship; hori—Kṛṣṇa; bidyā—knowledge; taba—your; kebala—only; rauraba—hell; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; prati—to; aurakti—love; sei—this; bīje—the seed; janme—birth; bhakti—devotion; bidyā—knowledge; ho'te—is; tāhā—that; asambhaba—not possible.

     Look, please think about this: If you do not worship Lord Kṛṣṇa, then mere knowledge will turn your life into hell. Attraction to Kṛṣṇa is the seed that grows into devotional service. Mere knowledge cannot grow in that way.

Text 3 

bidyāra mārjana tā'ra         kabhu kabhu apakāra
jagatete kori anubhaba
je bidyāra ālocane       kṛṣṇa-rati sphure mane
tāhāri ādara jāno' saba

     bidyāra—of knwoledge; mārjana——purification; tā'ra—of that; kabhu—when; kabhu—when; apakāra—harm; jagatete—to the world; kori—does; anubhaba—attraction; je—which; bidyāra—of knowledge; ālocane—in the consideration; kṛṣṇa-rati—love for Kṛṣṇa; sphure—manifest; mane—in the heart; tāhāri—to him; ādara—respect; jāno'—know; saba—all.

     I have seen how hair-splitting academic knowledge harms the world. But knowledge that makes one attracted to Kṛṣṇa delights everyone.

Text 4 

bhakti bādhā jāhā ho'te       se bidyāra mastakete
padāghāta koro' akaitaba
saraswatī kṛṣṇa-priyā         kṛṣṇa-bhakti tā'ra hiyā
binodera sei se baibhaba

     bhakti—devotional service; bādhā—obstacles; jāhā—which; ho'te—are; se—that; bidyāra—of knowledge; mastakete—at the head; padāghāta—kicking; koro'—do; akaitaba—sincerely; saraswatī—Goddess Sarasvatī; kṛṣṇa-priyā—dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa; tā'ra—of that; hiyā—heart; binodera—of Bhaktivinoda; sei—that; se—this; baibhaba—glory.

     Please earnestly kick the head of material knowledge, which is only an obstacle to devotional service. Goddess Sarasvatī is herself very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa. Devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa always stays in her heart. Devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa is the glory of Bhaktivinoda.




Song 11

Text 1

rūpera gauraba keno bhāi
anitya e kalebara        kabhu nāhi sthiratara
śamana āile kichu nāi
e aṅga śītala ho'be      aṅkhi spanda-hīna ro'be 
citāra āgune ho'be chāi

     rūpera—of beauty; gauraba—honor; kenaḥ—why?; bhāi—O brother; anitya—temporary; e—this; kalebara—body; kabhu—when; nāhi—not; sthiratara—steady; śamana—Yamaraja; āile—comes; kichu—something; nāi—not; e—this; aṅga—body; śītala—cold; ho'be—will be; aṅkhi—eyes; spanda-hīna—motionless; ro'be—will stay; citāra—of the funeral pyre; āgune—in the fire; ho'be—will become; chāi—ashes.

     O my brother, why are you so pleased by the beauty of the material body? The body is not eternal. It will not stay beautiful forever. When Yamarāja comes, nothing will remain. The limbs will grow cold. They eyes will be still. Then the flames of the funeral pyre will turn them into ashes.

Text 2 

je saundarja hero        darpaṇete nirantara
swa-śibāra hoibe bhojana
je bastre ādara koro'         jeba ābharaṇa poro'
kothā saba rohibe takhana?

     je—which; saundarja—beauty; heraḥ—see; darpaṇete—in the mirror; nirantara—always; swa—of dogs; śibāra—of jackals; hoibe—will be; bhojana—food; je—which; bastre—in clothing; ādara—liking; koro'—do; jeba—whatever; ābharaṇa—ornaments; poro'—great; kothā—where?; saba—all; rohibe—will stay; takhana—then.

     Again and again you gaze at your beauty in the mirror. Where will you keep your favorite clothes and ornaments when the dogs and jackals eat your body?

Text 3 

dārā suta bandhu sabe         śmaśāne tomāra lo'be
dagdha kori' gṛhete āsibe
tumi kā'ra ke tomāra          ebe bujhi dekho sāra
deho-nāśa abaśya ghaṭibe

     dārā—wife; suta—children; bandhu—friends and kinsmen; sabe—all; śmaśāne—in th4e crematorium; tomāra—of you; lo'be—accept; dagdha—burned; kori'—doing; gṛhete—at home; āsibe—will come; tumi—you; kā'ra—of whom?; ke—who?; tomāra—of you; ebe—now; bujhi—I know; dekhaḥ—see; sāra—best; dehaḥ—of the body; nāśa—destruction; abaśya—inevitable; ghaṭibe—will be.

     After burning your body at the cremation ground, your wife, children, friends, and kinsmen will all return to their homes. With whom have you a lasting relationship? Who has a lasting relationship with you? Please know this: The destruction of your body is inevitable.

Text 4 

su-nitya-sambala cāo          hari-guṇa sadā gāo
hari-nāma japoho sadāi
ku-tarka chāḍiyā mana         koro' kṛṣṇa ārādhana
binodera āśroya tāhāi

     su—very; nitya—eternal; sambala—wealth; cāaḥ—desire; hari-guṇa—the glories of Kṛṣṇa; sadā—always; gāaḥ—sing; hari-nāma—the names of Lord Kṛṣṇa; japohaḥ—chant; sadāi—always; ku-tarka—false logic; chāriyā—renouncing; mana—O heart; koro'—do; kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; ārādhana—worship; binodera—of Bhaktivinoda; āśroya—shelter; tāhāi—in Him.

     O my heart, if you wish to find a treasure that is eternal, then please chant Lord Kṛṣṇa's glories. Always chant Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. Turn away from the fallacies that are material logic, and worship Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is Bhaktivinoda's shelter.




Song 12

Text 1

mana re dhana-mada nitānta asāra
dhana jana bitta jata         e dehera anugata
deho gele se sakala chāra

     mana—heart; re—O; dhana—for wealth; mada—passion; nitānta—extreme; asāra—useless; dhana—wealth; jana—followers; bitta—treasure; jata—which; e—this; dehera—of the body; anugata—followed; dehaḥ—body; gele—goes; se—that; sakala—all; chāra—pile of ashes.

     O my heart, you passion for wealth is foolish. Wealth and servants only follow the body. When the body goes, all your wealth will turn into ashes.

Text 2 

bidyāra jateka ceṣṭā          cikitsaka upadeṣṭā
keho deho rākhibāre nāre
ajapā hoile śeṣa         deha-mātra abaśeṣa
jība nāhi thākena ādhāre

     bidyāra—of knowledge; jateka—which; ceṣṭā—action; cikitsaka—cure; upadeṣṭā—teaching; kehaḥ—someone; dehaḥ—body; rākhibāre—to protect; nāre—is not able; ajapā—reath; hoile—is; śeṣa—end; deha-mātra—body only; abaśeṣa—remaining; jība—soul; nāhi—not; thākena—stays; ādhāre—in the container.

     Even the most learned physician cannot protect the body. When the breath leaves, and the body is breathless, the soul will not stay in that empty shell.

Text 3 

dhane jadi prāṇa dita         dhani rājā nā marita
dharāmara hoito rābaṇa
dhane nāhi rākhe deho         deho gele nāhe keho
ata eba ki koribe dhana

     dhane—in wealth; jadi—if; prāṇa—breath; dita—given; dhani—welahty person; rājā—king; nā—not; marita—dead; dhara—held; amara—freedom from death; hoitaḥ—was; rābaṇa—Ravana; dhane—in wealth; nāhi—not; rākhe—saved; dehaḥ—body; dehaḥ—body; gele—goes; nāhe—not; kehaḥ—anyone; ata eba—therefore; ki—what?; koribe—will do; dhana—wealth.

     If wealth gave eternal life, then wealthy kings would never die. Rāvaṇa thought he had become immortal, At the end wealth will not save the body. When death comes, no one can stop it. Therefore, what is the use of your wealth?

Text 4 

jadi thāke bahu dhana         nije ho'be akiñcana
baiṣṇabera koro upakāra
jībe doyā anukhaṇa       rādhā-kṛṣṇa-arādhana
koro sadā ho'ye sadācāra

     jadi—if; thāke—stays; bahu—many; dhana—wealth; nije—own; ho'be—will be; akiñcana—without any possessions; baiṣṇabera—of a Vaiṣṇava; koraḥ—do; upakāra—help; jībe—to the soul; doyā—mercy; anukhaṇa—moment after moment; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-arādhana      koraḥ—do; sadā—aklways; ho'ye—is; sadācāra—good conduct.

     If you have great wealth, don't keep it. Use it to help the Vaiṣṇavas. Be kind to everyone always, always worship Śrī Śrī Rādhā, and always be saintly.




Song 13

Text 1

mana tumi sannyāsī sājite keno cāo
bāhirera sāja jata       antarete phāṅki tata
dambha pūji śarīra nācāo

     mana—O my heart; tumi—you; sannyāsī—as a sannyasi; sājite—to dress; kenaḥ—why?; cāaḥ—desire; bāhirera—external; sāja—dress; jata—which; antarete—in the heart; phāṅki—a hoax; tata—that; dambha—pride; pūji—worshiping; śarīra—body; nācāaḥ—dance.

     O my heart, why do you want to dress like a sannyāsī? Outside you may dress like that, but inside you will know very well that you are only a pretender.

Text 2 

āmāra bacana dharo       antara biśuddha koro
kṛṣṇāmṛta sadā koro pāna
jībana sahaje jāya       bhakti-bādhā nāhi pāya
tad-upāya koroho sandhāna

     āmāra—of me; bacana—the words; dharaḥ—please grasp; antara—within; biśuddha—pure; koraḥ—do; kṛṣṇāmṛta—the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sadā—always; koraḥ—do; pāna—drinking; jībana—life; sahaje—natural; jāya—go; bhakti-bādhā—obstacles to devotional service; nāhi—not; pāya—attaining; tad-upāya—the way of that; korohaḥ—do; sandhāna—spiritual practices.

     Please try to grasp my words: Be pure within. Always drink the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Live a natural life. Don't do anything that will become an obstacle to devotional service. Accept the spiritual practices that lead to devotion.

Text 3 

anāyāse jāhā pāo         tāhe tuṣṭa hoye jāo
āḍambare nā koro prayāsa
pūrṇa-bastra jadi nāi         kaupīna paro he bhāi
śīta-bastra kanthā bahir-bāsa

     anāyāse—easilt; jāhā—what; pāaḥ—attain; tāhe—that; tuṣṭa—happy; hoye—is; jāaḥ—go; āḍambare—a pompous display; nā—not; koraḥ—do; prayāsa—effort; pūrṇa—full; bastra—garments; jadi—if; nāi—not; kaupīna—loincloth; paraḥ—best; he—O; bhāi—brother; śīta—cold wealth; bastra—garments; kanthā—pathwork quilt; bahir-bāsa—outer garment.

     Happily accept whatever comes easily. Don't try to make a pompous display of your opulence. If you can't get many clothes, wear a loincloth. In the winter wear an old quilt.

Text 4 

aguru candana nāi        mṛttikā-tilaka bhāi
hārera badale dharo mālā
ei rūpe āśā-pāśa         sukhādira ku-bilāsa
kharbi chāro soṁsārera jwālā

     aguru—aguru; candana—sandal; nāi—not; mṛttikā-tilaka—earth tilaka; bhāi—brother; hārera—of necklace; badale—exchange; dharaḥ—accept; mālā—tulasi-mala; ei—this; rūpe—way; āśā-pāśa—the ropes of material desires; sukhādira—of material pleasures; ku-bilāsa—bad actions; kharbi—diminish; chāraḥ—renounce; soṁsārera—of the material world; jwālā—the flames.

     O my brother, don't accept fragrances of sandal and aguru. Wear earth-tilaka. Exchange your necklaces for tulasī beads. Turn from material sense pleasures. Cut the ropes of material desires. Escape the flames of birth and death.

Text 5 

sannyāsa-bairāgya-bidhi       sei āśramera nidhi
tahe kabhu nā koro ādara
se saba ādare bhāi       soṁsāre nistāra nāi
dāmbhikera liṅga nirantara

     sannyāsa—of sannyasa; bairāgya—renunciation; bidhi—rules; sei—this; āśramera—of the asrama; nidhi—treasure; tahe—in that; kabhu—when; nā—not; koraḥ—do; ādara—honor; se—that; saba—all; ādare—honor; bhāi—O my brother; soṁsāre—in the material world; nistāra—deliverance; nāi—not; dāmbhikera—of arrogance; liṅga—the sign; nirantara—always.

     Renunication is the great treasure of the sannyāsa-āśrama. O my brother, please don't hanker after honor from others. A proud person who seeks honor from others will not delivered from this world of birth and death.

Text 6 

tumi to' caitanya-dāsa        hari-bhakti taba āśā
āśramera liṅge kiba phala
pratiṣṭhā koroho dūra         bāsa taba śāntipura
sādhu kṛpā tomāra sambala

     tumi—you; to'—indeed; caitanya-dāsa—a servant of Lord Caitanya; hari-bhakti—devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa; taba—od you; āśā—desire; āśramera—of the asrama; liṅge—the sign; kiba—how?; phala—fruit; pratiṣṭhā—fame; korohaḥ—do; dūra—far away; bāsa—residence; taba—of you; śāntipura—Santipura; sādhu—of the devotees; kṛpā—mercy; tomāra—of you; sambala—treasure.

     You are Lord Caitanya's servant. Your real hankering is to serve Lord Kṛṣṇa. What will you gain by accepting the outward signs of the sannyāsa-āśrama? Throw the desire for fame far away. Make you home in Śāntipura, and make the Vaiṣṇavas' mercy your true wealth.

Text 7 

baiṣṇabera paricoya      abaśyaka nāhi hoya
āḍambare kabhu nāhi jāo
binodera nibedana        rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-gāna
phukāri' phukāri' sadā gāo

     baiṣṇabera—of a Vaisnava; paricoya—the outward signs; abaśyaka—neccessity; nāhi—not; hoya—is; āḍambare—pompous display; kabhu—when; nāhi—not; jāaḥ—go; binodera—of Bhaktivinoda; nibedana—statement; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-gāna—singing the glories of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; phukāri'—loudly chanting; phukāri'—chanting; sadā—always; gāaḥ—sing.

     It is not necessary to accept the outward signs of an advanced Vaiṣṇava. Don't try for an outward show of how great you are. Simply always chant the glories of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.




Song 14

Text 1

mana tumi tīrthe sadā rata
ayodhyā mathurā māyā kāśī kāñci abantiyā
dwārabatī āra āche jata

     mana—O my heart; tumi—you; tīrthe—in holy places; sadā—always; rata—devoted; ayodhyā—Ayodhya; mathurā—Mathura; māyā—Maya; kāśī—Varanasi; kāñci—Kanci; abantiyā—Avantipura; dwārabatī—Dvaraka; āra—and; āche—are; jata—which.

     O my heart, you are always eager to visit holy places like Ayodhyā, Mathurā, Māyāpura, Vārāṇasī, Kāñcipura, Avantipura, and Dvārakā.

Text 2 

tumi cāho bhramibāre          e sakala bāre bāre
mukti-lābha koribāra tore
se sakala taba bhrama         nirarthaka pariśrama
citta sthira tīrthe nāhi kore

     tumi—you; cāhaḥ—wish; bhramibāre—to wander; e—this; sakala—all; bāre—again; bāre—and again; mukti-lābha—to attain liberation; koribāra—to do; tore—to you; se—that; sakala—all; taba—of you; bhrama—wandering; nirarthaka—useless; pariśrama—labor; citta—heart; sthira—steady; tīrthe—in the holy place; nāhi—not; kore—do.

     To attain liberation you wish to visit all these holy places again and again. O my heart, your visiting them is only useless labor, for you do not become peaceful and determined by all your pilgrimages.

Text 3 

tīrtha-phala sādhu-saṅga      sādhu-saṅge antaraṅga
śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhajana manohara
jathā sādhu tathā tīrtha      sthira kori' nija citta
sādhu-saṅga koro nirantara

     tīrtha—of the holy place; phala—result; sādhu-saṅga—association with devotees; sādhu-saṅge—in association with devotees; antaraṅga—confidential; śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhajana—worship of Lord Kṛṣṇa; manohara—beautiful; jathā—as; sādhu—devotees; tathā—so; tīrtha—holy place; sthira—steady; kori'—doing; nija—own; citta—heart; sādhu-saṅga—association of devotees; koraḥ—do; nirantara—always.

     The real benefit of holy places is the association of devotees. In the association of devotees please perform the beautiful and secret worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Wherever the devotees stay is a holy place. O my heart, please be peaceful and always associate with the Lord's devotees.

Text 4 

je tīrthe baiṣṇaba nāi        se tīrthe nāhi jāi
ki lābha hāṇṭiyā dūra-deśa
jathāya baiṣṇaba-gaṇa         sei sthāna bṛndābana
sei sthāne ānanda aśeṣa

     je—which; tīrthe—holy place; baiṣṇaba—the Vaisnavas; nāi—not; se—that; tīrthe—holy place; nāhi—not; jāi—I go; ki—why?; lābha—attainment; hāṇṭiyā—walking; dūra-deśa—to faraway places; jathāya—as; baiṣṇaba-gaṇa—the Vaisnavas; sei—that; sthāna—place; bṛndābana—Vṛndāvana; sei—that; sthāne—place; ānanda—bliss; aśeṣa—limitless.

     I will never visit any holy place where the Vaiṣṇavas do not stay. What will I gain by walking to those faraway places? Wherever the Vaiṣṇavas stay, that place is Vṛndāvana. That place is filled with limitless bliss.

Text 5 

kṛṣṇa-bhakti jei sthāne       mukti dāsī sei-khāne
salila tathāya mandākinī
giri tathā gobardhana         bhūmi tathā bṛndābana
ābirbhūta āpani hlādinī

     kṛṣṇa—to Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhakti—devotion; jei—which; sthāne—place; mukti—of liberation; dāsī—the goddess; sei-khāne—there; salila—water; tathāya—so; mandākinī—the celestial Ganga; giri—mountains; tathā—so; gobardhana—Govardhana; bhūmi—land; tathā—so; bṛndābana—Vṛndāvana; ābirbhūta—manifested; āpani—own; hlādinī—pleasure potency.

     Wherever Lord Kṛṣṇa is worshiped with devotion, the goddess of liberation always stays. The water in that place is the celestial Gaṅgā. The hills are Govardhana. The earth is Vṛndāvana. There the Lord's pleasure potency personally appears.

Text 6 

binoda kohiche bhāi      bhramiyā ki phala pāi
baiṣṇaba-sebana mora brata

     binoda—Bhaktivinoda; kohiche—says; bhāi—O my brothers; bhramiyā—wandering; ki—what?; phala—fruit; pāi—I attain; baiṣṇaba—of teh Vaisnavas; sebana—the service; mora—of me; brata—the vow.

     Bhaktivinoda says: O my brothers, what will I gain by visiting many holy places. My vow is always to serve the Vaiṣṇavas.




Song 15

Text 1

dekho mana brate jena nā hao ācchanna
kṛṣṇa-bhakti āśā kori'        ācho nānā brata dhori'
rādhā-kṛṣṇe korite prasanna

     dekhaḥ—see; mana—O my heart; brate—in vows; jena—by which; nā—not; hao—is; ācchanna—covered; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—devotion to Kṛṣṇa; āśā—desire; kori'—doing; āchaḥ—is; nānā—various; brata—vows; dhori'—holding; rādhā-kṛṣṇe—Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; korite—to make; prasanna—pleased.

     O my heart, look. Don't observe many vows. Yearning for direct devotional service, you perform many vows to make Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa pleased with you and kind to you.

Text 2 

bhakti se sahaja tattwa       citte tā'ra āche sattwa
tāhāra samṛddhi taba āśā
dekhibe bicāra kori'          su-kaṭhina brata dhori'
sahajera nā koro bināśa

     bhakti—devotional service; se—that; sahaja—natural; tattwa—truth; citte—in the heart; tā'ra—of that; āche—is; sattwa—truth; tāhāra—of that; samṛddhi—opulence; taba—of you; āśā—desire; dekhibe—to see; bicāra—consideration; kori'—doing; su-kaṭhina—very hard; brata—vows; dhori'—observing; sahajera—natural; nā—not; koraḥ—do; bināśa—destruction.

     Desiring to improve the natural devotion in the heart, you observe many hard vows. But be careful you do not destroy that natural devotion.

Text 3 

kṛṣṇa-arthe kaya-kleśa        tā'ra phala āche śeṣa
kintu tāhā sāmānya nā hoya
bhaktira bādhaka ho'le        bhakti āra nāhi phale
tapaḥ-phala hoibe niścoya

     kṛṣṇa-arthe—for Lord Kṛṣṇa's sake; kaya-kleśa—trouble to the bvody; tā'ra—of that; phala—result; āche—is; śeṣa—end; kintu—however; tāhā—of that; sāmānya—general; nā—not; hoya—is; bhaktira—of devotional service; bādhaka—obstacles; ho'le—are; bhakti—devotion; āra—and; nāhi—not; phale—result; tapaḥ-phala—the result of austerities; hoibe—will be; niścoya—without doubt.

     Troubling the body with austerities to please Lord Kṛṣṇa, you will attain a result that is not ordinary. But if your austerities are obstacles to devotional service, you will not attain devotion as your result. You will attain only the benefits of austerity.

Text 4 

kintu bhebe dekho bhāi        tapasyāra kāja nāi
jadi hari ārādhita hana
bhakti jadi nā phalila        tapasyāra tuccha phala
baiṣṇaba nā loya kadācana

     kintu—however; bhebe dekhaḥ—see; bhāi—O my brother; tapasyāra—of austerity; kaja—action; nāi—not; jadi—if; hari—Kṛṣṇa; ārādhita—worship; hana—is; bhakti—devotion; jadi—if; nā—not; phalila—the result; tapasyāra—of austerity; tuccha—insignificant; phala—result; baiṣṇaba—Vaisnavas; nā—not; loya—accept; kadācana—ever.

     O my brothers, look. A person who worships Lord Kṛṣṇa need not perform austerities. If they do not lead to devotional service, austerities bring a only a petty result. Vaiṣṇavas never accept those austerities.

Text 5 

ihāte je gūḍha marma          bujho baiṣṇabera dharma
pātra-bhede adhikāra bhinna
binodera nibedana        bidhi-mukta anukhaṇa
sāra-grāhī śrī-kṛṣṇa-prapanna

     ihāte—here; je—which; gūḍha—hidden; marma—heart; bujhaḥ—please understand; baiṣṇabera—the Vaisnava; dharma—dharma; pātra—objects; bhede—in different; adhikāra—qualification; bhinna—different; binodera—of Bhaktivinoda; nibedana—statement; bidhi—from rules; mukta—free; anukhaṇa—at every moment; sāra—the essence; grahi—accepting; śrī-kṛṣṇa-prapanna—surrendered to Lord Kṛṣṇa.

     Please try to understand the secret heart of Vaiṣṇava-dharma. Every person is qualified in a different way. Here is Bhaktivinoda's request: Turn from the myriad of complicated rules. Accept what is truly important. At every moment surrender to Lord Kṛṣṇa.




Song 16

Text 1

mana tumi boroi cañcala
ekānta sarala bhakta-         jane nahe amurakta
dhūrta-jane āsakti prabala

     mana—O my heart; tumi—you; boroi—very; cañcala—restless and mischievous; ekānta—esclusively; sarala—honest; bhakta-jane—to devotees; nahe—not; amurakta—attachment; dhūrta-jane—to rascal; āsakti—attachment; prabala—strong.

     O my heart, you are a great mischief-maker. You do not like the honest devotees. You like to stay with scoundrels.

Text 2 

bujrugī jāne jei         taba sādhu-jana sei
tā'ra saṅga tomāre nācāya
krūra-beśa dekho jā'ra        śraddhāspada se tomāra
bhakto kori paḍo tā'ra pāya

     bujrugī—charlatan; jāne—knows; jei—which; taba—of you; sādhu-jana—devotees; sei—that; tā'ra—of them; saṅga—company; tomāre—to you; nācāya—make dance; krūra-beśa—overcome with cruelty; dekhaḥ—see; jā'ra—of whom; śraddhā—of faith; āspada—abode; se—that; tomāra—of you; bhaktaḥ—devotee; kori—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; paḍaḥ—feet; tā'ra—of them; pāya—at the feet.

     You think imposters are saints. The imposters make you dance. Look, the people in whom you have so much faith and before whose feet you fall are very cruel.

Text 3 

bhakta-saṅga hoya jāṅra       bhakti-phala phale tā'ra
akaitabe śānta-bhāba dharo
cañcalatā chāri' mana         bhajo kṛṣṇa-śrī-caraṇa
dhūrta-saṅga dūre pariharo'

     bhakta-saṅga—association with devotees; hoya—is; jāṅra—of which; bhakti-phala—the result of devotion; phale—result; tā'ra—of that; akaitabe—sincere; śānta-bhāba—peace; dharaḥ—holding; cañcalatā—restlessness; chāri'—renouncing; mana—heart; bhajaḥ—worship; kṛṣṇa-śrī-caraṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet; dhūrta-saṅga—scoundrels; dūre—far away; pariharo'—leaving.

     He who stays in the association of devotees attains the fruit of devotional service. O my heart, please be peaceful and honest. Stay far away from scoundrels. Turn from crookedness. Worship Lord Kṛṣṇa's graceful feet.




Song 17

Text 1

mana tore boli e bāratā
apakka bayase hāya       bañcita bañcaka pā'ya
bikāile nija-swatantratā

     mana—O heart; tore—to you; boli—I say; e—this; bāratā—news; apakka—immature; bayase—age; hāya—alas; bañcita—cheated; bañcaka—cheater; pā'ya—attaining; bikāile—sold; nija-swatantratā—your independence.

     O my heart, I tell you this: As a child you were cheated by scoundrels. To them you sold your independence.

Text 2 

sampradāye doṣa-buddhi        jāni' tumi ātma-śuddhi
koribāre hoile sābadhāna
na nile tilaka-mālā      tyajile dīkhāra jwālā
nije koile nabīna-bidhāna

     sampradāye—in the disciplic succession; doṣa—fault; buddhi—the conception; jāni'—thinking; tumi—you; ātma—self; śuddhi—purification; koribāre—to do; hoile—is; sābadhāna—with care; na—not; nile—wear; tilaka-mālā—tilaska and tulasi-mala; tyajile—renounced; dīkhāra—of initiation; jwālā—the flame; nije—own; koile—does; nabīna-bidhāna—new rules.

     Thinking the disciplic succession is impure, you now struggle to purify yourself. No longer do you wear neck-beads and tilaka. You have turned from the flame of spiritual initiation. Now you make your own rules.

Text 3 

pūrba-mate tāli diyā          nija-mata pracāriyā
nije abatāra buddhi dhori'
bratācāra nā mānile      pūrba-patha jale dile
mahājane bhrama-dṛṣṭi kori'

     pūrba—previous; mate—idea; tāli—clap; diyā—giving; nija-mata—own idea; pracāriyā—preaching; nije—own; abatāra—incarnation; buddhi—idea; dhori'—holding; bratācāra—observing a vow; nā—not; mānile—thinks; pūrba-patha—previous path; jale—to the waters; dile—gives; mahājane—the great souls; bhrama—mistakes; dṛṣṭi—sight; kori'—doing.

     Giving a slap to your previous philosophy, you preach your own idea. Thinking yourself an incarnation, you don't follow any rules. Thinking the great souls were mistaken, you throw your previous path into the waters.

Text 4 

phoṇṭā dīkhā mālā dhori'        dhūrta kore' su-cāturī
tāi tāhe tomāra birāga
mahājana-pathe doṣa      dekhiyā tomāra roṣa
patha prati chāro anurāga

     phoṇṭā—tilaka; dīkhā—initiation; mālā—necklace; dhori'—wearing; dhūrta—scoundrel; kore'—does; su-cāturī—clever; tāi—attain; tāhe—in that; tomāra—of you; birāga—renunciation; mahājana-pathe—the path of the great souls; doṣa—fault; dekhiyā—seeing; tomāra—of you; roṣa—anger; patha—path; prati—to; chāraḥ—renounce; anurāga—affection.

     Thinking only clever scoundrels accept spiritual initiation and wear tilaka and neck-beads, you have given them up. Thinking it wrong, you angrily turn from the path of the great souls.

Text 5 

ekhona dekhoho bhāi      swarṇa chāri' loile chāi
iha-kāla para-kāla jāya
kapaṭa bolila sabe      bhakati bā pele kabe
dehānte bā hi ho'be upāya

     ekhona—one; dekhohaḥ—please see; bhāi—O my brother; swarṇa—gold; chāri'—renouncing; loile—accept; chāi—ashes; iha-kāla—now; para-kāla—before; jāya—goes; kapaṭa—cheating; bolila—said; sabe—all; bhakati—devotion; bā—or; pele—attained; kabe—when; dehānte—at the body's end; bā—or; hi—indeed; ho'be—will be; upāya—the method.

     Look, O my brothers. Rejecting gold, you have accepted a pile of ashes. The present and future are both at stake here. You say they are all cheaters. When will you engage in devotional service? At the time of death what will you do?




Song 18

Text 1

ki āra bolibo tore mana
mukhe bolo prema prema        bastutaḥ tyajiyā hema
śūnya-grantha añcale bandhana

     ki—what?; āra—or; bolibaḥ—say; tore—to you; mana—O heart; mukhe—in the mouth; bolaḥ—says; prema—love; prema—love; bastutaḥ—truthfully; tyajiyā—renouncing; hema—gold; śūnya—empty; grantha—knot; añcale—in the corner; bandhana—tying.

     What more will I tell you, O my heart? With your mouth you say, "spiritual love", "spiritual love", but the truth is your purse is empty and you have refused a gift of gold.

Text 2 

abhyāsiyā aśru-pāta      lampha jhampha akasmāta
mūrccha-prāya thākaho paḍiyā
e loka bañcite raṅga          pracāriyā asat-saṅga
kāminī-kañcana labha giyā

     abhyāsiyā—by practice; aśru-pāta—shedding tears; lampha jhampha—jumping about; akasmāta—suddenly and for no reason; mūrccha—fainting; prāya—almost; thākahaḥ—stay; paḍiyā—falling; e—this; loka—people; bañcite—cheated; raṅga—theater; pracāriyā—preaching; asat-saṅga—association with scoundrels; kāminī—lusty women; kañcana—gold; labha—attainment; giyā—attaining.

     On cue you weep, jump about, and fall unconscious. With this play-acting you cheat the people. You preach the philosophy of scoundrels. You chase after women and gold.

Text 3 

premera sādhana-bhakti        tā'te noila anurakti
śuddha prema kemone milibe
daśa-aparādhā tyaji'          nirantara nāma bhaji'
kṛpā ha'le su-prema pāibe

     premera—of spiritual love; sādhana-bhakti—devotional service in practice; tā'te—that; noila—is not; anurakti—attraction; śuddha—pure; prema—love; kemone—how?; milibe—meets; daśa-aparādhā—ten offenses; tyaji'—renouncing; nirantara—always; nāma—the holy name; bhaji'—worshiping; kṛpā—of mercy; ha'le—is; su-prema—great love; pāibe—will attain.

     You are not attracted to sādhana-bhakti (the practice of devotional service), which is the way tom attain prema (pure spiritual love). Then how will you ever attain that pure prema? Turning from the ten offenses, always worship the holy name. When you attain the holy name's mercy, you will attain wonderful prema.

Text 4 

na mānile su-bhajana          sādhu-saṅge saṅkīrtana
na korile nirjane smaraṇa
na uṭhiyā bṛkhopari          ṭānāṭāni phala dhori'
duṣṭa-phala korile arjana

     na—not; mānile—think; su-bhajana—devotional service; sādhu-saṅge—in the company of the devotees; saṅkīrtana—chanting the holy names in sankirtana; na—not; korile—do; nirjane—in a secluded place; smaraṇa—remember; na—not; uṭhiyā—arises; bṛkha—tree; upari—over; tānāṭāni—tugging; phala—fruits; dhori'—holding; duṣṭa-phala—bad fruits; korile—does; arjana—attainment.

     You don't like to worship the Lord or chant in saṅkīrtana with the devotees. You don't meditate on the Lord in a secluded place. Not climbing the tree's branches, you want to gather the fruits by shaking the tree. You will get only the fruits that are bad.

Text 5 

akaitaba kṛṣṇa-prema          jena su-bimala hema
sei phala nṛ-loke durlabha
kaitabe bāñcana-mātra         hao āge jogya-pātra
tabe prema hoibe sulabha

     akaitaba—sincere; kṛṣṇa-prema—love for Lord Kṛṣṇa; jena—like; su-bimala—very pure; hema—gold; sei—this; phala—fruit; nṛ-loke—in the world of human beings; durlabha—very rare; kaitabe—cheating; bāñcana-mātra—cheating; hao—do; āge—first; jogya—proper; pātra—recipent; tabe—then; prema—pure love; hoibe—will be; sulabha—easily attained.

     True love for Kṛṣṇa is like very pure gold. In the world of human beings it is very rare. What you are doing is only cheating. First become qualified, and then you will very easily attain love for Kṛṣṇa.

Text 6 

kāme preme dekho bhāi         lakaṇete bheda nāi
tabu kāma prema nāhi hoya
tumi to' barile kāma          mithyā tāhe prema nāma
āropile kise śubha hoya

     kāme—in lust; preme—love; dekhaḥ—you see; bhāi—O my brother; lakaṇete—by the characteristices; bheda—different; nāi—not; tabu—then; kāma—lust; prema—love; nāhi—not; hoya—is; tumi—you; to'—indeed; barile—choose; kāma—lust; mithyā—falsely; tāhe—in that; prema—love; nāma—the name; āropile—impose; kise—how?; śubha—auspiciousness; hoya—is.

     O my brother, look. The outward symptoms of material lust (kāma) and spiritual love (prema) are not different. What you mistakenly call "spiritual love" (prema) is actually material lust (kāma). When you make a mistake like that how can you attain true auspiciousness?




Song 19

Text 1

keno mana kāmere nacāo prema-prāya
carma-māṁsa-moya kāma         joḍa-sukha abirāma
joḍa-biṣayete sadā dhāya

     kenaḥ—why?; mana—O my heart; kāmere—by lust; nacāaḥ—made to dance; prema-prāya—like love; carma—skin; māṁsa—flesh; moya—consisting of; kāma—lust; joḍa—material; sukha—happiness; abirāma—without stop; joḍa-biṣayete—in material sense objects; sadā—always; dhāya—running.

     O my heart, why, pushed by lust to dance, do you think you dance in spiritual love? Your desires always go to this body of skin and flesh. You yearn for dull material pleasures without stop. You always chase the objects of the senses.

Text 2 

jībera swarūpa dharma         cit-swarūpe prema-marma
tāhāra biṣaya-mātra hari
kāma-ābaraṇe hāya        prema ebe supta-prāya
prema jāgāo kāma dūra kori'

     jībera—of the soul; swarūpa—original; dharma—nature; cit-swarūpe—; prema-marma—the heart of love; tāhāra—of that; biṣaya—the object; mātra—only; hari—Kṛṣṇa kāma—of lust; ābaraṇe—the covering; hāya—is; prema—love; ebe—now; supta—asleep; prāya—like; prema—love; jāgāaḥ—awaken; kāma—lust; dūra—far away; kori'—do.

     The soul's nature is spiritual. In the soul's heart is pure love (prema), love for Kṛṣṇa alone. Now the soul is covered with lust. Now that original love for Kṛṣṇa sleeps. Chase the lust far away. Waken the spiritual love.

Text 3 

śraddhā hoite sādhu-saṅge          bhajanera kriyā-raṅge
niṣṭhā-ruci-āsakti-udoya
āsakti hoite bhāba       tāhe prema prādurbhāba
ei krame prema upajoya

     śraddhā—faith; hoite—is; sādhu-saṅge—in the association of devotees; bhajanera—of worship; kriyā-raṅge—actions; niṣṭhā—faith; ruci—delight; āsakti—attachment; udoya—arisal; āsakti—attachment; hoite—is; bhāba—ecstays; tāhe—in that; prema—love; prādurbhāba—manifested; ei—this; krame—sequence; prema—love; upajoya—manifested.

     In the beginning there must be faith. Then one becomes interested in associating with pure devotees. Thereafter one is initiated by the spiritual master and executes the regulative principles under his orders. Thus one is freed from all unwanted habits and becomes firmly fixed in devotional service. Thereafter one develops taste and attachment. This is the way of sādhana-bhakti, the execution of devotional service according to regulative principles. Gradually emotions intensify, and finally there is an awakening of love. This is the gradual development of love of Godhead (prema) for the devotee interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.*

Text 4 

ihāte jatana jā'ra        sei pāya prema-sāra
krama-tyāge prema nāhi jāge
e-krama-sādhane bhoya         keno koro' durāśoya
kāme prema kabhu nāhi lāge

     ihāte—in this; jatana—effort; jā'ra—of whom; sei—he; pāya—attains; prema-sāra—true spiritual love; krama—of the sequence; tyāge—in the rejection; prema—spiritual love; nāhi—not; jāge—awakens; e-krama-sādhane—in this sequence of sadhana-bhakti; bhoya—fear; kenaḥ—why?; koro'—you do; durāśoya—O wicked one; kāme—in lust; prema—in love; kabhu—when; nāhi—not; lāge—attain.

     One who works in this way will attain true spiritual love for Kṛṣṇa. One who rejects these stages will not awaken that love. O wicked heart, why do you fear these stages of sādhana-bhakti? By cultivating lust you will never attain spiritual love.

Text 5 

nāṭakābhinoya prāya         sa-kapaṭa prema bhāya
tāhe mātra indriya-santoṣa
indriya-toṣaṇa chāra          sadā koro' parihāra
chāro bhāi aparādhā-doṣa

     nāṭaka—of an actor; abhinoya—the pretense; prāya—like; sa-kapaṭa—cheating; prema—love; bhāya—is manifested; tahe—in that; mātra—only; indriya—of the senses; santoṣa—satisfaction; indriya-toṣaṇa—satisfaction of the senses; chāra—a pile of ashes; sadā—always; koro'—do; parihāra—rejection; chāraḥ—reject; bhāi—O brother; aparādhā-doṣa—offenses.

     Your cheating so-called "spiritual love" is only the pretending of an expert actor. It is only sense gratification. Sense gratification is worthless like a pile of ashes. Reject it. O my brother, reject these offenses.






Part 2 Anutāpa lakṣaṇa upalabdhi-Repentance

Song 1

Text 1

āmi ati pāmara durjana
ki korinu hāya hāya      prakṛtira dāsatāya
kāṭāinu amūlya jībana

     āmi—I; ati—very; pāmara—sinful; durjana—wicked; ki—indeed; korinu—I do; hāya—als; hāya—alas; prakṛtira—of matter; dāsatāya—as a slave; kāṭāinu—I sent; amūlya—priceless; jībana—life.

     I am a most wretched sinner. Alas! Alas! I passed this priceless lifetime as a slave of matter.

Text 2 

koto dina garbhābāse          kāṭāinu anāyāse
bālya gelo bala-dharma-baśe
grāmya-dharma e jaubana       miche dinu bisarjana
bṛddha-kāla elo abaśeṣe

     kotaḥ—how many; dina—days; garbha—in the womb; ābāse—residence; kāṭāinu—I spent; anāyāse—easily; bālya—childhood; gelaḥ—went; bala-dharma-baśe—in the control of cbildish activities; grāmya-dharma—household activities; e—this; jaubana—in youth; miche—falsely; dinu—I did; bisarjana—waste; bṛddha-kāla—in old age; elaḥ—gone; abaśeṣe—the remainder.

     How many days did I pass in the womb? My childhood passed in childish activities. My youth was foolishly thrown away in household life. Now only old-age is left.

Text 3 

biṣaye nāhiko sukha      bhoga-śakti su-baimukha
anta danta śarīra aśakta
jībana jantraṇamoya      maraṇete sadā bhoya
bolo kise hoi anurakta

     biṣaye—in material sense objects; nāhikaḥ—not; sukha—happines; bhoga-śakti—the power of sense gratification; su-baimukha—very averse; anta—at the end; danta—teeth; śarīra—bopdy; aśakta—unable; jībana—life; jantraṇamoya—made of suffering; maraṇete—in death; sadā—always; bhoya—fear; bolo-say; kise—how?; hoi—is; anurakta—attachment.

     I have no power to enjoy sense pleasures. I turn from them. At the end my teeth and my body are powerless. My whole life is pain. I fear death. Tell me: how can I like this kind of life?

Text 4 

bhoga-bastu-bhoga-śakti       ta'te chilo anurakti
je parjanta chilo dehe bala
samasta bigata ho'lo          ki loiyā thāki bolo
ebe citta sadāi cañcala

     bhoga—enjoyment; bastu—things; bhoga—enjoyment; śakti—power; ta'te—that; chilaḥ—is; anurakti—attachment; je—which; parjanta—at the end; chilaḥ—is; dehe—body; bala—power; samasta—all; bigata—gone; ho'laḥ—is; ki—what; loiyā—accepting; thāki—I stay; bolaḥ—say; ebe—now; citta—heart; sadāi—always; cañcala—mishcievous.

     As long as my body was strong and I had the power to enjoy, I was happy. Now my powers have all gone away. Tell me: Why is my heart always restless now?

Text 5 

sāmarthya thākite kāya        hari nā bhajinu hāya
asanna kālete kibā kori
dhik mora e jībane       nā sādhinu nitya-dhane
mitra chāri' bhajilāma ari

     sāmarthya—ability; thākite—to stay; kāya—body; hari—Kṛṣṇa; nā—not; bhajinu—I worshiped; hāya—alas; asanna—was; kālete—time; kibā—how?; kori—I do; dhik—alas; mora—of me; e—this; jībane—life; nā—nopt; sādhinu—I spent; nitya—eternal; dhane—in wealth; mitra—friend; chāri'—renouncing; bhajilāma—I worshiped; ari—my enemy.

     When I had the power, I did not worship Lord Kṛṣṇa. Now the final moment has come. What will I do? My life was wasted. I did not find the eternal treasure. Turning from my true friend, I worshiped my enemies.




Song 2

Text 1

sādhu-saṅga nā hoilo hāya
gelo dina akaraṇa        kori' artha uparjana
paramārtha rohilo kothāya

     sādhu-saṅga—association with devotees; nā—not; hoilaḥ—was; hāya—alas; gelaḥ—gone; dina—days; akaraṇa—useless; kori'—doing; artha—money; uparjana—earning; paramārtha—the supreme benefit; rohilaḥ—stayed; kothāya—where.

     Alas! I did not associate with devotees. My days passed uselessly. I earned money, but where was my spiritual wealth?

Text 2 

subarṇa koriyā tyāga          tuccha loṣṭre anurāga
durbhagara ei to' lakhaṇa
kṛṣṇetara saṅga kori'         sādhu-jane parihori'
mada-garbe kāṭānu jībana

     subarṇa—gold; koriyā—doing; tyāga—renunciation; tuccha—petty;
 loṣṭre—clump of earth; anurāga—love; durbhagara—unfortunate; ei—this; to'—indeed; lakhaṇa—nature; kṛṣṇetara—other than Kṛṣṇa; saṅga—association; kori'—doing; sādhu-jane—devotees; parihori'—rejecting; mada-garbe—passion and pride; kāṭānu—I passed; jībana—life.

     Rejecting gold, I fell in love with clumps of earth. That was my misfortune. Rejecting the saintly devotees, I associated with non-devotees. I passed my life in passion and pride.

Text 3 

bhakti-mūdra-daraśane         hāsya koritama mane
bātulatā boliyā tāhāya
je sabhyatā śreṣṭha gaṇi'          harāinu cintāmaṇi
śeṣe tāhā rohilo kothāya

     bhakti—of devotion; mūdra—the signs; daraśane—in the sight; hāsya—laughter; koritama—I did; mane—in the heart; bātulatā—madness; boliyā—saying; tāhāya—of that; je—which; sabhyatā—civilization; śreṣṭha—best; gaṇi'—thinking; harāinu—I rejected; cintāmaṇi—a contamani jewel; śeṣe—at the end; tāhā—that; rohilaḥ—stayed; kothāya—where?

     Seeing someone bearing the signs of devotion to the Lord, I would laugh in my heart. "That is craziness", I would say. Thinking I had already attained the company of the most cultured and civilized people, I rejected a cintāmaṇi jewel. Where am I now?

Text 4 

jñānera garimā bale      bhakti-rūpa su-sambale
upekhinu swārtha pāśariyā
duṣṭa joḍāśrita-jñāna         ebe ho'lo antardhāna
karma-bhoge āmāke rākhiyā

     jñānera—of knowledge; garimā—greatness; bale—on the power; bhakti-rūpa—the form of devotional service; su-sambale—great wealth; upekhinu—I rejected; swārtha—own benefit; pāśariyā—forgetting; duṣṭa—wicked; joḍāśrita-jñāna—material knowledge; ebe—now; ho'laḥ—is; antardhāna—disapearance; karma-bhoge—enjoyment of work; āmāke—to me; rākhiyā—protecting.

     Forgetting my true benefit, I was proud of my material knowledge and contemptuous of devotional service. Now my wicked material knowledge has disappeared. Now I have only the results of my karma.

Text 5 

ebe jadi sādhu-jane      kṛpā kori' e durjane
dena bhakti-samudrera bindhu
tā' hoile anāyāse        mukta ho'ye bhaba-pāśe
pāra hoi e soṁsāra sindhu

     ebe—now; jadi—if; sādhu-jane—thxe devotees; kṛpā—mercy; kori'—doing; e—thus; durjane—wicked person; dena—give; bhakt—of devotion; samudrera—in the ocean; bindhu—a drop; tā'—that; hoile—is; anāyāse—easily; mukta—liberated; ho'ye—is; bhaba—of birth and death; pāśe—from the ropes; pāra—the farther shore; hoi—is; e—this; soṁsāra—of birth and death; sindhu—the ocean.

     If the saintly devotees mercifully give to this sinner a single drop from the ocean of devotional service, then I will be freed from the noose of birth and death. Then I will easily cross to the farther shore of the ocean of birth and death.




Song 3

Text 1

ore mana karmera kuhare gelo kāla
swargādi sukhera āśe          porilāma karma-phāṅse
ūrṇanābhi-sama karma-jāla

     ore—O; mana—my heart; karmera—of karma; kuhare—in the pit; gelaḥ—gone; kāla—time; swargādi—beginning with Svargaloka; sukhera—of happiness; āśe—with the desire; porilāma—I fell; karma-phāṅse—in the noose of karma; ūrṇanābhi-sama—like a spider's web; karma-jāla—the net of karma.

     O my heart, my time has passed in karma's pit. Hankering for the pleasures of Svargaloka, I fell into karma's net, spread out like a spider's web.

Text 2 

upabāsa-brata dhori'          nānā kāya-kleśa kori'
bhasme ghṛta ḍāliyā apāra
marilāma nija doṣe       jarā-maraṇera phāṅse
hoibāre nārinu uddhāra

     upabāsa—of fasting; brata—vow; dhori'—holding; nānā—various; kāya-kleśa—sufferings of the body; kori'—doing; bhasme—in ashes; ghṛta—ghee; ḍāliyā—offering; apāra—shoreless; marilāma—I died; nija—own; doṣe—fault; jarā—old age;-maraṇera—of death; phāṅse—the noose; hoibāre—to be; nārinu—not; uddhāra—delliverance.

     Fasting and torturing my body in many ways, I poured ghee on the ashes. By my own fault I now stand in the noose of old-age and death. I have no way to escape.

Text 3 

barṇāśrama-dharma yaji'       nānā deba-debī bhaji'
mada-garbe kāṭāinu jībana
sthīra nā hoilo mana          nā labhinu śānti-dhana
na bhajinu śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa

     barṇāśrama-dharma—varnasrama-dharma; yaji'—following; nānā—various; deba-debī—demigods and demigoddesses; bhaji'—worshiping; mada-garbe—mad with pride; kāṭāinu—I spenmt; jībana—life; sthīra—peaceful; nā—not; hoilaḥ—was; mana—heart; nā—not; labhinu—I attained; śānti-dhana—the treasure of peace; na—not; bhajinu—I worshiped; śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet.

     Following varṇāśrama-dharma, worshiping many demigods and goddesses, and filled with pride, I passed my life.Now my heart is not peaceful. I did not find the treasure that is peace. I did not wership Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet.

Text 4 

dhik mora e jībana       dhik mora dhana-jane
dhik mora barṇa-abhimāna
dhik mora kula-māne      dhik śāstra-adhyāyane
hari-bhakti nā pāilo sthāna

     dhik—foe; mora—my; e—this; jībana—life; dhik—fie; mora—my; dhana-jane—wealth and followers; dhik—fie; mora—my; barṇa—of caste; abhimāna—pride; dhik—fie; mora—my; kula-māne—pride of family; dhik—fie; śāstra-adhyāyane—study of scipture; hari-bhakti—devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa; nā—not; pāilaḥ—attained; sthāna—place.

     Pathetic is my life! Pathetic are my wealth and followers! Pathetic is my pride of caste! Pathetic is my pride of family! Pathetic is my study of scripture. I did not attain devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa.




Song 4

Texts 1 and 2

ore mana ki bipada hoilo āmāra
māyāra durātmya-jware         bikāra jībera dhore
tāhā hoite pāite nistāra

sādhinu adwaita mata          jāhe māyā hoya hata
biṣa sebi' bikāra kāṭilo
kintu e durbhāgya mora        bikāra kāṭilo ghora
biṣera jwālāya prāṇa gelo

     ore—O; mana—my heart; ki—what?; bipada—calaity; hoilaḥ—was; āmāra—my; māyāra—of maya; durātmya-jware—by the flames of wickedness; bikāra—deviatiopn; jībera—of life; dhore—held; tāhā—that; hoite—is; pāite—to attain; nistāra—deliverance; sādhinu—I accepted; adwaita—monist; mata—theory; jāhe—will attain; māyā—maya; hoya—is; hata—destroyed; biṣa—poison; sebi'—serving; bikāra—transformation; kāṭilaḥ—passed; kintu—however; e—this; durbhāgya—misfortune; mora—of me; bikāra—transformation; kāṭilaḥ—passed; ghora—horrible; biṣera—of poison; jwālāya—by the flames; prāṇa—life; gelaḥ—went.

     O my heart, what a calamity has fallen on me! Burned by the flames of my own sins, I suffered. To escape the sufferings, I accepted the monist theory, which tries to kill the illusions of Māyā. In this way I drank poison. Now I am very unfortunate. The poison now shows its horrible effect. Burned by the flames of that poison, my life is about to depart.

Text 3 

āmi brahma eka mātra          e jwālāya dahe gātra
ihāra upāya kibā bhāi
bikāra je chilo bhālo         auṣadha jañjāla ho'lo
auṣadha-auṣadha kothā pāy

     āmi—I am; brahma—Brahman; eka—one; mātra—only; e—this; jwālāya—by the flames; dahe—burns; gātra—limbs; ihāra—here; upāya—method; kibā—why?; bhāi—O my brother; bikāra—transformation; je—which; chilaḥ—gone; bhālaḥ—good; auṣadha—medicine; jañjāla—rubbish; ho'laḥ—is; auṣadha-auṣadha—medicine of medicines; kothā—where?; pāy—attaining.

     "I am the Supreme Brahman. Everything is all one." That poison burned my body. O my brother, what kind of medicine is that? The medicine of impersonalism destroyed my life. Where can I get a medicine to cure the effects of that so-called medicine?

Text 4 

māyā-datta ku-bikāra          māyābāda biṣa-bhāra
e dui āpada nibaraṇa
hari-nāmāmṛta-pāna       sādhu baidya su-bidhāna
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-śrī-caraṇa

     māyā-datta—given by maya; ku-bikāra—disease; māyābāda—of impeersonalism; biṣa-bhāra—the poison; e—these; dui—two; āpada—calamity; nibaraṇa—to stop; hari-nāmāmṛta-pāna—drinking the nectar oif Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names; sādhu—good; baidya—doctor; su-bidhāna—good actions; śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-śrī-caraṇa—the graceful feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya.

     The nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy name is the medicine to cure these two diseases: the disease spread by Māyā and the disease brought by the poison of māyāvāda impersonalism. A devotee who stays at Lord Caitanya's graceful feet is the proper physician is administer this medicine.




Song 5

Text 1

ore mana kleśa-tāpa dekhi je aśeṣa
abidyā asmitā āra        abhinibeśa durbāra
rāga dweṣa ei pañca kleśa

     ore—O; mana—my heart; kleśa-tāpa—sufferings; dekhi—I see; je—which; aśeṣa—endless; abidyā—ignorance; asmitā—false ego; āra—and; abhinibeśa—being absorbed in material things; durbāra—irresistable; rāga—attachment; dweṣa—and aversion; ei—these; pañca—five; kleśa—sufferings.

     O my heart, I see five endless sufferings: 1. avidyā (ignorance), 2. asmitā (false ego), 3. abhiniveśa (being absorbed in material things), 4. durvāra rāga (irresistable attachment), and 5. dveṣa (aversion). 

Text 2 

abidyātmā-bismaraṇa      asmitānya-bibhābana
abhinibeśānye gāḍa-mati
anye prīti rāgāndhatā         bidweṣātmā biśuddhatā
pañca kleśa sadāi durgati

     abidyā—ignorance; atmā—self; bismaraṇa—forgetting; asmitā—false ego; anya—other; bibhābana—meditation; abhinibeśa—absorbtion; anye—in others; gāḍa—intense; mati—thought; anye—in others; prīti—love; rāga—by love; andhatā—blindness; bidweṣa—aversion; ātmā—self; biśuddhatā—purifty; pañca—five; kleśa—sufferings; sadāi—always; durgati—misfortune.

     1. Avidyā (ignorance) comes from forgetting the Supreme Lord. 2. Asmitā (false ego) comes from directing one's thoughts away from the Supreme Lord. 3. Abhiniveśa (being absorbed in material things) comes from rapt meditation on things other than the Supreme Lord. 4. Durvāra rāga (irresistable attachment) comes from blind love for things other than the Supreme Lord. 5. dveṣa (aversion) comes from the struggle to purify the soul. These five sufferings always torment me.

Text 3 

bhuliyā baikuṇṭha-tattwa      māyā-bhoge su-pramatta
āmi āmi koriyā bedāi
e āmāra se āmāra         e bhābanā anibāra
byasta kore' mora citta bhāi

     bhuliyā—forgetting; baikuṇṭha-tattwa—the spiritual world; māyā-bhoge—by the pleasures of maya; su-pramatta—maddened; āmi—I; āmi—I; koriyā—doing; beḍāi—increase; e—this; āmāra—of me; se—this; āmāra—of me; e—this; bhābanā—meditation; anibāra—without stop; byasta—manifested; kore'—does; mora—of me; citta—the heart; bhāi—O my brothers.

     Forgetting the world of Vaikuṇṭha, I became mad for Māyā's pleasures. With "I", "I", I surrounded myself. Again and again I thought, "This is mine, and that is also mine." O my brothers, in this way my heart was filled with anxieties.

Text 4

e roga-śamanopāya        anweṣiyā hāya hāya
mile baidya sadya jamopama
āmi brahma māyā bhrama        ei auṣadhera krama
dekhi' cintā hoilo biṣama

     e—this; roga—disease; śamana—to cure; upāya—the method; anweṣiyā—to be sought; hāya—alas; hāya—alas; mile—meets; baidya—physician; sadya—always; jama—death; upama—like; āmi—I am; brahma—Brhaman; māyā—maya; bhrama—an illusion; ei—thus; auṣadhera—of the medicine; krama—sequence; dekhi'—seeing; cintā—worry; hoilaḥ—is; biṣama—unbearable.

     I searched for a way to cure this disease. Alas! Alas! I met a physician who was like death personified. He said, “I am the Supreme Brahman. Māyā is to be unaware of that truth." Now I see that his medicine brought me unbearable pain.

Text 5 

eke to' rogera kaṣṭa          jamopama baidya-bhraṣṭa
e jantraṇa kise jāya mora
śrī-caitanya doyāmoya         koro jadi samāśroya
pāra habe e bipada ghora

     eke—one; to'—indeed; rogera—of the medicine; kaṣṭa—pain; jama—death; upama—like; baidya—by the physician; bhraṣṭa—broken; e—this; jantraṇa—pain; kise—how?; jāya—attained; mora—of me; śrī-caitanya—Śrī Caitanya; doyāmoya—merciful; koraḥ—do; jadi—if; samāśroya—shelter; pāra—the farther shore; habe—will be; e—this; bipada—of calamities; ghora—horrible.

     On one side is the disease of materialism. On the other side is the demon physician of impersonalism, a physician like death personified. How will I escape my troubles? If I take shelter of merciful Lord Caitanya, I will easily cross over these horrible calamities.




Part 3 Nirveda lakṣaṇa upalabdhi-Renunciation

Song 1

Text 1

ore mana bhālo nāhi lāge e soṁsāra
janama-maraṇa-jarā       je soṁsāre āche bharā
tāhe kiba āche bolo' sāra

     ore—O; mana—my heart; bhālaḥ—good; nāhi—not; lāge—accept; e—this; soṁsāra—material world; janama—birth; maraṇa—death; jarā—old age; je—which; soṁsāre—in the material world; āche—is; bharā—filled; tāhe—in that; kiba—whether; āche—is; bolo'—say; sāra—good.

     O my heart, this material world is not good. It is filled with birth, old-age, and death. What is the good in it? Tell me.

Text 2 

dhana-jana-paribāra      keho nāhe kabhu kā'ra
kāle mitra akāle apara
jāhā rākhibāre cāi       tāhā nāhe thāke bhāi
anitya samasta binaśwara

     dhana—wealth; jana—people; paribāra—followers; kehaḥ—some; nāhe—not; kabhu—ever; kā'ra—of whom; kāle—in time; mitra—friend; akāle—in hard times; apara—another; jāhā—whom; rākhibāre—to protect; cāi—I desire; tāhā—him; nāhe—not; thāke—stays; bhāi—O my brother; anitya—temporary; samasta—all; binaśwara—liable to destruction.

     No one can keep his wealth, kinsmen, and followers. When times are good, there are friends. When times are bad, the friends become strangers. O my brother, I would like to keep them always friends, but they will not stay. Everything is temporary. It will all perish.

Text 3 

āyu ati alpa dina        krame tāhā hoya khīṇa
śamanera nikaṭa darśana
roga-śoka anibāra        citta kore' chārakhāra
bāndhaba-bijoga durghaṭana

     āyu—life; ati—very; alpa—few; dina—days; krame—sequence; tāhā—that; hoya—is; khīṇa—short; śamanera—of death; nikaṭa—near; darśana—sight; roga-śoka—the sufferiugs of disease; anibāra—without stop; citta—heart; kore'—does; chārakhāra—burned into ashes; bāndhaba—from friends and kinsmen; bijoga—separattion; durghaṭana—calamity.

     This life is only a few days. Soon it is gone. Then one sees death approach. The sufferings of disease do not stop. The mind becomes burned to ashes. Friends and kinsmen flee. Everything is a calamity.

Text 4 

bhālo ko're dekho bhāi        amiśra ānanda nāi
je āche se duḥkhera kāraṇa
se sukhera tore tabe          keno māyā-dāsa habe
haraibe paramārtha-dhana

     bhālaḥ—good; ko're—does; dekhaḥ—sight; bhāi—O my brother; amiśra—unmixed; ānanda—happiness; nāi—not; je—which; āche—is; se—that; duḥkhera—of suffering; kāraṇa—the cause; se—that; sukhera—of happiness; tore—to you; tabe—then; kenaḥ—how?; māyā—of Maya; dāsa—a slave; habe—will be; haraibe—will take; paramārtha-dhana—the most valuable treasure.

     O my brother, look. There is no material pleasure that is not mixed with pain. Every material pleasure will become the cause of pain also. Why, then, have you become Māyā's slave? You have robbed yourself of the greatest treasure.

Text 5 

itihāsa-ālocane          bhebe dekho' nija mane
koto āsurika durāśoya
indriya-tarpaṇa sāra          kori' koto durācāra
śeṣe labhe maraṇa niścoya

     itihāsa—history; ālocane—in consideration; bhebe—consider; dekho'—look; nija—own; mane—in the heart; kotaḥ—how many?; āsurika—demonic; durāśoya—wicked; indriya-tarpaṇa—to please the senses; sāra—best; kori'—doing; kotaḥ—how many; durācāra—sins; śeṣe—at the end; labhe—attained; maraṇa—death; niścoya—without doubt.

     Look, think in your heart about the Purāṇa history-books. How many demons committed how many terrible sins to please their senses? In the end they all met with death.

Text 6 

maraṇa-samaya tā'ra      upāya hoiyā hāra
anutāpa-anale jwālilo
kukkurādi paśu-prāya          jībana kāṭāya hāya
paramārtha kabhu nā cintilo

     maraṇa—of death; samaya—at the time; tā'ra—of him; upāya—method; hoiyā—being; hāra—removal; anutāpa—of repentance; anale—in the fire; jwālilaḥ—burn; kukkura—dogs; ādi—beginning; paśu—animals; prāya—almost; jībana—life; kāṭāya—passed; hāya—alas; paramārtha—the supreme treasure; kabhu—when; nā—not; cintilaḥ—considered.

     At the  moment of death he is defeated. Then he burns in a fire of remorse. He laments, "Alas! I passed my life like a dog or a beast. I never thought about the greatest treasure."

Text 7 

emona biṣaye mana        keno thāko acetana
chāro chāro biṣayera āśā
śrī-guru-caraṇāśroya          koro' sabe bhāba joya
e dāsera sei to' bhārasā

     emona—like this; biṣaye—in material sense objects; mana—mind; kenaḥ—why?; thākaḥ—stay; acetana—unconscious; chāraḥ—renounce; chāraḥ—renounce; biṣayera—of material sense objects; āśā—desire; śrī-guru-caraṇāśroya—taking shelter of the spiritual master's feet; koro'—do; sabe—all; bhaba—material world; joya—conquest; e—this; dāsera—of the servant; sei—this; to'—indeed; bhārasā—faith.

     O my heart, why are you stunned by sense pleasures. Renounce, renounce the desire for material pleasures. Take shelter of my spiritual master's feet and you will conquer this world of birth and death. This servant is certain of that.




Song 2

Text 1

ore mana bāribāra āśā keno koro
pārthiba unnati jata          śeṣe abanati tata
śānta hao mora bākya dharo

     ore—O; mana—my heart; bāribāra—to increase; āśā—desires; kenaḥ—why?; koraḥ—do; pārthiba—king; unnati—raised; jata—as; śeṣe—at the end; abanati—cast down; tata—that; śānta—peace; hao—is; mora—of me; bākya—words; dharaḥ—please accept.

     O my heart, why do your desires increase more and more? A king may stand in a high place, but in the end he will be thrown down. Please be peaceful and consider my words.

Text 2 

āśāra iyattā nāi         āśā-patha sadā bhāi
nairāśya-kaṇṭake ruddha āche
bāro' jata āśā tata      āśā nāhi hoya hata
āśā nāhi nityānitya bāche

     āśāra—of desires; iyattā—end; nāi—not; āśā-patha—the path of desires; sadā—always; bhāi—O my brothers; nairāśya—of disappointment; kaṇṭake—on the thorns; ruddha—stopped; āche—is; bāro'—increases; jata—what; āśā—desire; tata—that; āśā—desire; nāhi—not; hoya—is; hata—destroyed; āśā—desire; nāhi—nbot; nitya—eternal; anitya—temporary; bāche—chooses.

     Material desires have no end. O my brother, anyone who walks on the path of desires will be stung by the thorns of disappointment. Desires only increase. They do not perish. 

Text 3 

eka rājya āja pāo        anya rājya kā'la cāo
sarba-rājya koro' jadi lābha
tabu āśā nahe śeṣa       indra-pada abaśeṣa
chāri' ca'be brahmāra prabhāba

     eka—one; rājya—kingdom; āja—today; pāaḥ—attain; anya—another; rājya—kingdom; kā'la cāaḥ—desires; sarba-rājya—all kingdoms; koro'—is; jadi—if; lābha—attainment; tabu—then; āśā—desire; nahe—not; śeṣa—end; indra-pada—the post of Indra; abaśeṣa—at the last stage; chāri'—leaving; ca'be—will desire; brahmāra—of Brahma; prabhāba—the glory.

     If today you get a kingdom, tomorrow you will desire another kingdom. Then you will desire all kingdoms. Those desires will never end. Eventually you will desire Indra's post. At the end you will desire Brahmā's post.

Text 4 

brahmatwa chāriyā bhāi        śiba-pada kise pāi
e cintā ha'be abirata
śibatwa labhiyā nara          brahma-samya tad-antara
āśā kore śaṅkarānugata

     brahmatwa—the state of Brahma; chāriyā—renouncing; bhāi—O my brother; śiba-pada—the post of Śiva; kise—what is?; pāi—I attain; e—this; cintā—thought; ha'be—will be; abirata—without stop; śibatwa—the post of Śiva; labhiyā—attaining; nara—person; brahma-samya—equal to impersonal Brahman; tad-antara—after that; āśā—desire; kore—does; śaṅkara—Śankaracarya; anugata—following.

     O my brother, then you will become rapt in thinking, “How can I leave this post of Brahmā and attain the post of Śiva?" When you attain the post of Śiva, you will become a follower of Śaṅkarācārya. Then you will desire to become like the impersonal Brahman.

Text 5 

ata eba āśā-pāśa         jāhe hoya sarba-nāśa
hṛdoya hoite rākho dūre
akiñcana-bhāba lo'ye          caitanya-caraṇāśroye
bāsa koro' sadā śāntipure

     ata eba—therefore; āśā-pāśa—the ropes of desires; jahe—in which; hoya—is; sarba-nāśa—the destruction of everything; hṛdoya—the heart; hoite—is; rākhaḥ—protection; dūre—far away; akiñcana-bhāba—teh state of not having anything; lo'ye—accepts; caitanya-caraṇāśroye—at the shelter of Lord Caitanya's feet; bāsa—residence; koro'—do; sadā—always; śāntipure—in Śāntipura.

     When you are caught in the trap of desires, all is lost. Keep desires far from your heart. Living in poverty, stay in Śāntipura and always take shelter of Lord Caitanya's feet.




Song 3

Text 1

ore mana bhukti-mukti-spṛhā koro dūra
bhogera nāhiko śeṣa      tāhe nāhi sukha-leśa
nirānanda tāhāte pracūra

     ore—O; mana—my heart; bhukti-mukti-spṛhā—the desire for sense gratification and impersonal liberation; koraḥ—do; dūra—far away; bhogera—of sense gratification; nāhikaḥ—not; śeṣa—end; tahe—in that; nāhi—not; sukha-leśa—the slightest happiness; nirānanda—without happiness; tahate—theat; pracūra—great.

     O my heart, please throw far away all desires for sense pleasures and impersonal liberation. So-called sense pleasures have no end. They do not bring any real pleasure. They bring only sufferings.

Text 2 

indriya-tarpaṇa bai      bhoge āra sukha kai
seo sukha abhāba-pūraṇa
je sukhete āche bhoya         tā'ke sukha bolā noya
tā'ke duḥkha bole bijña-jana

     indriya—of the senses; tarpaṇa—satisfaction; bai—except; bhoge—enjoyment; āra—other; sukha—happiness; kai—I say; seaḥ—this; sukha—happiness; abhāba—need; pūraṇa—filling; je—which; sukhete—happiness; āche—is; bhoya—fear; tā'ke—this; sukha—happiness; bola—say; noya—not; tā'ke—this; duḥkha—suffering; bole—say; bijña-jana—the wise.

     I say that in material sense pleasures the senses become appeased, but aside from that there is no real pleasure. That pleasure is only pacifying an itch. It is a fearful pleasure. The wise do not call this sense-appeasement "pleasure. They call it by the word "suffering".

Text 3 

śāstre phala-śruti jata         sei lobhe koto śata
mūḍha-jana bhoga prati dhāya
se saba kaitaba jāni'        chāriyā baiṣṇaba-jñānī
mukhya-phala kṛṣṇa-rati pāya

     śāstre—in the scriptures; phala—result; śruti—hearing; jata—which; sei—this; lobhe—desire; kotaḥ—how many?; śata—hundreds; mūḍha-jana—fools; bhoga—enjoyment; prati—to; dhāya—run; se—these; saba—all; kaitaba—cheating; jāni'—knowing; chāriyā—renouncing; baiṣṇaba—Vaiṣṇava; jñānī—wise; mukhya—primary; phala—result; kṛṣṇa-rati—love for Lord Kṛṣṇa; pāya—attaining.

     How many hundreds of fools, hearing the scriptures' descriptions, run after these sense pleasures? Knowing them to be only a trick, a wise Vaiṣṇava renounces them. He strives to attain love for Lord Kṛṣṇa, the most valuable of attainments.

Text 4 

mukti-bāñchā duṣṭa ati        naṣṭa kore' śiṣṭa-mati
mukti-spṛhā kaitaba-pradhāna
taha je chārite nare          māyā nāhi chāre tā're
tā'ra jatna nāhe phalabāna

     mukti—liberation; bāñchā—desire; duṣṭa—wicked; ati—very; naṣṭa—destroyed; kore'—does; śiṣṭa—good; mati—thoughts; mukti—for liberation; spṛhā—desire; kaitaba—of cheating; pradhāna—the most prominent; taha—that; je—which; chārite—to renounce; nare—person; māyā—illusion; nāhi—not; chāre—renounces; tā're—that; tā'ra—of that; jatna—effort; nāhe—not; phalabāna—bearing the result.

     The desire for impersonal liberation is very wicked. It destroys all good thoughts. The desire for impersonal liberation is the most devious of tricks. As long as one does not give up that desire, Māyā will not leave him alone. The impersonalist will struggle mightily, but he will never reach his goal.

Text 5 

ata eba spṛhā-dwoya      chāri' śodha e hṛdoya
nāhi rākho kāmera bāsanā
bhoga-mokha nāhi cāi          śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa pāi
binodera ei to' sādhana

     ata eba—therefore; spṛhā-dwoya—these two desires; chāri'—renouncing; śodha—pure; e—this; hṛdoya—heart; nāhi—not; rākhaḥ—keep; kāmera—of lust; bāsanā—the desire; bhoga—sense gratification; mokha—and impersonal liberation; nāhi—not; cāi—I desire; śrī-kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; caraṇa—the feet; pāi—I attain; binodera—of Bhaktivinoda; ei—this; to'—indeed; sādhana—effort.

     Therefore, O my heart, please renounce these two desires. Please do not keep these desires. I do not desire sense pleasures or impersonal liberation. I will attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa's feet. To attain them Bhaktivinoda struggles.




Song 4

Text 1

durlabha mānaba-janma labhiyā soṁsāre
kṛṣṇa nā bhajinu duḥkha kahibo kāhāre

     durlabha—rare; mānaba-janma—human birth; labhiyā—attaining; soṁsāre—in the material world; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; nā—not; bhajinu—I worshiped; duḥkha—unhappiness; kahibaḥ—will say; kāhāre—to whom?

     After attaining a rare human birth in this world, I still did not worship Lord Kṛṣṇa. To whom will I tell my sufferings?

Text 2 

soṁsāra soṁsāra ko're miche gelo kāla
lābha nā koilo kichu ghaṭilo jañjāla

     soṁsāra—household life; soṁsāra—household life; ko're—does; miche—falsely; gelaḥ—gone; kāla—in time; lābha—attaining; nā—not; koilaḥ—did; kichu—atnything; ghaṭilaḥ—was; jañjāla—trouble.

     I became a householder. A householder! How I wasted my time. I did not gain anything good. All I got was trouble.

Text 3 

kisera soṁsāra ei chāyābāji prāya
ihāte mamatā kori' bṛtha dina jāya

     kisera—of what kind?; soṁsāra—material world; ei—this; chāyābāji—magic; prāya—like; ihate—here; mamatā—possessiveness; kori'—doing; bṛtha—useless; dina—days; jāya—go.

     What kind of world is this? It's like a magician's illusion. Again and again claiming, "It's mine!", I wasted my days.

Text 4 

e deho patana ho'le ki ro'be āmāra
keho sukha nāhi dibe putra-paribāra

     e—this; dehaḥ—body; patana—falling; ho'le—is; ki—what?; ro'be—will stay; āmāra—of me; kehaḥ—some; sukha—happiness; nāhi—not; dibe—will give; putra—children; paribāra—entourage.

     When this body collapses, what will still me "mine"? Neither children nor companions will make me happy.
 
Text 5 

gardabhera mata āmi kori pariśrama
kā'ra lāgi eto kori nā ghucilo bhrama

     gardabhera—a donkey; mata—like; āmi—I; kori—do; pariśrama—hard work; kā'ra—of whom?; lāgi—touching; etaḥ—this; kori—I do; nā—not; ghucilaḥ—destroy; bhrama—illusion.

     I slave like a donkey. What do I get? My illusions refuse to die.

Text 6 

dina jāya micha kāje niśā nidrā-baśe
nāhi bhābi maraṇa nikaṭe āche bo'se

     dina—days; jāya—go; micha—uselessly; kāje—in work; niśā—at night; nidrā-baśe—controlled by sleep; nāhi—not; bhābi—I think; maraṇa—death; nikaṭe—near; āche—is; bo'se—stays.

     I waste my days in work and my nights in the grip of sleep. I do not know how death approaches.

Text 7 

bhālo manda khāi heri pari cintā-hīna
nāhi bhābi e deho chāribo kona dīna

     bhālaḥ—good; manda—bad; khāi—I eat; heri—I see; pari—I do; cintā-hīna—without anxiety; nāhi—not; bhābi—I know; e—this; dehaḥ—body; chāribaḥ—will leave; kona—some; dīna—day.

     Sometimes I receive good and sometimes bad. I look about. I don't worry. I do not know that some day this body will collapse.

Text 8 

deho-geho-kalatrādi-cintā abirata
jāgiche hṛdoye mora buddhi kori' hata

     dehaḥ—body; gehaḥ—home; kalatra—wife; ādi—beginning; cintā—worry; abirata—without stop; jāgiche—awaken; hṛdoye—in the heart; mora—my; buddhi—intelligence; kori'—doing; hata—destroyed.

     Worries about body, home, wife, and others always awaken in my heart. They have destroyed my intelligence.

Text 9 

hāya hāya nāhi bhābi anitya e saba
jībana bigate kothā rohibe baibhaba

     hāya—alas; hāya—alas; nāhi—not; bhābi—I think; anitya—temporary; e—this; saba—all; jībana—life; bigate—gone; kothā—where?; rohibe—will stay; baibhaba—glories and opulences.

     Alas! Alas! I did not know it would all be destroyed! When my life ends, what will happen to all my glories and opulences?

Text 10 

śmaśāne śarīra mama poriyā rohibe
bihaṅga-pataṅga tāya bihāra koribe

     śmaśāne—in the cremation; śarīra—body; mama—my; poriyā—falling; rohibe—will stay; bihaṅga—birds; pataṅga—insects; tāya—of that; bihāra—pastime; koribe—will be.

     When my body falls in the cremation-ground, the birds and insects will rejoice.

Text 11 

kukkura śṛgala saba ānandita ho'ye
mahotsaba koribe āmāra deho lo'ye

     kukkura—dogs; śṛgala—jackals; saba—all; ānandita—delighted; ho'ye—will be; mahotsaba—a great festival; koribe—will do; āmāra—of me; dehaḥ—the body; lo'ye—attaining.

     All the dogs and jackals will be delighted. They will celebrate a great festival over my body.

Text 12 

je dehera ei gati tā'ra anugata
soṁsāra-baibhaba āra bandhu-jana jata

     je—which; dehera—of the body; ei—this; gati—destination; tā'ra—of that; anugata—following; soṁsāra-baibhaba—material opulences; āra—and; bandhu-jana—friends and kinsmen; jata—which.

     That is the fate of this body. It is also the fate of my friends and kinsmen and all my material glories and opulences.

Text 13 

ata eba māyā-moha chāri buddhimāna
nitya-tattwa kṛṣṇa-bhakti koruna sandhāna

     ata eba—therefore; māyā-moha—the bewilderments of Maya; chāri—renouncing; buddhimāna—intelligent; nitya-tattwa—eternal truth; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa; koruna—does; sandhāna—practice.

     Turning away from Māyā's bewilderments, an intelligent person engages in devotional service (sādhana-bhakti) to the Supreme Truth, Lord Kṛṣṇa.




Song 5

Text 1

śarīrera sukhe mana deho jalañjali
e deho tomāra noya       barañca e satru hoya
siddha-deho-sādhana-samaye
sarbadā ihāra bale rohiyācho bali 
kintu nāhi jāno mana          e śarīra acetana 
po're roya jībana-bilaye

     śarīrera—of the body; sukhe—happiness; mana—O my heart; dehaḥ—body; jalañjali—a handful of water; e—this; dehaḥ—body; tomāra—of you; noya—not; barañca—rather; e—this; satru—enemy; hoya—is; siddha-deho-sādhana-samaye—at the tiem of attaining the perfect spiritual body; sarbadā—in all ways; ihāra—here; bale—on the power; rohiyāchaḥ—stays; bali—powerful; kintu—however; nāhi—not; jānaḥ—you understand; mana—heart; e—this; śarīra—body; acetana—unconscious; po're—falls; roya—stays; jībana—of life; bilaye—in the destruction.

     O my heart, please cast a handful of water as a funeral oblation to honor the death of this material body's pleasures. This material body is not your property. Indeed, when you try to attain your original spiritual body, this material body becomes your enemy. You still try to get power from this material body. O my heart, you don't understand. When this life comes to an end, the material body will collapse and become unconscious.

Text 2 

dehera saundarya-bala nāhe ciro-dina
ata eba taha lo'ye       nā thāko garbita ho'ye
toma' prati ei anunoya
śuddha-jība siddha-dehe sadāi nabīna 
jorī-bhūta deho-joga          jībanera karma-bhoga 
jībera patana joḍāśroya

     dehera—of the body; saundarya—handsomeness; bala—and strength; nahe—not; ciraḥ—many; dina—days; ata eba—therefore; taha—of you; lo'ye—attaining; nā—not; thākaḥ—remain; garbita—proud; ho'ye—is; toma'—of you; prati—to; ei—thius; anunoya—request; śuddha-jība—pure soul; siddha-dehe—perfect body; sadāi—always; nabīna—new; jori-bhuta—become material; deho-joga—conact with the body; jībanera—of life; karma—of work; bhoga—attaining the results; jībera—of the soul; patana—falling; joḍa—of matter; āśroya—shelter.

     This body's handsomeness and strength will not last for many days. Therefore, you should not be proud. I place this information before you: In his original spiritual body, the pure soul is eternally young and new. However, when he comes in contact with a material body, the pure soul become stunned and bewildered. He falls into the material world, takes shelter of matter, and becomes subject to the laws of karma.

Text 3 

e parjanta e dehete jībera saṅgati
cakhu karṇa nāsa jihwā          twag-ādira jaḍa-spṛhā
jībe lo'ye kore' ṭānāṭāni
dekho dekho bhoyaṅkara jībera durgati 
jība cāi kṛṣṇa bhaji          deho joḍe jāya maji' 
śeṣe jība pasare āpani

     e—this; parjanta—up to; e—this; dehete—body; jībera—of the soul; saṅgati—endowment; cakhu—eyes; karṇa—ears; nasa—nose; jihwa—tongue; twag—sking; ādira—beginning with; jaḍa-sprha—material desires; jībe—the soul; lo'ye—attains; kore'—does; ṭānāṭāni—continual dragging; dekhaḥ—look; dekhaḥ—look; bhoyaṅkara—fearful; jībera—of the soul; durgati—bad destination; jība—soul; cai—desires; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; bhaji—worship; dehaḥ—body; joḍe—material; jāya—goes; maji'—plunging; śeṣe—at the end; jība—the soul; pasare—forgets; āpani—himself.

     Staying in the material body, the soul is provided with material eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin, and other things. The soul's material desires are then directed to all these senses. Gathering around the soul, and saying, "Look! Look!", the senses try to drag him in different directions. In this way the soul's condition is very fearful and unfortunate. He wants to worship Lord Kṛṣṇa, but because the soul in plunged in the material body, he eventually forgets his original spiritual nature.

Text 4 

āra keno jība joḍe koribe samara
joḍa deo bisarjana      śuddha-jība-prabodhana
sahaja-samādhi-joge sādha
krame krame joḍa-satta ha'be abasara 
siddha-deho anugata      koro deho joḍāśrita 
paramārtha nā hoibe bādha

     āra—and; kenaḥ—why?; jība—the soul; joḍe—in matter; koribe—will do; samara—battle; joḍa—matter; deaḥ—give; bisarjana—rejection; śuddha-jība—pure soul; prabodhana—awakening; sahaja-samādhi-joge—inspiritual meditation; sādha—endeavor; krame krame—gradually; joḍa-satta—material condition; ha'be—will be; abasara—cessation; siddha-dehaḥ—original spiritual body; anugata—following; koraḥ—do; dehaḥ—body; joḍāśrita—taken shelter of matter; paramārtha—supreme treasure; nā—not; hoibe—will be; bādha—obstruction.

     Why must the soul struggle against matter? Renounce the world of matter. Awaken the pure spirit soul. Meditate on spirit. Gradually your confinement to the material world will come to an end. Identify with your original spiritual body. Then this material body will no longer be an obstacle to attaining the greatest treasure.




Part 4 Sambandha abhidheya prayojana-The Soul's Relationship with the Supreme Lord, His Activities in that Relationship, and the final Goal of Life

Song 1

Text 1

ore mana boli śuno tattwa-bibaraṇa
jāhāra bismṛti-janya jībera bandhana

     ore—O; mana—my heart; boli—I tell; śunaḥ—please hear; tattwa-bibaraṇa—description of the truth; jāhāra—of which; bismṛti—forgetting; janya—because of; jībera—of the soul; bandhana—the bondage.

     O my heart, please listen. I will you of the Absolute Truth. Because they have forgotten Him, the conditioned souls are thrown into the prison of the material world.

Text 2 

tattwa eka adwitīya atulya apāra
sei tattwa para-brahma sarba sārāt sāra

     tattwa—Truth; eka—one; adwitīya—withotu a rival; atulya—peerless; apāra—limitless; sei—this; tattwa—Truth; para-brahma—the Supreme Brahman; sarba—all; sārāt—than the best; sāra—better.

     The Absolute Truth is one. He has no rival. No one is His equal. He has no limit. The Absolute Truth is the Supreme Brahman. He is greater than all who are great.

Text 3 

sei tattwa śaktimāna sampūrṇa sundara
śakti śaktimāna eka bastu nirantara

     sei—this; tattwa—Truth; śaktimāna—the master of potencies; sampūrṇa—perfect and complete; sundara—handsome; śakti—power; śaktimāna—the master of potencies; eka—one; bastu—thing; nirantara—always.

     The Absolute Truth is the master of all potencies. He is perfect and complete. He is handsome. The potency and the master of potencies are never different.

Text 4 

nitya-śakti nitya sarba-bilāsa-poṣoka
bilāsārtha bṛndābana baikuṇṭha goloka

     nitya—eternal; śakti—potency; nitya—eternal; sarba—all; bilāsa—pastimes; poṣoka—nourishing; bilāsa—pastimes; artha—purpose; bṛndābana—Vṛndāvana; baikuṇṭha—Vaikuṇṭha; goloka—Goloka.

     His eternal potency nourishes all His eternal pastimes. For this purpose the Lord's potency manifests the worlds of Vṛndāvana, Vaikuṇṭha, and Goloka.

Text 5 

bilāsārtha nāma dhāma guṇa parikara
deśa-kāla-pātra saba śakti anucara

     bilāsa—pastimes; artha—purpose; nāma—name; dhāma—abode; guṇa—qualities; parikara—associates; deśa—place; kāla—time; pātra—circumstance; saba—all; śakti—potency; anucāra—following.

     For the sake of the Lord's pastimes, the eternal potency manifests the Lord's names, abodes, qualities, and associates, all different according to different times, places, and circumstances.

Text 6 

śaktira prabhāba āra prabhura vilāsa
para-brahma-sahe nitya ekātmā-prokāśa

     śaktira—of the potency; prabhāba—power; āra—and; prabhura—of the Lord; vilāsa—pastimes; para-brahma-sahe—with ther Supreme Brahman; nitya—eternal; eka—one; ātmā—Self; prokāśa—manifestation.

     The eternal potency thus manifests the Lord's pastimes. The Supreme Brahman is identical with His potency.

Text 7 

ata eba brahma āge śakti kārja pare
je kore siddhānta sei mūrkha e soṁsāre

     ata eba—therefore; brahma—Brahman; āge—in the beginning; śakti—potency; kārja—action; pare—then; je—which; kore—does; siddhānta—conclusion; sei—this; mūrkha—fools; e—this; soṁsāre—in the world.

     That Brahman is manifested first and His potency is manifested second is a conclusion held by the fools in this world.

Text 8 

pūrṇa-candra bolile kiraṇa-saha jāni
akiraṇa candra-sattā kabhu nāhi māni

     pūrṇa—full; candra—moon; bolile—said; kiraṇa-saha—with rays of light; jāni—I know; akiraṇa—without rays of light; candra—of the moon; sattā—existence; kabhu—ever; nāhi—not; māni—I know.

     I know the full moon always exists with its moonlight. I know the moon never exists without moonlight.

Text 9 

brahma āra brahma-śakti-saha parikara
sama-kāla nitya boli' māni ataḥ para

     brahma—Brahman; āra—and; brahma-śakti-saha—the potency of Brahman; parikara—associates; sama-kāla—at the same time; nitya—eternal; boli'—saying; mani—I know; atah para—then.

     Brahman is always accompanied by His potency. They are both eternal. This I know. This I say.

Text 10 

akhaṇḍa bilāsa-moya para-brahma jei
aprākṛta bṛndābane kṛṣṇacandra sei

     akhaṇḍa—unbroken; bilāsa-moya—consisting of pastimes; para-brahma—the Supreme Brahman; jei—which; aprākṛta—not material; bṛndābane—in Vṛndāvana; kṛṣṇacandra—Kṛṣṇacandra; sei—He.

     The Supreme Brahman enjoys pastimes eternally. He is not material. In Vṛndāvana He is Kṛṣṇacandra.

Text 11 

sei se adwaya-tattwa parānandakāra
kṛpāya prakaṭa hoilo bhārate āmāra

     sei—this; se—He; adwaya-tattwa—the non-dual Truth; parānandakāra—blissful; kṛpāya—mercy; prakaṭa—manifest; hoilaḥ—was; bhārate—in Bharata-varas; āmāra—our.

     The Supreme Brahman, the blissful Absolute Truth, mercifully appeared in our Bhārata-varṣa.

Text 12 

kṛṣṇa se parama-tattwa prakṛtira para
brajete bilāsa kṛṣṇa kore' nirantara

     kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; se—that; parama-tattwa—Absolute Truth; prakṛtira—matter; para—above; brajete—in Vraja; bilāsa—pastimes; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; kore'—diod; nirantara—always.

     Lord Kṛṣṇa is that Absolute Truth. He is above the world of matter. In the land of Vraja He manifested His eternal pastimes.

Text 13 

cid-dhāma-bhāskara kṛṣṇa taṅra jyotir-gata
ananta cit-kaṇa jība tiṣṭhe abirata

     cit—spiritual; dhāma—world; bhāskara—the sun; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; taṅra—of Him; jyotiḥ—light; gata—gone; ananta—endless; cit—spirit; kaṇa—particles; jība—souls; tiṣṭhe—stay; abirata—always.

     Lord Kṛṣṇa is the effulgent sun of the spiritual world. The limitless rays of light always emanating from Him are the individual spirit souls.

Text 14 

sei jība prema-dharmī kṛṣṇa-gata-prāṇa
sadā kṛṣṇākṛṣṭa bhakti-sudhā kore' pāna

     sei—these; jība—souls; prema—love; dharmī—whose nature; kṛṣṇa—to Lord Kṛṣṇa; gata—gone; prāṇa—life; sadā—always; kṛṣṇa—to Lord Kṛṣṇa; ākṛṣṭa—attracted; bhakti—of devotional service; sudhā—of the nectar; kore'—do; pāna—drinking.

     These souls love Kṛṣṇa. They have dedicated their lives to Him. Eternally they are attracted to Him. Eternally they drink the nectar of devotional service to Him.

Text 15 

nānā-bhāba-miśrita piyā dāsya-rasa
kṛṣṇera ananta-guṇe sadā thāke baśa

     nānā—various; bhāba—ecstasies; miśrita—mixed; piyā—attaining; dāsya-rasa—the nectar of devotional service; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; ananta—limitless; guṇe—qualities; sadā—always; thāke—stay; baśa—in the control.

     They drink the nectar of service to Lord Kṛṣṇa, a nectar mixed with different kinds of ecstatic love. They are overwhelmed by Lord Kṛṣṇa's limitless transcendental qualities.

Text 16 

kṛṣṇa mātā kṛṣṇa pitā kṛṣṇa sakhā pati
ei saba bhinna-bhābe kṛṣṇa kore rati

     kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; mātā—mother; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; pitā—father; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; sakhā—friend; pati—husband; ei—this; saba—all; bhinna-bhābe—different kinds of ecstatic love; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; kore—does; rati—love.

     Kṛṣṇa is their mother. Kṛṣṇa is their father. Kṛṣṇa is their friend or their husband. Kṛṣṇa manifests all these different kinds of loving relationships with them.

Text 17 

kṛṣṇa se puruṣa eka nitya bṛndābane
jība-gaṇa nārī-bṛnda rame kṛṣṇa-sane

     kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; se—He; puruṣa—male; eka—one; nitya—eternal; bṛndābane—in Vṛndāvana; jība-gaṇa—the individual souls; nārī-bṛnda—females; rame—enjoy; kṛṣṇa-sane—with Kṛṣṇa.

     In Vṛndāvana Kṛṣṇa is the one male eternally. The individual souls, who are all female, enjoy pastimes with Kṛṣṇa.

Text 18 

sei to' ānanda-līlā jā'ra nāi anta
ata eba kṛṣṇa-līlā akhaṇḍa ananta

     sei—this; to'—indeed; ānanda—of bliss; līlā—pastimes; jā'ra—of which; nāi—not; anta—end; ata eba—therefore; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; līlā—pastimes; akhaṇḍa—unbroken; ananta—endless.

     These blissful pastimes have no end. Therefore Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are unbroken and endless.

Text 19 

je saba jībera bhoga-bañchā upajilo
puruṣa bhabete tā'ra joḍe prabeśilo

     je—who; saba—all; jībera—of the souls; bhoga—for enjoyment; bañchā—desires; upajilaḥ—born; puruṣa—male; bhabete—in the nature; tā'ra—of that; joḍe—matter; prabeśilaḥ—entered.

     Any soul in whom the desire to enjoy apart from Kṛṣṇa takes birth will attain a male's nature and enter the world of matter.

Text 20 

māyā-kārja joḍa māyā nitya-śakti-chāya
kṛṣṇa-dāsī sei satya kāra-kartrī māyā

     māyā-kārja—the work of Maya; joḍa—matter; māyā—Maya; nitya—eternal; śakti—potency; chāya—shadow; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; dāsī—the maidservant; sei—this; satya—truth; kāra-kartrī—carrying out the order; māyā—Maya.

     The world of matter is created by Māyā. Māyā is the shadow of the Lord's eternal potency. She is Lord Kṛṣṇa's maidservant. In truth she carries out Lord Kṛṣṇa's commands.

Text 21 

sei māyā ādarśera samasta biśeṣa
loiyā gaṭhilo biśwa jāhe pūrṇa kleśa

     sei—this; māyā—Maya; ādarśera—manifestation; samasta—all; biśeṣa—variety; loiyā—accepting; gaṭhilaḥ—created; biśwa—universe; jāhe—in which; pūrṇa—full; kleśa—of sufferings.

     This Māyā potency created the material world filled with sufferings.

Text 22 

jība jadi hoilena kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha
māyādevī tabe tā'ra jāchilena sukha

     jība—the soul; jadi—if; hoilena—is; kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha—averse to Kṛṣṇa; māyādevī—Goddesz Maya; tabe—then; tā'ra—of him; jāchilena—gives; sukha—happiness.

     When a soul turns his face away from Lord Kṛṣṇa, Goddess Māyā offers her pleasures.

Text 23 

māyā-sukhe matta jība śrī-kṛṣṇa bhulilo
sei se abidyā-baśe asmitā janmilo

     māyā-sukhe—by Maya's pleasures; matta—intoxicated; jība—the soul; śrī-kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhulilaḥ—forgets; sei—that; se—he; abidyā—of ignorance; baśe—in the grip; asmitā—false ego; janmilaḥ—is born.

     Intoxicated by Māyā's pleasures, the soul forgets Lord Kṛṣṇa. In the grip of ignorance, he finds material false ego take birth within him.

Text 24 

asmitā hoite hoilo māyābhinibeśa
tāhā hoite joḍa-gata rāga āra dweṣa

     asmitā—false ego; hoite—from that; hoilaḥ—is; māyā—on Maya; abhinibeśa—entrance; tāhā—that; hoite—from; joḍa-gata—material; rāga—attraction; āra—and; dweṣa—aversion.

     From false ego comes rapt meditation on Māyā, and from that come material attraction and aversion.

Text 25 

ei rūpe jība karma-cakre prabeśiyā
uccābaca-gati-krame phirena bhramiyā

     ei rūpe—in this way; jība—the soul; karma-cakre—in the wheel of karma; prabeśiyā—entering; uccābaca-gati-krame—low and high situations; phirena—comes and goes; bhramiyā—wanders.

     Entering the wheel of karma, the soul wanders through the high and low species of life.

Text 26 

kothā se baikuṇṭhānanda śrī-kṛṣṇa-bilāsa
kothā māyā-gata sukha duḥkha sarba-nāśa

     kothā—where?; se—that; baikuṇṭha—of the spiritual world; ānanda—bliss; śrī-kṛṣṇa-bilāsa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa's pastimes; kothā—where?; māyā-gata—gone to Maya; sukha—pleasure; duḥkha—suffering; sarba-nāśa—all destruction.

     What is the destructive calamity of Māyā's pleasures and torments? What are Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, the bliss of Vaikuṇṭha, in comparison?

Text 27 

cit-tattwa hoiyā jībera māyābhiramaṇa
ati tuccha jugupsita ananta patana

     cit-tattwa—the spiritual nature; hoiyā—being; jībera—of the soul; māyā—of Maya; abhiramana—pleasures; ati—very; tuccha—insignificant; jugupsita—horrible; ananta—limitless; patana—degraded.

     Tasting Māyā's pleasures, the spirit soul becomes degraded. His position becomes very horrible and lowly.


Text 28 

māyika dehera bhābābhābe dāsya kori'
para-tattwa jībera ki kaṣṭha āhā mori

     māyika—made by Maya; dehera—body; bhāba—original nature; abhābe—non-existence; dāsya—service; kori'—doing; para-tattwa—the spiritual nature; jībera—of the soul; ki—what; kaṣṭha—calamity; āhā—alas; mori—destroyed.

     Serving his material body, the soul forgets his spiritual identity. What a calamity!

Text 29 

bhramite bhramite jadi sādhu-saṅga hoya
punarāya gupta nitya-dharmera udoya

     bhramite bhramite—wandering and wandering; jadi—if; sādhu-saṅga—the association of devotees; hoya—is; punarāya—again; gupta—secret; nitya-dharmera—eternal nature; udoya—arisal.

     If, after wandering and wandering in the material world, the soul attains the association of devotees, his hidden eternal nature is again manifested.

Text 30 

sādhu-saṅge kṛṣṇa-kathā hoya ālocana
pūrba-bhāba udi' kāṭe māyāra bandhana

     sādhu-saṅge—in the association of devotees; kṛṣṇa-kathā—talk of Lord Kṛṣṇa; hoya—is; ālocana—consideration; pūrba-bhāba—previous nature; udi'—arising; kaṭe—cut; māyāra—of Maya; bandhana—the bonds.

     In the association of devotees there is talk of Lord Kṛṣṇa. The soul's original nature is again manifested. The bonds of Māyā are cut.

Text 31 

kṛṣṇa prati jība jabe korena īkhaṇa
vidya-rūpe māyā kore' bandhana-chedana

     kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; prati—to; jība—the soul; jabe—when; korena—does; īkhaṇa—seeing; vidya-rūpe—in the form of knowledge; māyā—Maya; kore'—does; bandhana—of bonds; chedana—cutting.

     When the soul finally sees Lord Kṛṣṇa, Māyā appears as transcendental knowledge and cuts the soul's bonds. 

Text 32 

māyika jagate bidyā nitya bṛndābana
jībera sādhana-janya kore' bibhābana

     māyika—of Maya; jagate—in the world; bidyā—knowledge; nitya—eternal; bṛndābana—Vṛndāvana; jībera—of the soul; sādhana—spiritual practice; janya—because of; kore'—does; bibhābana—perception.

     To enlighten the conditioned souls, Māyā manifests within the material world the eternal realm of Vṛndāvana, which is transcendental knowledge personified.

Text 33 

sei bṛndābane jība bhābābiṣṭa ho'ye
nitya-sebā lābha kore' caitanya-āśroye

     sei—this; bṛndābane—in Vṛndāvana; jība—the soul; bhāba—in spiritual love; ābiṣṭa—entered; ho'ye—is; nitya-sebā—eternal service; lābha—attainment; kore'—does; caitanya-āśroye—at the shelter of Lord Caitanya.

     Staying in Vṛndāvana, the soul is overcome with spiritual love. Taking shelter of Lord Caitanya, the soul attains eternal service to the Lord.

Text 34 

prakaṭita līlā āra goloka-bilāsa
eka tattwa bhinna noya dwibidhā prokāśa

     prakaṭita—manifested; līlā—pastimes; āra—and; goloka-bilāsa—pastimes in Goloka; eka—one; tattwa—truth; bhinna—different; noya—not; dwibidhā—in two ways; prokāśa—manifested.

     The Lord's pastimes in Goloka and His pastimes in the material world are identical. They are not different. They are merely manifest twice.

Text 35 

nitya-līlā nitya-dāsa-gaṇera niloya
e prakaṭa-līlā-baddha-jībera āśroya

     nitya-līlā—eternal pastimes; nitya-dāsa-gaṇera—eternal servants; niloya—abode; e—this; prakaṭa-līlā—manifest pastimes; baddha-jībera—of the conditioned souls; āśroya—the shelter.

     The eternally liberated devotees participate in the eternal pastimes in Goloka. The conditioned souls participate in the pastimes in the material world.

Text 36 

ata eba bṛndābana jībera ābāsa
asāra-soṁsāre nitya-tattwera prokāśa

     ata eba—therefore; bṛndābana—Vṛndāvana; jībera—of the soul; ābāsa—residence; asāra-soṁsāre—in ther material world; nitya-tattwera—of the eternal truth; prokāśa—manifestation.

     In this way eternal Vṛndāvana, the soul's original home, is manifested within the horrible material world.

Text 37 

bṛndābana-līlā jība koroho āśroya
ātmā-gata rati-tattwa jahe nitya hoya

     bṛndābana-līlā—the pastimes of Vṛndāvana; jība—the soul; korohaḥ—does; āśroya—shelter; ātmā-gata—gone to the soul; rati-tattwa—the nature of spiritual love; jahe—when; nitya—eternal; hoya—is.

     Taking shelter of the Lord's Vṛndāvana pastimes, the soul eternally falls in love with Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 38 

joḍa-rati-khadyotera āloka adhama
ātmā-rati-sūrjodoye hoya upaśama

     joḍa—material; rati—love; khadyotera—of the firefly; aloka—light; adhama—pathetic; ātmā—for the Lord; rati—love; surja—sun; udoye—rise; hoya—is; upaśama—cessation.

     When the sun of the soul's spiritual love for Lord Kṛṣṇa rises, the firefly light of love for material things becomes eclipsed.

Text 39 

joḍa-rati-gata jata śubhāśubha-karma
jībera sambandhe saba aupadhika dharma

     joḍa-rati-gata—material love; jata—which; śubhāśubha-karma—god and bad karma; jībera—of the soul; sambandhe—relationship; saba—all; aupadhika—material designations; dharma—nature.

     Identifying with his external material body, the soul in the material world performs auspicious and inauspicious deeds.

Text 40 

joḍa-rati hoite loka-bhoga abirata
joḍa-rati aiśwarjera sadā anugata

     joḍa-rati—material love; hoite—from; loka-bhoga—material pleasures; abirata—without stop; joḍa-rati—material love; aiśwarjera—of opulence; sadā—always; anugata—followed.

     From the love of material things material pleasures come. Love for material things follows material opulences.

Text 41 

joḍa-rati joḍa-deha prabhu-sama bhāya
māyika biṣaya-sukhe jībake nācāya

     joḍa-rati—material love; joḍa-deha—material body; prabhu-sama—like the Lord; bhāya—manifesting; māyika—material; biṣaya—sense objects; sukhe—in happiness; jībake—the soul; nācāya—causes to dance.

     Become like his two masters, material love and the material body make the soul dance in the arena of Māyā's sense pleasures.

Text 42 

kabhe tā're lo'ye jāya brahmaloka jathā
kabhu tā'ra śikhā deya jogaiśwarja-kathā

     kabhe—sometimes; tā're—of him; lo'ye—attaining; jāya—going; brahmaloka—to Brahmaloka; jathā—as; kabhu—sometimes; tā'ra—of him; śikhā—instruction; deya—giving; jogaiśwarja-kathā—talk of yoga's opulences.

     Sometimes these two masters take the soul to Brahmaloka. Sometimes they teach him about the glories of mystic yoga.

Text 43 

jogaiśwarja bhogaiśwarja sakhali sabhoya
bṛndābane ātmā-rati jībera abhoya

     jogaiśwarja—the glories of yoga; bhogaiśwarja—the glories of sense pleasures; sakhali—all; sabhoya—fearful; bṛndābane—in Vṛndāvana; ātmā-rati—love for the Lord; jībera—of the soul; abhoya—fearless.

     The opulences of yoga and the opulences of sense pleasures ultimately place the soul in a fearful position. Only when he lives in Vṛndāvana and falls in love with the Supreme Lord does the soul attain fearlessness.

Text 44 

śrī-kṛṣṇa-bimukha-jana aiśwarjera āśe
māyika joḍiyā sukhe baddha māyā-pāśe

     śrī-kṛṣṇa-bimukha-jana—peopel who have turned their faces away from Lord Kṛṣṇa; aiśwarjera—of opulences; āśe—with the desire; māyika—of Maya; joḍiyā—material; sukhe—happiness; baddha—bound; māyā-pāśe—with the ropes of Maya.

     Souls who have turned their faces away from Lord Kṛṣṇa, and who yearn for material opulences, are bound by Māyā's ropes of material pleasures.

Text 45 

akiñcana ātmā-rata kṛṣṇa-rati-sāra
jāni' bhukti-mukti-āśā kore' parihāra

     akiñcana—without any property; ātmā-rata—taking pleasure in the self; kṛṣṇa-rati-sāra—fallen in love with Lord Kṛṣṇa; jāni'—knowing; bhukti—sense gratification; mukti—and impersonal liberation; āśā—desires; kore'—do; parihāra—rejection.

     But when he is no longer ineterested in material things, when he is attracted to spiritual things, and when he falls in love with Lord Kṛṣṇa, the soul, now situated in true knowledge, rejects all desires for sense pleasure or impersonal liberation.

Text 46 

soṁsāre jībana-jātrā anāyāse kori'
nitya-dehe nitya-sebe ātmā-prada hori

     soṁsāre—in the material world; jībana—of life; jātrā—the journey; anāyāse—easily; kori'—doing; nitya-dehe—in the eternal body; nitya-sebe—in eternal service; ātmā-prada—giving to the self; hori—Kṛṣṇa.

     Then the journey of life in this world goes very pleasantly and easily. At the end Lord Kṛṣṇa gives the soul an eternal body and eternal devotional service.

Text 47 

barṇa-mada bala-mada rūpa-mada jata
bisarjana diyā bhakti-pathe hana rata

     barṇa—of caste; mada—intoxicated with pride; bala—of strength; mada—intoxicated with pride; rūpa—of beauty; mada—intoxicated with pride; jata—which; bisarjana—renunciation; diyā—doing; bhakti-pathe—on the path of devotional service; hana—is; rata—intent.

     Renouncing pride of caste, strength, and handsomeness, the soul thus walks on the path of devotional service.

Text 48 

āśramādi bidhānete rāga-dweṣa hīna
eka-mātra kṛṣṇa-bhakti jāni' samicīna

     āśramādi—beginning with asrama; bidhānete—arrangement; rāga-dweṣa—attachm,ent and aversion; hīna—without; eka-mātra—one only; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa; jāni'—knowing; samicīna—right.

     Then the soul has neither attraction nor aversion for the different āśramas or other arrangements of this world. He knows devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa is the only right path.

Text 49 

sādhu-gaṇa-saṅge sadā hari-līlā-rase
japana korena kāla nitya-dharma-baśe

     sādhu-gaṇa-saṅge—in association with devotees; sadā—always; hari-līlā-rase—the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes; japana—chanting; korena—does; kāla—time; nitya-dharma-baśe—in the control of eternal duties.

     Rapt in performing his eternal duties, the soul passes his time in the association of the devotees and always chanting the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes.

Text 50 

jībana-jātrāra janya baidika-bidhāna
rāga-dweṣa bisarjiyā korena sammāna

     jībana—of life; jātrāra—of the journey; janya—because; baidika-bidhāna—Vedic rules; rāga-dweṣa—attachment and aversion; bisarjiyā—renouncing; korena—does; sammāna—respect.

     Renouncing attachment and aversion, he honors the Vedic injunctions in the journey of his life.

Text 51 

sāmānya baidika dharma artha-phala-prada
artha hoite kāma-labha mūḍhera sampada

     sāmānya—general; baidika—Vedic; dharma—duties; artha-phala-prada—giving results of prosperity; artha—prosperity; hoite—from; kāma-labha—attainment of sense gratification; mūḍhera—of fools; sampada—opulence.

     However, the Vedic injunctions meant for the people in general show how to attain material wealth and, after that, how to attain material sense pleasures. These two attainments are the opulences of fools.

Text 52 

sei dharma sei artha sei kāma jata
swīkāra korena dina-jāpanera mata

     sei—this; dharma—duty; sei—this; artha—wealth; sei—this; kāma—sense pleasure; jata—which; swikāra—acceptance; korena—does; dina—days; jāpanera—passing; mata—intoxicated.

     Accepting these Vedic injunctions, many souls pass their days intoxicated by material wealth and material sense pleasures.

Text 53 

tāhāte jībana-jātrā korena nirbāha
jībanera artha kṛṣṇa-bhaktira prabāha

     tāhāte—in that; jībana-jātrā—journey of life; korena—does; nirbāha—carrying out; jībanera—of life; artha—wealth; kṛṣṇa-bhaktira—of devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa; prabāha—the activities.

     In this way the people pass the journey of their lives. However, the true wealth of this life is the activities of devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 54 

ata eba liṅga-hīna sadā sādhu-jana
dwandwātīta ho'ye korena śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhajana

     ata eba—therefore; liṅga-hīna—without distinction; sadā—always; sādhu-jana—devotees; dwandwātīta—beyond duality; ho'ye—is; korena—does; śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhajana—worship of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

     Therefore, rejecting everything else, and free from the dualities of this world, the devotees always worship Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 55 

jñānera prayāse kāla nā kori' jāpana
bhakti-bale nitya-jñāna korena sādhana 

     jñānera—of knowledge; prayāse—effort; kāla—time; nā—not; kori'—doing; jāpana—chanting; bhakti-bale—the power of devotional service; nitya-jñāna—eternal knowledge; korena—does; sādhana—practice.

     The devotees do not struggle to attain knowledge. By the power of devotional service they attain knowledge of the eternal.

Text 56 

jathā tathā bāsa kori' je se bastra pori'
su-labdha-bhojana-dwārā deha rākha kori'

     jathā—as; tathā—so; bāsa—residence; kori'—doing; je—which; se—that; bastra—garments; pori'—wearing; su-labdha—easily attained; bhojana—food; dwārā—by; deha—body; rākha—maintaining; kori'—doing.

     They wear clothing is easily attained, and maintain the body with food that is easily attained, 

Text 57 

kṛṣṇa-bhakta kṛṣṇa-sebā-ānande matiyā
sadā kṛṣṇa-prema-rase phirena gahiyā

     kṛṣṇa-bhakta—devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa-sebā-ānande—the bliss of service to Lord Kṛṣṇa; matiyā—wild; sadā—always; kṛṣṇa-prema-rase—in the nectar of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa; phirena—thrown; gahiyā—plunged.

     Wild with the bliss of serving Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Kṛṣṇa-devotees always swim in the nectar of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 58 

nabadwīpe śrī-caitanya-prabhu abatāra
bhakatibinoda gāya kṛpāya tāṅhāra

     nabadwīpe—in Navadvipa; śrī-caitanya-prabhu—Śrī Caitanya mahaprabhu; abatāra—incarnation; bhakatibinoda—Bhaktivinoda; gāya—singing; kṛpāya—by the mercy; tāṅhāra—of Him.

     By the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Prabhu, who descended to this world in Navadvīpa, Bhaktivinoda sings this song.




Song 2

Text 1

apūrba baiṣṇaba-tattwa ātmāra ānanda-
prasrabana nāhi jā'ra tulana soṁsāre
swa-dharma bolya jā'ra āche paricoya
e jagate e tattwera suno bibaraṇa
para-brahma sanātana ānanda-swarūpa
nitya-kāla rasa-rūpa rasera ādhāra
parāt para adwitīya ananta apāra
tathāpi swarūpa-tattwa śakti-śaktimāna
līlā-rasa-parakāṣṭha āśroya-swarūpa
tarka ki se tattwa kabhu sparśibāre pāre
rasa-tattwa su-gambhīra samādhi-āśroye

     apūrba—wonderful; baiṣṇaba-tattwa—Vaisnava philosophy; ātmāra—of the soul; ānanda—bliss; prasrabana—fountain; nāhi—not; jā'ra—of which; tulana—equal; soṁsāre—in the world; swa-dharma—own nature; bolya—saying; jā'ra—of which; āche—is; paricoya—understanding; e—this; jagate—O world; e—this; tattwera—truth; sunaḥ—please hear; bibaraṇa—description; para-brahma—the Supreme Brahman; sanātana—eternal; ānanda—bliss; swarūpa—nature; nitya-kāla—eternal time; rasa-rūpa—the form of nectar; rasera—of nectar; ādhāra—the reservoir; parāt—than the greatest; para—greater; adwitīya—without a rival; ananta—limitless; apāra—endless; tathāpi—still; swarūpa-tattwa—the nature; śakti-śaktimāna—the potenbcy and the master of potencies; līlā-rasa-parakāṣṭha—the sweetest nectar of transcendental pastimes; āśroya-swarūpa—the shelter; tarka—logic; ki—how?; se—this; tattwa—truth; kabhu—ever; sparśibāre—to touch; pāre—be able; rasa-tattwa—nectar; su-gambhīra—very deep; samādhi—rapt meditation; āśroye—shelter.

     How wonderful is the Vaiṣṇava philosopphy! It is a fountain of bliss for the soul. It has no equal in this world. O world, please hear this description of the Vaiṣṇava philosophy. The Supreme Brahman is eternal and blissful. For eternal time He is full of nectar, the reservoir of nectar. He is greater than the greatest, unrivaled, endless, and limitless. Still, He is all potencies and He is the master of all potencies. He is the sweetest nectar of transcendental pastimes and He is the supreme shelter. How can ordinary material logic have the power to touch Him? He is the deep nectar seen in rapt meditation.

Text 2 

upalabdha āhā māri samādhi ki dhana
samādhi-stha ho'ye dekho su-sthira antare
he sādhaka rasa-tattwa akhaṇḍa ānanda
kintu tahe āswādaka-āswādya-bidhana
nitya-dharma anusyūta adwitīya prabhu
āswādaka kṛṣṇa-rūpa āswādya rādhikā
dwaitānanda parānanda-pīṭha bṛndābana
prākṛta jagate jā'ra prokāśa biśeṣa
jogamāyā prakāśita taṅhara āśroye
labhiche sādhaka-brnda nitya prema-tattwa
ādarśa jāhāra nāma baikuṇṭha kalyāṇa
jadi cāha nityānanda prabāha sebite
abirata guru-padāśroya koro' jība
nīrasa bhajana samudoya parihori'
brahma-cintā ādi jata sadā sādha' rati
kusumita bṛndābane śrī-rāsa-maṇḍale
puruṣatwa-ahaṅkāra nitanta durbala
taba tumi śuddha jība āswādya swajana
śrī-radhikār nitya sakhī parānanda-rasa
anubhabi māyā-bhoga tomāra patana

     upalabdha—understood; āhā—ah!; māri—ah!; samādhi—meditation; ki—what?; dhana—wealth; samadhi—in meditation; stha—standing; ho'ye—is; dekhaḥ—look; su-sthira—peaceful; antare—in the heart; e—this; sādhaka—devotee; rasa-tattwa—nectar; akhaṇḍa—unbroken; ānanda—bliss; kintu—however; tahe—in that; āswādaka-āswādya-bidhana—the distinction of enjoyer and enjoyed; nitya-dharma—eternal nature; anusyūta—connected; adwitīya—without a rival; prabhu—master; āswādaka—enjoyer; kṛṣṇa-rūpa—the form of Kṛṣṇa; āswādya—the enjoyed; rādhikā—Rādhā; dwaita—duality; ānanda—bliss; parānanda-pīṭha—teh abode of supreme bliss; bṛndābana—Vṛndāvana; prākṛta—material; jagate—in the world; jā'ra—of which; prokāśa—manifestation; biśeṣa—specific; jogamāyā—Yogamaya; prakāśita—manifested; taṅhara—of that; āśroye—in the shelter; labhiche—attained; sādhaka-brnda—the devotees; nitya—eternal; prema-tattwa—the truth of love; ādarśa—thing; jāhāra—of which; nāma—name; baikuṇṭha—Vaikuntha; kalyāṇa—auspicious; jadi—if; cāha—desires; nityānanda—Nityānanda; prabāha—glory; sebite—to serve; abirata—always; guru-padāśroya—the shelter of the spiritual master's feet; koro'—do; jība—O soul; nīrasa—without nectar; bhajana—worship; samudoya—arisal; parihori'—rejecting; brahma-cintā—Brahman; ādi—beginning; jata—what; sadā—always; sādha'—attaining; rati—love; kusumita—flower filled; bṛndābane—in Vṛndāvana; śrī-rāsa-maṇḍale—in the rasa dance circle; puruṣatwa—of maleness; ahaṅkāra—false ego; nitanta—limitless; durbala—weak; taba—that; tumi—you; śuddha—pure; jība—soul; āswādya—the enjoyed; swajana—own people; śrī-radhikāḥ—of Śrī Rādhā; nitya—eternal; sakhī—friend; parānanda-rasa—the nectar of transcendental bliss; anubhabi—experiencing; māyā-bhoga—the pleasures of Maya; tomāra—of you; patana—falling down.

     Ah! What a great treasure is seen in that rapt meditation! O devotees, see what is manifested in the meditation of one who has a peaceful heart! The Supreme Truth is nectar, is unbroken bliss. Still, He is divided into the enjoyer and the enjoyed. That is His eternal nature. He is the supreme master. He has no rival. As the enjoyer He is Kṛṣṇa. As the enjoyed He is Rādhā. How much bliss does He enjoy by being these two! his blissful transcendental abode is Vṛndāvana. His Yogamaya potency manifests Vṛndāvana within the material world. The devotees who take shelter of Vṛndāvana attain eternal love for the Lord. How auspicious is Vṛndāvana! Its name is auspicious even in Vaikuṇṭha. O soul, if you wish to serve the eternal and blissful Supreme Lord, then take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master. Renounce all dry and nectarless methods of worship and strive to fall in love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who enjoys pastimes in the rāsa-dance circle in flower-filled Vṛndāvana. Your idea that you are a male is a pathetic mistake. O pure soul, you are meant for Lord Kṛṣṇa's enjoyment. You are an eternal friend of Śrī Rādhā. Please taste the nectar of transcendental bliss. The pleasures of Māyā are your falldown.




Song 3

Text 1

cij-joḍera dwaita jini korena sthāpana
joḍīya kutarka-bale hāya
bhrama-jāla tā'ra buddhi kore ācchādana
bijñāna-āloka nāhi tāya

     cit—of spirit; joḍera—and matter; dwaita—two; jini—which; korena—does; sthāpana—establishment; joḍīya—material; kutarka-bale—by the power of ordinary logic; hāya—alas; bhrama-jāla—in a netwrok of illusions; tā'ra—of him; buddhi—intelligence; kore—does; ācchādana—covering; bijñāna—knowledge; āloka—understanding; nāhi—not; tāya—of him.

     Ah! If someone employs ordinary material logic to understand the difference between matter and spirit, his intelligence will be caught in a net of illusions. he will not understand the truth.

Text 2 

cit-tattwe ādarśa boli' jāne jeya jane
joḍe anukṛti boli' māni
tāhāra bijñāna śuddha rahasya sādhane
samartha boliyā āmi jāni

     cit-tattwe—in spirit; ādarśa—replica; boli'—saying; jāne—know; jeya—which; jane—person; joḍe—in matter; anukṛti—imitation; boli'—saying; māni—I know; tāhāra—of him; bijñāna—knowledge; śuddha—pure; rahasya—secret; sādhane—in practice; samartha—able; boliyā—saying; āmi—I; jāni—know.

     I know that a person who says that the material world is a perverted reflection of the spiritual world knows the secret that is the pure truth.

Text 3 

ata eba e jagate jaha lakṣya hoya
baikuṇṭhera joḍa anukṛti
nirdoṣa baikuṇṭha-gata-sattā-samudoya
sa-doṣa joḍīyā parimiti

     ata eba—therefore; e—this; jagate—in the material world; jaha—which; lakṣya—to be seen; hoya—is; baikuṇṭhera—of the spiritual world; joḍa—matter; anukṛti—imitation; nirdoṣa—faultless; baikuṇṭha-gata-sattā-samudoya—the manifestations of the spiritual world; sa-doṣa—with faults; joḍīyā—masterial; parimiti—made.

     Whatever is seen in the material world is an imitation of what is already present in the spiritual world. However, everything in the spiritual world is faultless, and everything in the material world is full of faults.

Text 4 

baikuṇṭha-nilaye je aprākṛta rati
su-madhura mahā-bhābābadhi
tā'ra tuccha anukṛti puruṣa-prakṛti
saṅga-sukha-saṅkleśa-jaladhi

     baikuṇṭha-nilaye—in the spiritual world; je—what; aprākṛta—not material; rati—love; su-madhura—very sweet; mahā-bhābābadhi—up to the limit of mahā-bhāva; tā'ra—of that; tuccha—patheic; anukṛti—imitation; puruṣa-prakṛti—man and woman; saṅga—contact; sukha—happiness; saṅkleśa—sufferings; jaladhi—an ocean.

     In the spiritual world the non-material love that culminates in the ecstasy of mahā-bhāva is very sweet. In the material world that spiritual love is pervertedly reflected. That reflection, that pathetic imitation, is the material love of material men and women, a love whose pleasures lead to an ocean of troubles.

Text 5 

aprakṛta siddha-deha koriyā āśroya
sahaja-samādhi-joga-bale
sādhaka prakṛti-bhābe śrī-nanda-tanoya
bhajena sarbada kautūhale

     aprakṛta—not material; siddha-deha—perfect body; koriyā—doing; āśroya—shelter; sahaja-samādhi-joga-bale—by the power of natural meditation; sādhaka—the devotee; prakṛti—female; bhābe—with the nature; śrī-nanda-tanoya—Nanda's son; bhajena—worships; sarbadā—always; kautūhale—happily.

     By the power of his sincere spiritual meditation accepting a spiritual female body, the liberated soul joyfully worships Lord Kṛṣṇa eternally.




Song 4

Text 1

jībana-samāpta-kāle koribo bhajana
ebe kori gṛha-sukha'
kakhona e kathā nāhi bole bijña-jane
e deho patanonmukha

     jībana—life; samāpta—end; kāle—at the time; koribaḥ—do; bhajana—worship; ebe—now; kori—I dow; gṛha-sukha'—household happiness; kakhona—what; e—this; kathā—talk; nāhi—not; bole—says; bijña-jane—a wise man; e—this; dehaḥ—body; patana—collapse; unmukha—imminent.

     Because he knows this body's collapse is always imminent, a wise person will never say, "At the moment of my death I will worship the Lord. For now I will enjoy a householder's happiness."

Text 2 

āji bā śateka barṣe abaśya maraṇa
niścinta nā thāko bhāi
jata śīghra para bhajo śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa
jībanera ṭhika nāi

     āji—now; bā—or; śateka—a hundred; barṣe—years; abaśya—inevitable; maraṇa—death; niścinta—without worries; nā—not; thākaḥ—stay; bhāi—my brother; jata—what; śīghra—at once; para—great; bhajaḥ—worship; śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa's feet; jībanera—of life; ṭhika—settled; nāi—not.

     Death must come, either now or in a hundred years. O my brothers, please don't be so free of worries. At once worship Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet. Nothing is certain in this life.

Text 3 

soṁsāra nirbāha kori' ja'bo āmi bṛndābana
ṛṇa-troya śodhibāre koritechi su-jatana

     soṁsāra—of household life; nirbāha—actions; kori'—doing; ja'baḥ—will go; āmi—I; bṛndābana—to Vṛndāvana; ṛṇa-troya—three debts; śodhibāre—to absolve; koritechi—I do; su-jatana—great effort.

     First I will do a housholder's duties. Later I will go to Vṛndāvana. For now I must work to become free of the three debts.

Text 4 

e āśāya nāhi prayojana
emona durāśā-baśe jā'bo prāṇa abaśeṣe
na hoile dīna-bandhu-caraṇa-sebana

     e—this; āśāya—of the desire; nāhi—no; prayojana—need; emona—this; durāśā-baśe—in the grip of bad desires; jā'baḥ—will go; prāṇa—life; abaśeṣe—at the end; na—not; hoile—was; dīna—of the poor; bandhu—of the friend; caraṇa—of the feet; sebana—service.

     You don't need desires like those. In the grip of those desires, you will find your life come to an end. You will not have worship the feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the friend of the poor.

Text 5 

jadi su-maṅgala cāo sadā kṛṣṇa-nāma gāo
gṛhe thāko bane thāko ithe tarka akāraṇa

     jadi—if; su-maṅgala—great auspiciousness; cāaḥ—desire; sadā—always; kṛṣṇa-nāma—Lord Kṛṣṇa's name; gāaḥ—sing; gṛhe—at home; thākaḥ—stay; bane—in the forest; thākaḥ—stay; ithe—in this; tarka—logic; akāraṇa—useless.

     Stay at home, or stay in the forest, if you desire true auspiciousness, please always chant Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. The excuses you gave are all useless.






Part 5 Prārthanā Dainyamayī-Humble Prayers

Song 1

Text 1

kabe śrī-caitanya more koribena doyā
kabe āmi pāibo baiṣṇaba-pada-chāyā

     kabe—when; śrī-caitanya—Śrī Caitanya; more—to me; koribena—gives; doyā—mercy; kabe—when?; āmi—I; pāibaḥ—will attain; baiṣṇaba—of the Vaisnavas; pada—of the feet; chāyā—the shade.

     When will Lord Caitanya be merciful to me? When will I attain the shade of the Vaiṣṇavas' feet?

Text 2 

kabe āmi chāribo e biṣayābhimāna
kabe biṣṇu-jane āmi koribo sammāna

     kabe—when?; āmi—I; chāribaḥ—will renounce; e—this; biṣaya—material; abhimāna—pride; kabe—when?; biṣṇu-jane—the devotees; āmi—I; koribaḥ—will do; sammāna—honor.

     When will I renounce my false pride? When will I honor the Vaiṣṇavas?

Text 3 

gala-bastra kṛtāñjali baiṣṇaba-nikaṭe
dante tṛṇa kori' dāṇḍāibo niṣkapaṭe

     gala—on the neck; bastra—cloth; kṛtāñjali—folded hands; baiṣṇaba-nikaṭe—near the Vaisnavas; dante—teeth; tṛṇa—blade of grass; kori'—doing; dāṇḍāibaḥ—I will stand up; niṣkapaṭe—sincerely.

     When, with folded hands, a cloth around my neck, and a blade of grass between my teeth, will I sincerely offer my respects to the Vaiṣṇavas.

Text 4 

kāndiyā kāndiyā jānāibo duḥkha-grāma
soṁsāra-anala hoite māgibo biśrāma

     kāndiyā—weeping; kāndiyā—and weeping; janāibaḥ—I will know; duḥkha-grāma—the many sufferings; soṁsāra-anala—the blazing fire of the material world; hoite—from; māgibaḥ—I will be; biśrāma—relief.

     When, weeping and weeping, will I finally understand that the material world is a place only of sufferings? When will I beg relief from the blazing fire of repeated birth and death?

Text 5 

śuniyā āmāra duḥkha baiṣṇaba ṭhākura
āmā lagi' kṛṣṇa ābedibena pracūra

     śuniyā—hearing; āmāra—my; duḥkha—sufferings; baiṣṇaba—The Vaisnavas; ṭhākura—saintly; āmā—me; lagi'—taking; kṛṣṇa—to Kṛṣṇa; ābedibena—will appeal; pracūra—greatly.

     When, hearing of my sufferings, will the saintly Vaiṣṇavas take me to Lord Kṛṣṇa and beg Him on my behalf?

Text 6 

baiṣṇabera ābedane kṛṣṇa doyāmoya
e heno pāmara prati ha'bena sadoya

     baiṣṇabera—of the Vaisnavas; ābedane—the appeal; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; doyāmoya—merciful; e—this; henaḥ—like; pāmara—wretch; prati—to; ha'bena—will be; sadoya—merciful.

     When, hearing the Vaiṣṇavas' appeal, will kind Lord Kṛṣṇa be merciful to this sinner?

Text 7 

binodera nibedana baiṣṇaba-caraṇe
kṛpā kori' saṅge laha ei akiñcane

     binodera—of Bhaktivinoda; nibedana—the appeal; baiṣṇaba-caraṇe—at the Vaisnavas' feet; kṛpā—mercy; kori'—doing; saṅge—in the association; laha—please accept; ei—this; akiñcane—who has no property.

     Bhaktivinoda places this appeal before the Vaiṣnavas' feet: "Please be merciful and accept this poor person in your company."




Song 2

Text 1

āmi to' durjana ati sadā durācāra
koṭi koṭi janme mora nāhiko uddhāra

     āmi—I; to'—indeed; durjana—wicked; ati—very; sadā—always; durācāra—acting badly; koṭi—millions; koṭi—and millions; janme—in birth; mora—of me; nāhikaḥ—not; uddhāra—deliverance.

     I am an evil person. My actions are always sins. Even after millions and millions of births I will not be delivered.

Text 2 

e heno doyālu keba e jagate āche
e mata pāmare uddhāriyā la'be kāche

     e—this; henaḥ—like; doyālu—merciful; keba—whoever; e—this; jagate—in the world; āche—is; e—this; mata—like; pāmare—most sinful; uddhāriyā—delivering; la'be—will take; kāche—near.

     Who in this world is so merciful that he will deliver this sinner and give him shelter?

Text 3 

śuniyāchi śrī-caitanya patita-pabana
ananta-pātakī jane korila mocana

     śuniyāchi—I heard; śrī-caitanya—Śrī Caitanya; patita-pabana—the purifier of the fallen; ananta—endless; pātakī—sinners; jane—persons; korila—did; mocana—liberation.

     I heard that Śrī Caitanya, the purifier of the fallen, delivered numberless sinners.

Text 4 

e mata doyāra sindhu kṛpā bitāriyā
kabe uddhāribe more śrī-caraṇa diyā

     e mata—this way; doyāra—of mercy; sindhu—an ocean; kṛpā—mercy; bitāriyā—giving; kabe—when?; uddhāribe—will deliver; more—me; śrī-caraṇa—His graceful feet; diyā—giving.

     He is like an ocean of mercy. When will He mercifully give me shelter at His feet and deliver me?

Text 5 


ei bāra bujhā jā'be koruṇā tomāra
jadi e pāmara-jane koribe uddhāra

     ei—this; bāra—time; bujhā—knowing; jā'be—will go; koruṇā—mercy; tomāra—of You; jadi—if; e—this; pāmara-jane—sinner; koribe—will do; uddhāra—deliverance.

     If You deliver this sinner I will know that You are truly merciful.

Text 6 

karma nāi jñāna nāi kṛṣṇa-bhakti nāi
tabe bolo ki-rūpe o śrī-caraṇa pāi

     karma—pious deeds; nāi—not; jñāna—knowledge; nāi—not; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāi—not; tabe—then; bolaḥ— say; ki-rūpe—in what way; aḥ—and; śrī-caraṇa—at the feet; pāi—I attain.

     I have no pious deeds, no knowledge, and no devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa. How will I attain Your feet? Please tell me.

Text 7 

bharasā āmāra mātra koruṇa tomāra
ahaitukī se koruṇā bedera bicāra

     bharasā—shelter; āmāra—of me; mātra—only; koruṇa—mercy; tomāra—of You; ahaitukī—causeless; se—this; koruṇā—mercy; bedera—of the Vedas; bicāra—understanding.

     Your mercy is my only hope. The Vedas say Your mercy is causeless.

Text 8 

tumi to' pabitra-pada āmi durāśoya
kemone tomāra pade pāibo āśroya

     tumi—You; to'—indeed; pabitra-pada—the abode of purity; ami—I; durāśoya—very wicked; kemone—how?; tomāra—of You; pade—at the feet; pāibaḥ—will attain; āśroya—shelter.

     You are the abode of purity. I am a sinner. How will I find shelter at Your feet?

Text 9 

kāndiyā kāndiyā bole' e patita chāra
patita-pābana nāma prasiddha tomāra

     kāndiyā—weeping; kāndiyā—and weeping; bole'—says; e—this; patita—fallen; chāra—pile of ashes; patita—of the fallen; pābana—the purifier; nāma—name; prasiddha—famous; tomāra—Your.

     Weeping and weeping, this fallen sinner, a person worthless like a pile of ashes, says, "O Lord, You are famous as patita-pāvana (the purifier of the fallen)!"




Song 3

Text 1

bhabārṇabe po'ḍe more ākula parāṇa
kise kūla pa'bo tā'ra nā pāi sandhāna

     bhaba—of birth and death; arṇabe—in theocean; po'ḍe—falling; more—to me; akula—distress; parāṇa—life; kise—how?; kūla—father shore; pa'baḥ—will attain; tā'ra—of that; nā—not; pāi—I attain; sandhāna—discovery.

     I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death, and now my life is filled with troubles. How will I cross to the farther shore of this ocean? I do not know.

Text 2 

na āche karama-bala nāhi jñāna-bala
jāga-joga-tapo-dharma nā āche sambala

     na—not; āche—is; karama-bala—the power of karma; nāhi—not; jñāna-bala—the power of knowledge; jāga—yajnas; joga—yoga; tapaḥ—austerities; dharma—religion; nā—not; āche—is; sambala—wealth.

     I have no power given by past pious deeds. I have no power of transcendental knowledge. I have no wealth of yajñas, yoga, austerity, or religion.

Text 3 

nitānta durbala āmi nā jāni santāra
e bipade ke āmāre koribe uddhāra

     nitānta—very; durbala—weak; āmi—I; nā—not; jāni—know; santāra—swimming; e—this; bipade—in the calamity; ke—who?; āmāre—to me; koribe—will be; uddhāra—the deliverer.

     I am very weak. I don't know how to swim. In this calamity who will rescue me?

Text 4 

biṣaya-kumbhīra tāhe bhīṣaṇa-darśana
kāmera taraṅga sadā kore' uttejana

     biṣaya—of sense pleasures; kumbhīra—the crocodile; tāhe—that; bhīṣaṇa-darśana—fearful to see; kāmera—of lust; taraṅga—waves; sadā—always; kore'—do; uttejana—agitation.

     The waves of lust splash against me. The crocodile of sense pleasures, so fearsome to see, attacks me.

Text 5 

prāktana-bāyura bega sahite nā pāri
kāndiyā asthira mana nā dekhi kāṇḍāri

     prāktana—of previous karma; bāyura—of the wind; bega—the power; sahite—with; nā—not; pāri—Iam able; kāndiyā—weeping; asthira—unsteady; mana—mind; nā—not; dekhi—I see; kāṇḍāri—a savior.

     I have no power to resist the winds of my past karma. Weeping, and my heart agitated, I do not see anyone to rescue me.

Text 6 

ogo śrī-jāhnabā debī e dāse koruṇā
koro' aji nija-guṇe ghucāo jantraṇā

     ogaḥ—O; śrī-jāhnabā debī—Śrī Jahnavi-devi; e—this; dāse—servant; koruṇā—mercy; koro'—please do; aji—now; nija—own; guṇe—virtues; ghucāaḥ—please destroy; jantraṇā—sufferings.

     O Śrī Jahnavi-devi, please me merciful to this servant. Please be kind. Please destroy his sufferings.

Text 7 

tomāra caraṇa-tarī koriyā āśroya
bhabārṇaba pāra ha'ba korechi niścoya

     tomāra—your; caraṇa—of the feet; tari—the boat; koriyā—doing; āśroya—shelter; bhabārṇaba—the ocean of birth and death; para—the farther shore; ha'ba—will be; korechi—I do; niścoya—without doubt.

     Taking shelter of the boat of your feet, I will certainly cross to the farther shore of this ocean of birth and death.

Text 8 

tumi nityānanda-śakti kṛṣṇa-bhakti-guru
e dāse koroho dāna pada-kalpa-taru

     tumi—you; nityānanda-śakti—the potency of Lord Nityānanda; kṛṣṇa-bhakti-guru—the teacher of devotional service; e—this; dāse—servant; korohaḥ—please do; dāna—gift; pada—of the feet; kalpa-taru—the kalpa-vrksa tree.

     You are Lord Nityānanda's potency. You are the guru of Kṛṣṇa-bhakti. To this servant please give the gift of the kalpa-vṛkṣa tree of your feet.

Text 9 

kota kota pāmarere ko'recho uddhāra
tomāra caraṇe āja e kāṅgāla chāra

     kota—how many?; kota—how many?; pāmarere—sinners; ko'rechaḥ—you did; uddhāra—deliverance; tomāra—of you; caraṇe—at the feet; āja—now; e—this; kāṅgāla—poor beggar; chāra—pile of ashes.

     How many sinners have you already delivered? How many? This poor beggar, this pile of ashes, begs at your feet.




Song 4

Text 1

biṣaya-bāsanā-rūpa cittera bikāra
āmāra hṛdoye bhoga kā're anibāra

     biṣaya—of sense objects; bāsanā—desires; rūpa—form; cittera—of the heart; bikāra—transformatuion; āmāra—of me; hṛdoye—the heart; bhoga—pleasure; kā're—of which; anibāra—without stop.

     Horrible material desires stay always in my heart.

Text 2 

je kota jatana āmi korilama hāya
na gelo bikāra bujhi śeṣe prāṇa jāya

     je—which; kota—how many?; jatana—struggles; āmi—I; korilama—do; hāya—alas; na—not; gelaḥ—go; bikāra—horrible; bujhi—I know; śeṣe—at the end; prāṇa—life; jāya—goes.

     How much did I struggle! The horrible desires would not go. I know at the end my life-breath will flee.

Text 3 

e ghora bikāra more korilo asthira
śānti nā pāilo sthāna antara adhīra

     e—these; ghora—horrible; bikāra—ungly things; more—to me; korilaḥ—do; asthira—unsteady; śānti—peace; nā—not; pāilaḥ—attain; sthāna—place; antara—another; adhīra—unsteady.

     These grotesque, horrible desires make me unsteady. I cannot find peace. I am agitated at heart.

Text 4 

śrī-rūpa-goswāmī more kṛpā bitariyā
uddhāribe kabe jukta-bairāgya arpiyā

     śrī-rūpa-goswāmī—Śrī Rupa Gosvami; more—to me; kṛpā—mercy; bitariyā—giving; uddhāribe—will deliver; kabe—when?; jukta-bairāgya—proper renunciation; arpiyā—giving.

     When will Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī be merciful, give me proper renunciation, and deliver me?

Text 5 

kabe sanātana more chāradye biṣoya
nityānande sāmārpibe haiyā sadoyā

     kabe—when?; sanātana—sanata Gosvami; more—to me; chāradye—causing to renounbce; biṣoya—sense gratification; nityānande—Lord Nityānanda; sāmārpibe—will place before; haiyā—doing; sadoyā—mercifully.

     When will Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī give me the power to renounce sense pleasures? When will he mercifully place me before Lord Nityānanda?

Text 6 

śrī-jība-gośwāmī kabe siddhānta-salile
nibāibe tarkānala citta jāhe jwale

     śrī-jība-gośwāmī—Śrī Jiva Gosvami; kabe—when?; siddhānta—of true conclusions; salile—with the water; nibāibe—will extinguish; tarka—of material logic; anala—the flames; citta—in the heart; jāhe—which; jwale—burn.

     When will Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, pouring the water of truth, extinguish the flames of material logic that burn in my heart?

Text 7 

śrī-caitanya-nāma sune udibe pulaka
rādhā-kṛṣṇāmṛta-pāne haibo aśoka

     śrī-caitanya-nāma—the holy name of Lord Caitanya; sune—hear; udibe—will rise; pulaka—hairs; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; amṛta—nectar; pāne—drinking; haibaḥ—will be; aśoka—free from grief.

     When will the hairs of my body stand erect as I hear Lord Caitanya's holy name? When, drinking the nectar of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, will I become free of all lamenting?

Text 8 

kāṅgālera su-kāṅgāla durjana e jana
baiṣṇaba-caraṇāśroya jāce akiñcana

     kāṅgālera—of poor beggars; su-kāṅgāla—the most poor and wretched beggar; durjana—wicked; e—this; jana—person; baiṣṇaba—of the Vaisnavas; caraṇa—of the feet; āśroya—shelter; jāce—begs; akiñcana—penniless.

     This penniless, sinful beggar, the most wretched of all beggars, begs for shelter at the Vaiṣṇavas' feet.




Song 5

Text 1

āmāra samāna hīna nāhi e soṁsāre
asthira ha'yechi poḍi' bhaba pārābāre

     āmāra—me; samāna—like; hīna—degraded; nāhi—not; e—this; soṁsāre—in the world; asthira—unsteady; ha'yechi—is; poḍi'—fallin; bhaba—material world; pārābāre—ocean.

     In this world no one is fallen like me. Drowning in the ocean of birth and death, I am very anxious.

Text 2 

kuladebī jogamāyā more kṛpā kori'
ābaraṇa sambaribe kabe biśwodarī

     kuladebī—Goddess; jogamāyā—Yogamaya; more—to me; kṛpā—mercy; kori'—doing; ābaraṇa—covering; sambaribe—will remove; kabe—when; biśwodarī—the mother of the world.

     O Goddess Yogamāyā, O the mother of the worlds, when will you be merciful to me and remove this veil of illusions? 

Text 3 

śunechi āgame bede mahimā tomāra
śrī-kṛṣṇa-bimukhe bāndhi karāo soṁsāra

     śunechi—I heard; āgame—in the Agamas; bede—in the Vedas; mahimā—glory; tomāra—of you; śrī-kṛṣṇa-bimukhe—averse to Lord Kṛṣṇa; bāndhi—binding; karāaḥ—do; soṁsāra—in the material world.

     In the Vedas and Agamas I have heard your glories. The souls who have turned away from Lord Kṛṣṇa you imprison in the world of birth and death. 

Text 4 

śrī-kṛṣṇa-sāmmukhya jā'ra bhāgya-krame hoya
tā're mukti diyā koro' aśoka abhoya

     śrī-kṛṣṇa-sāmmukhya—favorable top Lord Kṛṣṇa; jā'ra—which; bhāgya-krame—good fortune; hoya—is; tā're—of them; mukti—liberation; diyā—giving; koro'—do; aśoka—without grief; abhoya—without fear.

     To the fortunate souls who try to turn toward Lord Kṛṣṇa you give liberation. You free them from fear and grief.

Text 5 

e dāse janani kori' akaitaba doyā
bṛndābane deha' sthāna tumi jogamāyā

     e—this; dāse—servant; janani—O mother; kori'—doing; akaitaba—without cheating; doyā—mercy; bṛndābane—in Vṛndāvana; deha'—please give; sthāna—a place; tumi—you; jogamāyā—Yogamāyā.

     O mother, please be merciful to this servant. Please don't cheat him. O Yogamāyā, please give him a place in Vṛndāvana.

Text 6 

tomāke laṅghiyā kothā jībe kṛṣṇa pāya
kṛṣṇa-rasa prakaṭilo tomāra kṛpāya

     tomāke—you; laṅghiyā—jumping over; kothā—where; jībe—the soul; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; pāya—attaining; kṛṣṇa-rasa—the nectar of Kṛṣṇa; prakaṭilaḥ—manifests; tomāra—of you; kṛpāya—by the mercy.

     How can a person who neglects you find Lord Kṛṣṇa? It is by your mercy that the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa is openly visible.

Text 7 

tumi kṛṣṇa-sahacarī jagata-jananī
tumi dekhāile more kṛṣṇa-cintāmaṇi

     tumi—you; kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sahacarī—the companion; jagata—of the universes; jananī—the mother; tumi—you; dekhāile—show; more—to me; kṛṣṇa-cintāmaṇi—the cintamani jewel that is Lord Kṛṣṇa.

     You are Lord Kṛṣṇa's companion. You are the mother of the worlds. You showed me the cintāmaṇi jewel that is Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 8 

niṣkapaṭa ho'ye mātā cāo mora pāne
baiṣṇaba biśwāsa bṛddhi ha'ka prati-khaṇe

     niṣkapaṭa—without cheating; ho'ye—is; mātā—O mother; cāaḥ—I desire; mora—of me; pāne baiṣṇaba—to the Vaisnavas; biśwāsa—faith; bṛddhi—increase; ha'ka—will be; prati-khaṇe—moment after moment.

     O mother, I sincerely desire that my faith in the Vaiṣṇavas will grow moment after moment.

Text 9

baiṣṇaba-caraṇa binā bhaba-parābāra
bhakatibinoda nāre hoibāre pāra

     baiṣṇaba-caraṇa—the Vaisnavas' feet; binā—without; bhaba-parābāra—the ocean of birth and death; bhakatibinoda—Bhaktivinoda; nāreis not; hoibāre—to do; pāra—crossing to the farther shore.

     Without taking shelter of the Vaiṣṇavas' feet, Bhaktivinoda has no power to cross to the farther shore of the ocean of birth and death.




Part 6 Prārthanā Lalasāmayī-Prayers Filled With Longing

Song 1

Text 1

kabe mora śubha-dina hoibe udoya
bṛndābana-dhāma mama hoibe āśroya

     kabe—when?; mora—of me; śubha—auspicious; dina—day; hoibe—will be; udoya—arisal; bṛndābana-dhāma—Vṛndāvana dhama; mama—my; hoibe—will be; āśroya—the shelter.

     When will I take shelter of Vṛndāvana? When will that auspicious day be mine?

Text 2 

ghucibe soṁsāra-jwālā biṣaya-bāsanā
baiṣṇabe soṁsarge mora pūribe kāmanā

     ghucibe—will destroy; soṁsāra—of the material world; jwālā—the fire; biṣaya—material; bāsanā—desires; baiṣṇabe—to the Vaisnavas; soṁsarge—in the association; mora—of me; pūribe—will fulfill; kāmanā—the desires.

     When will my material desires end? When will the flames of birth and death be extinguished? When will association with the Vaiṣṇavas fulfill all my desires?

Text 3 

dhulāya dhūsara ho'ye hari-saṅkīrtane
matta ho'ye poḍe ro'ba baiṣṇaba-caraṇe

     dhulāya—with dust; dhūsara—darkened; ho'ye—is; hari-saṅkīrtane—in trhe chanting of Lord Kṛṣṇa's names; matta—wild; ho'ye—is; poḍe—fall; ro'ba—will stay; baiṣṇaba-caraṇe—at the Vaisnavas' feet.

     When, in the chanting of Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana, will I become wild, fall to the ground, roll in the dust, and grasp the Vaiṣṇavas' feet?

Text 4 

kabe śrī-jamunā-tīre kadamba-kānane
heribo jugala-rūpa hṛdoya-nayane

     kabe—when?; śrī-jamunā-tīre—on the Śrī Yamuna's shore; kadamba-kānane—in a kadamba forest; heribaḥ—will see; jugala-rūpa—the forms of the divine couple; hṛdoya—heart; nayane—with the eyes.

     When with the eyes of my heart will I see the divine couple in a kadamba grove by Śrī Yamunā's bank?

Text 5 

kabe sakhī kṛpā kori' jugala-sebāya
nijukta koribe more rākhi' nija pā'ya

     kabe—when; sakhī—a gopī friend; kṛpā—mercy; kori'—doing; jugala—of the divine couple; sebāya—service; nijukta—engaged; koribe—will do; more—to me; rākhi'—protecting; nija—own; pā'ya—at the feet.

     When will a gopī give me shelter at her feet and kindly engage me in serving the divine couple?

Text 6 

kabe bā jugala-līlā kori' daraśana
premānanda-bhore āmi ha'bo acetana

     kabe—when?; ba—or; jugala—of the divine couple; līlā—pastimes; kori'—doing; daraśana—sight; prema—love; ānanda—and bliss; bhore—abundance; āmi—I; ha'baḥ—will be; acetana—unconscious.

     When, gazing at the divine couple's pastimes, will I, overcome with bliss and love, fall unconscious?

Text 7 

kata khaṇa acetana poḍiyā rohibo
āpana śarīra āmi kabe pāśaribo

     kata—how many?; khaṇa—moments; acetana—unconscious; poḍiyā—falling; rohibaḥ—will stay; āpana—own; sarira—body; āmi—I; kabe—when?; pāśaribaḥ—will forget.

     How long will I be unconscious? When will I forget my body in this way?

Text 8 

uṭhiyā smaribo punaḥ acetana-kāle
jā' dekhinu kṛṣṇa-līlā bhāsi' aṅkhi-jale

     uṭhiyā—rising; smaribaḥ—I will remember; punaḥ—again; acetana—unconscious; kāle—at the time; jā'—which; dekhinu—I saw; kṛṣṇa-līlā—Kṛṣṇa's pastimes; bhāsi'—floating; aṅkhi—of the eyes; jale—in the water.

     When, becoming conscious again, will I remember the vision of Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes I saw in those unconscious moments and then suddenly float in the tears streaming from my eyes?

Text 9 

kākuti minati kori' baiṣṇaba-sadane
bolibo bhakati-bindu deho' e durjane

     kākuti—with words choked with emotion; minati—request; kori'—doing; baiṣṇaba-sadane—in the assembly of Vaisnavas; bolibaḥ—will say; bhakati—of devotion; bindu—a drop; deho'—please give; e—to this; durjane—sinner.

     When, with words choked with emotion, will I beg the Vṛndāvanas: "To this sinner please give one drop of devotion to the Lord."?

Text 10 

śrī-anaṅga-mañjarīra caraṇa śaraṇa
e bhaktibinoda āśā kore anukhaṇa

     śrī-anaṅga-mañjarīra—of Śrī Anaṅga-mañjarī; caraṇa—at the feet; śaraṇa—shelter; e—this; bhaktibinoda—Bhaktivinoda; āśā—desire; kore—does; anukhaṇa—at every moment.

     At every moment Bhaktivinoda longs to take shelter of Anaṅga-mañjarī's feet.




Song 2

Text 1

śrī-guru-baiṣṇaba-kṛpā kota dine habe
upādhi-rahita-rati citte upajibe

     śrī-guru—of the spiritual master; baiṣṇaba—and the4 Vaisnavas; kṛpā—mercy; kota—how many?; dine—days; habe—will; be; upādhi—material designations; rahita—without; rati—spiritual love; citte—in the heart; upajibe—will take birth.

     After how many days will I attain the mercy of my spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas? After how many days will spiritual love, love free of material misconceptions, take birth in my heart?

Text 2 

kabe siddha-deha mora hoibe prakāśa
sakhī dekhāibe more jugala-bilāsa

     kabe—when?; siddha—perfect; deha—body; mora—of me; hoibe—; prakāśa—manifestation; sakhī—gopī friend; dekhaibe—will show; more—to me; jugala—of the divine couple; bilāsa—the pastimes.

     When will I attain my original spiritual body? When will a gopī show me the divine couple's pastimes?

Text 3 

dekhite dekhite rūpa hoibo bātula
kadamba-kānane jā'bo tyaji' jāti kula

     dekhite—gazing; dekhite—and gazing; rūpa—form; hoibaḥ—will be; bātula—crazy; kadamba-kānane—in teh kadamba forest; jā'baḥ—will go; tyaji'—leaving; jāti—caste; kula—and family.

     When, gazing and gazing at the beautiful forms of the divine couple, will I become almost mad? When, leaving behind my caste and family, will I run into that kadamba forest?

Text 4 

sweda kampa pulakāśru baibarṇya praloya
stambha swara-bheda kabe hoibe udoya

     sweda—perspiration; kampa—trembling; pulaka—hairs standing erect; aśru—tears; baibarṇya—turning pale; praloya—devastation; stambha—being stunned; swara-bheda—speaking with a broken voice; kabe—when?; hoibe—will be; udoya—arisal.

     When will I manifest the ecstatic symptoms of perspiring, trembling, tears, devastation, being stunned, standing erect of the body's hairs, and speaking with a broken voice?

Text 5 

bhābamoya bṛndābana heribo nayane
sakhīra kiṅkorī ho'ye sebibo du'jane

     bhābamoya—filled with ecstatic love; bṛndābana—Vṛndāvana; heribaḥ—I will see; nayane—eyes; sakhīra—of a gopī; kiṅkorī—the maidservant; ho'ye—is; sebibaḥ—I will serve; du'jane—the divine couple.

     When, filled with ecstatic love, will I see Vṛndāvana with my own eyes? When, becoming a gopī's maidservant, will I serve the divine couple?

Text 6 

kabe narottama saha sākhāta hoibe
kabe bā prārthanā-rasa citte prabeśibe

     kabe—when; narottama—Narottama; saha—with; sākhāta—direct; hoibe—will be; kabe—when?; bā—or; prārthanā—of prayers; rasa—nectar; citte—in the heart; prabeśibe—will enter.

     When will I meet Narottama dāsa? When will the nectar of his book Prārthanā enter my heart?

Text 7 

caitanya-dāsera dāsa chāri' anya rati
kara-juri' māge aja śrī-caitanya mati

     caitanya—of Lord Caitanya; dāsera—of the servant; dāsa—the servant; chāri'—renouncing; anya—other; rati—love; kara-juri'—folding hands; māge—beg; āja—now; śrī-caitanya—of Lord Caitanya; mati—the thought.

     Rejecting all other attractions, this servant of Lord Caitanya's servants folds his hands and begs that he may always meditate on Lord Caitanya.




Song 3

Text 1

āmāra emona bhāgya kota dine ha'be
āmāre āpana boli' janibe baiṣṇabe

     āmāra—of me; emona—like that; bhāgya—good fortune; kota—how many?; dine—days; ha'be—will be; āmāre—of me; āpana—himself; boli'—saying; janibe—will know; baiṣṇabe—a Vaiṣṇava.

     After how many days will I become fortunate? After how many days will a Vaiṣṇava say that I am his servant?

Text 2 

śrī-guru-caraṇāmṛta-mādhwīka-sebane
matta ho'ye kṛṣṇa-guṇa gābo bṛndābane

     śrī-guru—of the spiritual master; caraṇa—of the feet; amṛta—nectar; mādhwīka—madhvika; sebane—in service; matta—intoxicated; ho'ye—being; kṛṣṇa-guṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa's transcendental qualities; gābaḥ—I will sing; bṛndābane—in Vṛndāvana.

     When, intoxicated by drinking the mādhvīka nectar at my spiritual master's feet, will I sing Lord Kṛṣṇa's glories in Vṛndāvana?

Text 3 

karmī jñānī kṛṣṇa-dweṣī bahirmukha-jana
ghṛṇā kori' akiñcane koribe barjana

     karmī—karmis; jñānī—jnanis; kṛṣṇa-dweṣī—enemies of Lord Kṛṣṇa; bahirmukha-jana—persons who have turned their backs on Lord Kṛṣṇa; ghṛṇā—aversion; kori'—doing; akiñcane—poor; koribe—will do; barjana—abandonment.

     When will this poor person, feeling disgust and horror, turn away from the karmīs, jñānīs, enemies of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and persons who have turned their backs on Lord Kṛṣṇa? 

Text 4 

karma-joḍa-smārta-gaṇa koribe siddhānta
ācāra-rohita ei nitānta aśānta

     karma—karma; joḍa—material; smārta-gaṇa—learned in the smrti-sastras; koribe—will do; siddhānta—copnclusion; ācāra—good conduct; rohita—without; ei—this; nitānta—very; aśānta—unpeaceful.

     When will the karmīs and smārta-paṇḍitas decide that I am very restless and misbehaved?

Text 5 

bātula boliyā more paṇḍitābhimānī
tyajibe āmāra saṅga māyābādī jñānī

     bātula—mad; boliyā—saying; more—to me; paṇḍitābhimānī—proud of being panditas; tyajibe—will renounce; āmāra—my; saṅga—company; māyābādī—mayavadi; jñānī—philosophers.

     When will the māya1vādīs, proud of being great scholars, call me a madman and shun me?

Text 6 

ku-saṅga-rohita dekhi' baiṣṇaba-sujana
kṛpā kori' āmāre dibena āliṅgana

     ku-saṅga—from bad association; rohita—free; dekhi'—seeing; baiṣṇaba-sujana—the saintly Vaisnavas; kṛpā—mercy; kori'—doing; āmāre—to me; dibena—will give; āliṅgana—embrace.

     When, seeing that I shun all bad association, will the saintly Vaiṣṇavas kindly embrace me?

Text 7 

sparśiyā baiṣṇaba-deha e durjana chāra
ānande lobhibe kabe sattwika-bikāra

     sparśiyā—touching; baiṣṇaba-deha—the body of a Vaiṣṇava; e—this; durjana—sinner; chāra—pile fo ashes; ānande—with bliss; lobhibe—will attain; kabe—when; sattwika-bikāra—the symptoms of sattvika-bhava ecstasy.

     When, touching a Vaiṣṇava's body, will this sinner, this pile of ashes, joyfully attain the ecstasies of sāttvika-bhāva?




Song 4

Text 1

caitanya-candrera līlā samudra apāra
bujhite śakati nāhi ei kathā sāra

     caitanya-candrera—of Lord Caitanyacandra; līlā—pastimes; samudra—ocean; apāra—shoreless; bujhite—to understand; śakati—the power; nāhi—not; ei—this; kathā—words; sāra—best.

     No one has the power to know everything about the shoreless ocean of Lord Caitanyacandra's pastimes. That is the essence of this book.

Text 2 

śāstrera agamya tattwa śrī-kṛṣṇa āmāra
tāṅra līlā anta bujhe śakati kāhāra

     śāstrera—by the scriptures; agamya—unattainable; tattwa—truth; śrī-kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; āmāra—of me; tāṅra—of Him; līlā—pastimes; anta—end; bujhe—to know; śakati—the power; kāhāra—of whom?.

     My Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Truth. Even the scriptures cannot approach Him. Who has the power to know the limit of His pastimes?

Text 3 

tabe mūrkha-jana keno śāstra bicāriyā
gaura-līlā nāhi māne anta nā pāiyā

     tabe—then; mūrkha-jana—fools; kenaḥ—why?; śāstra—scriptures; bicāriyā—studying; gaura-līlā—the pastimes of Loerd Caitanya; nāhi—not; māne—know; anta—the end; na—not; pāiyā—attaining.

     Why do the fools study the scriptures? They will never understand the limit of Lord Caitanya's pastimes.

Text 4 

anantera anta āche kona śāstra gāya
śāstrādhīna kṛṣṇa iha śuni' hāsi pāya

     anantera—of that which has no end; anta—the end; āche—is; kona—in what; śāstra—scriptures; gāya—singing; śāstra—to the scriptures; adhīna—subordinate; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; iha—here; śuni'—hearing; hāsi—laughing; pāya—attaining.

     What scripture can find the limit of the limitless? Hearing the words, "Kṛṣṇa is ruled by the scriptures," I smile and laugh.

Text 5 

kṛṣṇa hoibena gorā iccha ho'lo tāṅra
sa-baikuṇṭha nabadwīpe hoila abatāra

     kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; hoibena—wil be; gorā—Lord Caitanya; iccha—desire; ho'laḥ—was; tāṅra—of Him; sa-baikuṇṭha—with the spiritual world; nabadwīpe—in Navadvipa; hoila—did; abatāra—descent.

     By His own wish, dark Lord Kṛṣṇa has now become fair. Bringing His spiritual world, He descended to Navadvīpa.

Text 6 

jakhona āsena kṛṣṇa jība uddhārite
saṅge saba sahacara āse pṛthivīte

     jakhona—when; āsena—comes; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; jība—the conditioned souls; uddhārite—to deliver; saṅge—association; saba—with; sahacara—followers; āse—comes; pṛthivīte—to the earth.

     When He desires to deliver the conditioned souls, Lord Kṛṣṇa comes with His associates to the earth.

Text 7 

gorā abatāre tāṅra śrī-jaya-bijoya
nabadwīpe śatru-bhābe hoilo udoya

     gorā—Lord Caitanya; abatāre—incarnation; tāṅra—of Him; śrī-jaya-bijoya—Śrī Jaya and Vijaya; nabadwīpe—in navadvipa; śatru—enemies; bhābe—nature; hoilaḥ—was; udoya—arisal.

     When Lord Caitanya descended to Navadvīpa, Śrī Jaya and Vijaya came and became His enemies.

Text 8 

pūrbe pūrbe abatāre asura āchilo
śāstre bole paṇḍita hoiyā janamilo

     pūrbe pūrbe—previous; abatāre—incarnations; asura—demons; āchilaḥ—were; śāstre—in the scriptures; bole—says; paṇḍita—learned; hoiyā—being; janamilaḥ—took birth.

     Many times in the past they had descended to this world as demons. Now they took birth as paṇḍitas learned in the scriptures.

Text 9 

smṛti-tarka-śāstre bole bairī prakāśiyā
gorācandra saha raṇa korilo mātiyā

     smṛti-tarka-śāstre—in the smrti and tarkla scriptures; bole—says; bairī—enemies; prakāśiyā—manifesting; gorācandra—Lord Caitanya; saha—with; raṇa—battle; korilaḥ—did; mātiyā—thinking.

     Speaking from the Smṛti and Tarka śāstras, they became Lord Caitanya enemies. They struggled against Him.

Text 10

ata eba nabadwīpa-bāsī jata jana
śrī-caitanya-līlā-puṣṭi kore anukhaṇa

     ata eba—thus; nabadwīpa-bāsī—the residents of Navadvipa; jata—who; jana—people; śrī-caitanya-līlā—Lord Caitanya's pastimes; puṣṭi—nourishment; kore—did; anukhaṇa—moment after moment.

     Moment after moment all the people of Navadvīpa made Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes sweeter and sweeter.

Text 11 

ekhona je brahma-kule caitanyera ari
tā'ke jāni caitanyera līlā puṣṭikārī

     ekhona—one; je—who; brahma-kule—in a brāhmaṇa family; caitanyera—of Lord Caitanya; ari—enemy; tā'ke—him; jāni—knowing; caitanyera—of Lord Caitanya; līlā—pastimes; puṣṭikārī—nourishing.

     I know that these enemies of the Lord, enemies born in a brāhmaṇa family, made Lord Caitanya's pastimes sweeter and more glorious.

Text 12 

śrī-caitanya-anucara śatru-mitra jata
sakalera śrī-caraṇe hoilāma nata

     śrī-caitanya-anucara—the followers of Lord Caitanya; śatru—enemies; mitra—friends; jata—who; sakalera—of all; śrī-caraṇe—at the feet; hoilāma—I do; nata—obeisances.

     I bow down before the feet of all Lord Caitanya's associates, friends or enemies.

Text 13 

tomāra koroho kṛpā e dāsera prati
caitanya su-dṛḍha koro binodera mati

     tomāra—of you; korohaḥ—please do; kṛpā—mercy; e—this; dāsera—servant; prati—to; caitanya—Lord Caitanya; su-dṛḍha—very firm; koraḥ—please do; binodera—Bhaktivinoda; mati—heart.

     Please be merciful to this servant. Please make Bhaktivinoda's heart deeply devoted to Lord Caitanya.




Song 5

Text 1

kabe mora mūḍha mana chāri' anya dhyāna
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇe pābe biśrāmera sthāna

     kabe—when; mora—my; mūḍha—foolish; mana—heart; chāri'—renouncing; anya—ither; dhyāna—meditations; śrī-kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; caraṇe—at the feet; pabe—will attain; biśrāmera—rest; sthāna—place.

     When will my foolish mind turn from all other thoughts and take shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet?

Text 2 

kabe āmi jānibo āpane akiñcana
āmāra apekha khudra nāhi anya jana

     kabe—when?; āmi—I; jānibaḥ—will know; āpane—myself; akiñcana—without anything; āmāra—of me; apekha—in relation to; khudra—insignificant; nāhi—not; anya—another; jana—person.

     When will I understand that I have nothing of value, that no one is insignificant like me?

Text 3 

kabe āmi ā-caṇḍāle koribo praṇati
kṛṣṇa-bhakti māgi' la'ba koriyā minati

     kabe—when; āmi—I; ā-caṇḍāle—down to the candalas; koribaḥ—will do; praṇati—obeisances; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa; māgi'—begging; la'ba—will take; koriyā—doing; minati—prayers.

     When will I bow down before all living entities, even the caṇḍālas? When, speaking many prayers, will I beg that they give me devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa?

Text 4 

sarba-jībe doyā mora kota dine habe
jībera durgati dekhi' lotaka poḍibe

     sarba-jībe—all souls; doyā—mercy; mora—of me; kota—how many?; dine—days; habe—will be; jībera—of the soul; durgati—misfortune; dekhi'—seeing; lotaka—tears; poḍibe—will fall.

     After how many days will I become merciful to all souls? When, seeing the conditioned souls' misfortune, will I weep?

Text 5 

kāndite kāndite āmi ja'bo bṛndābana
braja-dhāme baiṣṇabera loibo śaraṇa

     kāndite—weeping; kāndite—and weeping; āmi—I; ja'baḥ—will go; bṛndābana—to Vṛndāvana; braja-dhāme—in the abode of Vraja; baiṣṇabera—of th Vaisnavas; loibaḥ—will attain; śaraṇa—shelter.

     When, weeping and weeping, will I go to Vṛndāvana? When will I take shelter of the Vaiṣṇavas in Vraja-dhāma?

Text 6 

braja-bāsī-sannidhāne juri' dui kora
jijñāsibo līlā-sthāna hoiyā katora

     braja-bāsī—the residents of Vraja; sannidhāne—near; juri'—folding; dui—two; kora—hands; jijñāsibaḥ—will ask; līlā—pastimes; sthāna—place; hoiyā—doing; katora—intent.

     When, folding my hands, will I earnestly beg the people of Vraja to show me the places of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes?

Text 7 

ohe braja-bāsī more anugraha kori'
dekhāo kothāya līlā korilena hori

     ohe—O; braja-bāsī—residents of Vraja; more—to me; anugraha—mercy; kori'—doing; dekhāaḥ—show; kothāya—where; līlā—pastimes; korilena—does; hori—Kṛṣṇa.

     When will I say, "O people of Vraja, please be kind and show me where Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoyed pastimes?"

Text 8 

tabe kona braja-jana sa-kṛpā-antore
āmāre jā'bena lo'ye bipina-bhitore

     tabe—then; kona—some; braja-jana—people of Vraja; sa-kṛpā-antore—with kind hearts; āmāre—to me; ja'bena—will go; lo'ye—taking; bipina-bhitore—to the forest.

     When will a kind-hearted person of Vraja take me into the forest?

Text 9

bolibena dekho ei kadamba-kānana
jathā rāsa-līlā koila brajendra-nandana

     bolibena—says; dekhaḥ—look; ei—this; kadamba-kānana—kadamba forest; jathā—as; rāsa-līlā—rasa dance pastimes; koila—did; brajendra-nandana—the prince of Vraja.

     When will he say, "Look. There is the kadamba forest where Vraja's prince enjoyed the rāsa dance. . . . 

Text 10

ai dekho nanda-grāma nandera ābāsa
ai dekho baladeba jathā koilo rāsa

     ai—this; dekhaḥ—look; nanda-grāma—Nanda's village; nandera—of Nanda; ābāsa—the home; ai—this; dekhaḥ—look; baladeba—Baladeva; jathā—as; koilaḥ—did; rāsa—rasa dance.

 . . . Look, there is Nanda's home in Nanda-grāma. Look. There is where Balarāma enjoyed the rāsa dance. . . .

Text 11

ai dekho jathā hoilo dukūla-haraṇa
ai sthāne bakāsura hoilo nidhana

     ai—this; dekhaḥ—look; jathā—as; hoilaḥ—was; dukūla—of the garments; haraṇa—the theft; ai—that; sthāne—place; bakasura—bakasura; hoilaḥ—was; nidhana—killed.

 . . . Look. There is the place where Kṛṣṇa stole the gopīs' garments, and there is the place where He killed Bakāsura."?

Text 12 

ei-rūpe braja-jana-saha bṛndābane
dekhibo līlāra sthāna sa-tṛṣṇa-nayane

     ei-rūpe—in this way; braja-jana-saha—with a person of Vraja; bṛndābane—in Vṛndāvana; dekhibaḥ—will see; līlāra—of pastimes; sthāna—the places; sa-tṛṣṇa—thirsty; nayane—with eyes.

     When, accompanied by a person of Vraja, will I see with thirsty eyes the places of Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Vṛndāvana?


Text 13 

kabhu bā jamunā-tire śuni' baṁśī-dhwani
ābāsa hoiyā lābha koribo dharaṇī

     kabhu—when; ba—or; jamunā-tire—on the ayamuna's bank; śuni'—hearing; baṁśī—of the flute; dhwani—the sound; ābāsa—rrsidence; hoiyā—doing; lābha—attainment; koribaḥ—will do; dharaṇī—.

     When, hearing flute music by the Yamunā's bank, will I fall, overcome with bliss, to the ground?

Text 14 

kṛpāmoya braja-jana kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa boli'
pāna korāibe jala pūriyā añjali

     kṛpāmoya—merciful; braja-jana—people of Vraja; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; boli'—chanting; pāna—drinking; korāibe—will give; jala—water; pūriyā—filling; añjali—cupped hands.

     When, chanting "Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!", will a person of Vraja make me drink a handful of water?

Text 15 

hari-nāma śune punaḥ pāiyā cetana
braja-jana-saha āmi koribo bhramaṇa

     hari-nāma—the names of Lord Kṛṣṇa; śune—hearing; punaḥ—again; pāiyā—attaining; cetana—consciousness; braja-jana-saha—with the person of Vraja; āmi—I; koribaḥ—will do; bhramaṇa—wandering.

     When, regaining consciousness and hearing the names of Lord Kṛṣṇa, will I continue walking with that person of Vraja?

Text 16 

kabe heno śubha-dina hoibe āmāra
mādhukorī kori' bedaibo dwāra dwāra

     kabe—when; henaḥ—like that; śubha-dina—auspicious day; hoibe—will be; āmāra—of me; mādhukorī—doing madhukari begging; kori'—doing; beḍāibaḥ—I will walk; dwāra—from door; dwāra—to door.

     When will the auspicious day come when I will beg from door to door?

Text 17 

jamunā-salīlā pibo añjali bhariyā
deba-dwāre rātri-kāle rohibo śuiyā

     jamunā-salīlā—the Yamuna's water; pibaḥ—I will drink; añjali—cuppedhands; bhariyā—filling; deba-dwāre—at the door of a temple; rātri—night; kāle—time; rohibaḥ—will stay; śuiyā—sleeping.

     When will I drink the Yamunā's water from my cupped hands? When will I sleep at night in a temple's doorway?

Texts 18 and 19 

jakhona āsibe kala e bhautika pura
jala-jantu-mahotsaba hoibe pracura

siddha-dehe nija-kuñje sakhīra caraṇe
nitya-kāla thākiyā sebibo kṛṣṇa-dhane

     jakhona—when; āsibe—I will go; kala—time; e—thisd; bhautika—of matter; pura—city; jala—in the water; jantu—for the creatures; mahā-a great; utsaba—festival; hoibe—will be; pracura—great; siddha-dehe—in my original spiritual form; nija-kuñje—in her own forest; sakhīra—of a sakhi; caraṇe—at the feet; nitya-kāla—always; thākiyā—staying; sebibaḥ—I will serve; kṛṣṇa-dhane—the great treasure that is Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

     When, this material body become a great feast for the fishes, will I attain my original spiritual form? When, always staying by the feet of a sakhī in her forest grove, will I always serve the great treasure that is Lord Kṛṣṇa?

Text 20 

ei se prārthanā kore' e pāmora chāra
śrī-jāhnabā more doyā koro' ei bāra

     ei—this; se—this; prārthanā—prayer; kore'—does; e—this; pāmora—sinner; chāra—pile of ashes; śrī-jāhnabā—Śrī Jahnava-devi; more—to me; doyā—mercy; koro'—please do; ei—this; bāra—time.

     This sinner, this pile of ashes makes these requests. O Jāhnavā-devī, please be merciful to me this one time.




Song 6

Text 1

hari hari kabe mora ho'be heno dina
bimala baiṣṇabe          rati upajibe
bāsanā hoibe khīna

     hari hari—Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!; kabe—when; mora—my; ho'be—will be; henaḥ—like this; dina—day; bimala—pure; baiṣṇabe—to the Vaisnavas; rati—affectuion; upajibe—will be born; bāsanā—material desires; hoibe—will be; khīna—destroyed.

     O Lord Kṛṣṇa! O Lord Kṛṣṇa! When will I feel affection for the pure Vaiṣṇavas? When will my material desires perish? When will that day be?

Text 2 

antara-bahire       sama byabahāra
amānī mānada ho'bo
kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtane         śrī-kṛṣṇa-smaraṇe
satata majiyā ro'bo

     antara—within; bahire—and without; sama—equal; byabahāra—behavior; amānī—prideless; mānada—respectful to others; ho'baḥ—will be; kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtane—in chanting Lord Kṛṣṇa;'s holy names; śrī-kṛṣṇa-smaraṇe—in remembering Lord Kṛṣṇa; satata—always; majiyā—rapt; ro'baḥ—will be.

     When will I be honest and sincere, the same within and without? When will I be humble and respectful to others? When will I be always rapt in remembering Kṛṣṇa and glorifying Kṛṣṇa in saṅkīrtana?

Text 3 

e dehera kriyā      abhyāse koribo
jībana jāpana lāgi'
śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhajane        anukūla jāhā
tāhe ho'bo anurāgī

     e—this; dehera—of the body; kriyā—actions; abhyāse—regular performance; koribaḥ—will do; jībana—life; jāpana—going; lāgi'—taking; śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhajane—worship of Lord Kṛṣṇa; anukūla—favorable; jāhā—will go; tāhe—in that; ho'baḥ—will be; anurāgī—love.

     When will perform material duties only to maintain my body? When will I be attracted to what is favorable for devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa?

Text 4 

bhajanera jāhā      pratikūla tāhā
dṛḍha-bhābe teyāgibo
bhajite bhajite          samaya āsile
e deho chāriyā dibo

     bhajaneraof devotional service; jāhā—what; pratikūla—not favorable; tāhā—that; dṛḍha-bhābe—firm; teyāgibaḥ—will renounce; bhajite—worshiping; bhajite—and worshiping; samaya—time; āsile—comes; e—this; dehaḥ—body; chāriyā—leaving; dibaḥ—will give.

     When will I firmly renounce all that is unfavorable for devotional service? When, as I am rapt in worshiping Lord Kṛṣṇa, will the time come for me to leave this body?

Text 5 

bhakatibinoda       ei āśā kori'
basiyā godruma-bane
prabhu-kṛpā lāgi'        byākula antare
sadā kānde saṅgopane

     bhakatibinoda—Bhaktivinoda; ei—this; āśā—desire; kori'—doing; basiyā—staying; godruma-bane—in Godruma Forest; prabhu—of the Supreme Lord; kṛpā—the mercy; lāgi'—accepting; byākula—agitated; antare—within; sadā—always; kānde—weeps; saṅgopane—in a secluded place.

     Desiring in this way, living in Godruma Forest, and his heart yearning to attain the Lord's mercy, Bhaktivinoda weeps in a secluded place.




Song 7

Text 1

kabe mui baiṣṇabe cinibo hari hari
baiṣṇaba-caraṇa          kalyanera khani
mātibo hṛdaye dhori'

     kabe—when?; mui—I; baiṣṇabe—the Vaisnavas; cinibaḥ—appreciated; hari—O Lord Kṛṣṇa; hari—O Lord Kṛṣṇa; baiṣṇaba-caraṇa—the feet of the Vaisnavas; kalyanera—of auspiciousness; khani—the jewel mine; mātibaḥ—become wild; hṛdaye—to the heart; dhori'—holding.

     O Lord Kṛṣṇa! O Lord Kṛṣṇa! When will I appreciate the Vaiṣṇavas? When, holding to my heart the Vaiṣṇavas' feet, feet that are jewel mines of auspiciousness, will I become wild with bliss?

Text 2 

baiṣṇaba-ṭhākura         aprākṛta sadā
nirdoṣa ānandamoya
kṛṣṇa-nāme prīti        joḍe udāśīna
jībete doyārdra hoya

     baiṣṇaba-ṭhākura—a saintly Vaisnava; aprākṛta—not material; sadā—always; nirdoṣa—faultless; ānandamoya—blissful; kṛṣṇa-nāme—in Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy name; prīti—love; joḍe—to matter; udāśīna—indifferent; jībete—to the souls; doya—with mercy; ardra—melting; hoya—are.

     A saintly Vaiṣnava is always spiritual, faultless, joyful, full of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names, aloof from matter, melting with mercy for the conditioned souls, . . .

Text 3 

abhimāna hīna       bhajane prabīna
biṣayete anāsakta
antara-bahire       niṣkapaṭa sadā
nitya-līlā-anurakta

     abhimāna—of pride; hīna—free; bhajane—in devotional service; prabīna—expert; biṣayete—to material sense gratification; anāsakta—unattached; antara-bahire—within and without; niṣkapaṭa—honest; sadā—always; nitya-līlā—eternal pastimes; anurakta—attracted.

 . . . prideless, expert in devotional service, unattached to sense pleasures, always honest within and without, and attracted to the Lord's eternal pastimes.

Text 4 

kaniṣṭha madhyama        uttama prabhede
baiṣṇaba tri-bidha gaṇi
kaniṣṭhe ādara      madhyame praṇati
uttame śuśrūṣā śuni

     kaniṣṭha—beginner; madhyama—intermediate; uttama—advanced; prabhede—in differences; baiṣṇaba—Vaisnavas; tri-bidha—three kinds; gaṇi—considering; kaniṣṭhe—beginner; ādara—respect; madhyame—intermediate; praṇati—obeisances; uttame—advanced; śuśrūṣā—eagerness to hear and worship; śuni—I hear.

     Considering that there are three kinds of Vaiṣṇavas, namely kaniṣṭha (neophyte), madhyama (intermediate), and uttama (advanced) Vaiṣṇavas, I am respectful to the kaniṣṭha, I bow down before the madhyama, and I am eager to hear the words of the uttama.

Text 5 

je jena baiṣṇaba         ciniyā loiyā
ādara koirbo jabe
baiṣṇabera kṛpā          jāhe sarba-siddhi
abaśya pāibo tabe

     je—which; jena—like; baiṣṇaba—Vaisnava; ciniyā—knowing; loiyā—taking; ādara—respect; koirbaḥ—will do; jabe—when; baiṣṇabera—of the Vaisnavas; kṛpā—mercy; jāhe—in which; sarba-siddhi—all perfections; abaśya—inevitably; pāibaḥ—will attain; tabe—then.

     When I properly honor them, by the Vaiṣṇavas' mercy I will attain all spiritual perfection.

Text 6 

baiṣṇaba-caritra         sarbadā pabitra
jei ninde hiṁsā kori'
bhakatibinoda       nā sambhāṣe ta're
thāke sadā mauna dhori'

     baiṣṇaba—of the Vaisnavas; caritra—the character; sarbadā—alwasy; pabitra—pure; jei—which; ninde—offense; hiṁsā—violence; kori'—doing; bhakatibinoda—Bhaktivinoda; nā—not; sambhāṣe—says; ta're—of him; thāke—stays; sadā—always; mauna—silence; dhori'—holding.

     Bhaktivinoda will never blaspheme a pure Vaiṣṇava. He stays always silent.




Song 8


Text 1

kṛpā koro' baiṣṇaba ṭhākura
sambandha jāniyā         bhajite bhajite
abhimāna hao dūra

     kṛpā—mercy; koro'—please do; baiṣṇaba—O Vaisnava; ṭhākura—saibnt; sambandha—relationship; jāniyā—knowing; bhajite—worshiping; bhajite—and worshiping; abhimāna—pride; hao—will make; dūra—far away.

     O saintly Vaiṣṇava, please be merciful to me. Only then will I understand my relationship with Lord Kṛṣṇa. Only then will I become rapt in worshiping Lord Kṛṣṇa. Only then will my false pride flee far away.

Text 2 

āmi to' baiṣṇaba e buddhi hoile
amānī nā ho'bo āmi
pratiṣṭhāśā āsi'         hṛdoya dūṣibe
hoibo niraya-gāmī

     āmi—I; to'—indeed; baiṣṇaba—a Vaisnava; e—this; buddhi—intelligence; hoile—is; amānī—prideless; nā—not; ho'baḥ—will be; āmi—I; pratiṣṭhā—for fame; āśā—desire; āsi'—taking; hṛdoya—heart; dūṣibe—will be polluted; hoibaḥ—will be; niraya—to hell; gāmī—going.

     If I think, "I am a great Vaiṣṇava", I will not be prideless. If I hanker for fame, my heart will be polluted, and in the end I will go to hell.

Text 3 

tomāra kiṅkora      āpane jānibo
guru-abhimāna tyaji'
tomāra ucchiṣṭha         pada-jala-reṇu
sadā niṣkapaṭe bhaji

     tomāra—of You; kiṅkora—the servant; āpane—own; jānibaḥ—I will know; guru-abhimāna—trhe honor of a guru; tyaji'—renouncing; tomāra—of You; ucchiṣṭha—remnants; pada—from the feet; jala—water; reṇu—and dust; sadā—always; niṣkapaṭe—sincerely; bhaji—I worship.

     Renouncing the pride of thinking myself a guru, I will know that I am your servant, O saintly Vaiṣṇava. I will taste the remnants of your meals, I will accept the dust and water from your feet. I will sincerely worship you always.

Text 4 

nije śreṣṭha jāni'       ucchiṣṭhādi dāne
ho'be abhimāna bhāra
tāi śiṣya taba      thākiyā sarbadā
nā loibo pūjā kā'ra

     nije—own; śreṣṭha—best; jāni'—thinking; ucchiṣṭha—remnants; ādi—beginning; dāne—in ther gift; ho'be—will be; abhimāna—pride; bhāra—great; tāi—because śiṣya—disciple; taba—your; thākiyā—staying; sarbadā—always; nā—not; loibaḥ—will accept; pūjā—worship; kā'ra—from anyone.

     If I think, "I am most exalted", and if I give to others the remnants of my meals, then I will become very proud. Therefore I will always remain your disciple. I will never accept worship from anyone.

Text 5 

amānī mānada        hoile kīrtane
adhikāra dibe tumi
tomāra caraṇe       niṣkapaṭe āmi
kāndiyā luṭibo bhūmi

     amānī—prideless; mānada—respectfful; hoile—is; kīrtane—in kirtana; adhikāra—qualification; dibe—will give; tumi—you; tomāra—of you; caraṇe—at the feet; niṣkapaṭe—sincerely; āmi—I; kāndiyā—weeping; luṭibaḥ—roll about; bhūmi—on the ground.

     Please make me qualified. Then I be prideless and respectful. Then I will chant the holy names. Then, sincerely weeping, I will roll on the ground before your feet.




Song 9

Text 1

kabe ha'be heno daśā mora
tyaji' joḍa āśā         bibidha bandhana
chāḍibo soṁsāra ghora

     kabe—when?; ha'be—will be; henaḥ—like this; daśā—condition; mora—of me; tyaji'—renouncing; joḍa—material; āśā—desires; bibidha—various; bandhana—bounds; chāḍibaḥ—I will leave; soṁsāra—household life; ghora—horrible.

     Cutting the bonds of material desires, I will leave this horrible household life. When will that be? 

Text 2 

bṛndābanābhede      nabadwīpa-dhāme
bandhibo kuṭīra-khāni
śacīra nandana-          caraṇa-āśroya
koribo sambandha māni'

     bṛndābana—from Vṛndāvana; abhede—not different; nabadwīpa-dhāme—the abode of Navadvipa; bandhibaḥ—will bound; kuṭīra-khāni—a cottage; śacīra—of Ścaī; nandana—of the son; caraṇa—of the feet; āśroya—shelter; koribaḥ—I will do; sambandha—relatinship; māni'—knowing.

     In Navadvīpa, which is not different from Vṛndāvana, I will build a small cottage. Thinking of my relationship with Him, I will take shelter of Lord Caitanya's feet.

Text 3 

jāhnabī-puline      cinmoya-kānane
bāsiyā bijana-sthale
kṛṣṇa-nāmāmṛta      nirantara pibo
ḍākibo gaurāṅga bole

     jāhnabī—of the Gaṅgā; puline—on the bank; cinmoya—spiritual; kānane—in the forest; bāsiyā—residing; bijana-sthale—in a secluded place; kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāma—o fthe holy name; amṛta—the nectar; nirantara—always; pibaḥ—I will drink; ḍākibaḥ—I will call out; gaurāṅga—Gaurāṅga; bole—say.

     Residing in a secluded place in the spiritual forest by the Gaṅgā's bank, I will always drink the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa's names. I will call out, "Gaurāṅga!"

Text 4 

hā gaura-nitāi      torā du'ṭī bhāi
patita-janera bandhu
adhama patita       āmi he durjana
hao more kṛpā sindhu

     hā—O; gaura-nitāi—Caitanya and Nityānanda; torā—Youy; du'ṭī—two; bhāi—brothers; patita-janera—of the fallen people; bandhu—the friends; adhama—lowly; patita—fallen; āmi—I; he—o; durjana—wicked; hao—am; more—to me; kṛpā—mercy; sindhu—ocean.

     O Gaura-Nitāi, You are the friends of the fallen. I am very fallen and sinful. Please let me swim in Your ocean of mercy.

Text 5 

kāndite kāndite          ṣola-krośa-dhāma
jāhnabī ubhoya kūle
bhramite bhramite        kabhu bhāgya-phale
dekhi kichu taru-mūle

     kāndite—weeping; kāndite—and weeping; ṣola-krośa-dhāma—abode of 32 square miles; jāhnabī—of the Gaṅgā; ubhoya—both; kūle—banks; bhramite—wandering; bhramite—and wandering; kabhu—when; bhāgya—of good fortune; phale—the fruit; dekhi—I see; kichu—something; taru-mūle—under a tree.

     When, weeping and weeping as wander along the Gaṅgā's banks, will I suddenly see the fruit of spiritual good fortune under a tree.

Text 6 

ha ha manohara      ki dekhinu āmi
boliya mūrchita ho'bo
sambita pāiya       kāndibo gopane
smari duṅhu kṛpā-laba

     ha—O; ha—O; manaḥ—of my heart; hara—thief; ki—what?; dekhinu—see; āmi—I; boliya—saying; mūrchita—unconscious; ho'baḥ—will be; sambita—consciousness; pāiya—regaining; kāndibaḥ—I will weep; gopane—in a secluded place; smari—remembering; duṅhu—of Them both; kṛpā—the mercy; laba—a small particle.

     Calling out, "Ah! Ah! Thief of my heart! What do I see?", I will fall unconscious. Regaining consciousness, I will go to a secluded place and weep. I will know that all this was only a small particle of Gaura-Nitāi's mercy.




Song 10

Text 1

hā hā morā gaura-kiśora
kabe doyā kori'          śrī-godruma-bane
dekhā dibe mana-cora

     hā—O; hā—Oh; morā—my; gaura-kiśora—Gaura-kīsora; kabe—when?; doyā—moercy; kori'—doing; śrī-godruma-bane—in the forest of Godruma; dekhā—sight; dibe—will give; mana-cora—the thief of my heart.

     O Gaura-kiśora, O thief of my heart, when will You mercifully let me see in You in Godruma forest?

Text 2 

ānanda-sukhada      kuñjera bhitore
gadādhare bāme kori'
kāñcana-baraṇa      cāñcara cikura
naṭana su-besa dhori'

     ānanda-sukhada kuñjera bhitore—in Ananda-sukhada-kunja; gadādhare—Gadādahar; bāme—on the left; kori'—doing; kāñcana—gold; baraṇa—color; cāñcara—curly; cikura—hair; naṭana—dancing; su-besa—glorious garments; dhori'—wearing.

     In Ananda-sukha-kuñja You will dance, Your complexion like gold, Your hair gracefully curly, You garments glorious, and Gadādhara at Your left.

Text 3 

dekhite dekhite          śrī-rādhā-mādhaba
rūpete koribe ālā
sakhī-gaṇa-saṅge         koribe naṭana
galete mohana-mālā

     dekhite—gazing; dekhite—and gazing; śrī-rādhā-mādhaba—Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; rūpete—the forms; koribe—will do; ālā—effulgent; sakhī-gaṇa-saṅge—with gopī friends; koribe—will do; naṭana—dancing; galete—on the necks; mohana—charming; mālā—garlands.

     As I watch, You will manifest the effulgent forms of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Charming flower garlands on Your necks, You will dance in the company of Your gopī friends.

Text 4 

anaṅga-mañjarī      sadoya hoiyā
e dāsī-korete dhori'
duhe nibedibe       duṅhara mādhurī
heribo noyana bhori'

     anaṅga-mañjarī—Anaṅga-mañjarī; sadoya—merciful; hoiyā—being; e—this; dāsī—maidservant; korete—hand; dhori'—holding; duhe—both; nibedibe—will offer; duṅhara—of the divine couple; mādhurī—sweetness; heribaḥ—I will see; noyana—eyes; bhori'—filling.

     Merciful Anaṅga-mañjarī will take the hand of this maidservant and place her before the divine couple. Filling my eyes, I will gaze at the sweetness of the divine couple.     




Song 11

Text 1

hā hā kabe gaura-nitāi
e patita jane       uru kṛpā kori'
dekhā dibe du'ṭī bhāi

     hā hā—oh! Oh!; kabe—when?; gaura-nitāi—gaura-Nitāi; e—this; patita—fallen; jane—person; uru—great; kṛpā—mercy; kori'—doing; dekhā—sight; dibe—will give; du'ṭī—two; bhāi—brothers.

     Ah! Ah! When will the two brothers Gaura-Nitāi very mercifully allow this fallen person to see Them?

Text 2 

duṅhu kṛpā-bale          nabadwīpa-dhāme
dekhibo brajera śobhā
ānanda-sukhada-          kuñja manohara
heribo nayana-lobhā

     duṅhu—both; kṛpā-bale—by the power of the mercy; nabadwīpa-dhāme—in navadvipa; dekhibaḥ—I will see; brajera—of Vraja; śobhā—beauty; ānanda-sukhada-kuñja—in Ananda-sukhada-kunja; manohara—charming; heribaḥ—I will see; nayana—of the eyes; lobhā—the desire.

     When, by Their mercy, will I see the beauty of Vraja manifest in Navadvīpa? When, in Ananda-sukhada-kuñja, will my eyes see the charming sight they yearn to see?

Text 3 

tāhāra nikaṭe      śrī-lalitā-kuṇḍa
ratna-bedī kota śata
jathā rādhā-kṛṣṇa        līlā bistāriyā
bihārena abirata

     tāhāra—Them; nikaṭe—near; śrī-lalitā-kuṇḍa—Śrī Lalita-kunda; ratna-bedī—jewle courtyards; kota—how many?; śata—hundreds; jathā—as; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; līlā—pastimes; bistāriyā—manifesting; bihārena—enjoy pastimes; abirata—without stop.

     How many hundreds of jewel courtyards will be manifest arounf Lalitā-kuṇḍa? There Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa will enjoy many pastimes without stop.

Text 4 

sakhī-gaṇa jathā         līlāra sahāya
nānā-sebā-sukha pāya
e dāsī tathāya      sakhīre ājñāte
kārje iti-uti dhāya

     sakhī-gaṇa—gopī friends; jathā—as; līlāra—of pastimes; sahāya—help; nānā-sebā-sukha—many delightful services; pāya—attainign; e—this; dāsī—maidservant; tathāya—of that place; sakhīre—of the gopīs; ājñāte—by the orders; kārje—duties; iti-uti—here and there; dhāya—running.

     The gopīs will perform many delightful services to help the divine couple's pastimes. On the gopīs' orders, this maidservant will run here and there on various errands.

Text 5 

mālatīra mālā       gānthiyā ānibo
dibe tabe śakhi-kore
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gale         sakhī parāibe
nācibo ānanda-bhore

     mālatīra—of jasmine flowers; mālā—garland; gānthiyā—stringing; ānibaḥ—I will go; dibe—I will give; tabe—then; śakhi-kore—in a gopī's hand; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gale—onmf Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's necks; sakhī—the gopī; parāibe—will place; nācibaḥ—I will dance; ānanda-bhore—filled with bliss.

     Stringing two jasmine garlands, I will place them in a sakhī's hands. When she places them around Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's necks, I will dance with bliss.




Song 12

Text 1

kabe āhā gaurāṅga boliyā
bhojana-śayane      dehera jatana
chāribo birakta hayā

     kabe—when?; āhā—Ah!; gaurāṅga—Gaurāṅga; boliyā—saying; bhojana—in eating; śayane—and sleeping; dehera—of the body; jatana—struggle; chāribaḥ—I will renounce; birakta—renounced; hayā—being.

     When, calling out, "O Gaurāṅga!" will I lose all interest in eating and sleeping?

Text 2 

nabadwīpa-dhāme         nagare nagare
abhimāna parihari'
dhāma-bāsī-ghare         mādhukorī lobo'
khāibo udara bhari'

     nabadwīpa-dhāme—in Navadvipa; nagare—in the twon; nagare—after down; abhimāna—pride; parihari'—renouncing; dhāma-bāsī-ghare—in the homes of the people who live in the holy abode; mādhukorī—begging; lobo'—doing; khāibaḥ—I will eat; udara—belly; bhari'—filling.

     When, turning away from pride, will I wander from village to village in Navadvīpa? When, begging mādhukarī from the residents of the holy abode, will I somehow put some food in my belly?

Text 3 

nadī-taṭe giyā      añjali añjali
pibo prabhu-pada-jala
taru-tale poḍi'         ālasya tyajibo
pāibo śarīra bala

     nadī-taṭe—on the riverbanks; giyā—going; añjali—folded hands; añjali—folded hands; pibaḥ—I will drink; prabhu-pada-jala—the water of the Suprerme Lord's feet; taru-tale—under a tree; poḍi'—falling; ālasya—laziness; tyajībaḥ—I will renounce; pāibaḥ—I will attain; śarīra—of the body; bala—strength.

     When, cupping my hands, will I drink the sacred Gaṅgā water flowing from the Supreme Lord's feet? When, resting under a tree, will my body become refreshed?

Text 4 

kākuti koriyā       gaura-gadādhara
śrī-rādhā-mādhaba nāma
kāndiyā kāndiyā          ḍāki ucca rabe
bhramibo sakala dhāma

     kākuti—with a voice choked with emotion; koriyā—doing; gaura-gadādhara—Gaura-Gadādhara; śrī-rādhā-mādhaba—Śrī Rādhā—-Mādhava; nāma—names; kāndiyā—weeping; kāndiyā—and weeping; ḍāki—I call out; ucca—in a loud; rabe—voice; bhramibaḥ—I will wander; sakala—in the holy; dhāma—holy abode.

     When, calling out the names, "Gaura-Gadādhara!" and "Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava!" in a voice choked with emotion, will I wander everywhere in the holy abode?

Text 5 

baiṣṇaba dekhiyā         poḍibo caraṇe
hṛdayera bandhu jāni'
baiṣṇaba ṭhākura         prabhura kīrtana
dekhāibe dāsa māni'

     baiṣṇaba—the Vaiṣnmavas; dekhiyā—seeing; poḍibaḥ—I will fall; caraṇe—at the feet; hṛdayera—of the heart; bandhu—the friend; jāni'—knowing; baiṣṇaba—th Vaisnavas; ṭhākura—saints; prabhura—of the Lord; kīrtana—kīrtana; dekhāibe—will show; dāsa—servant; māni'—thinking.

     Seeing a Vaiṣṇava, and knowing him the true friend of my heart, I will fall down before his feet. The saintly Vaiṣṇava will then teach this servant how to chant the holy nmaes of the Lord.




Part 7 Vijñapti-Appeals

Song 1

Text 1

gopīnātha mama nibedana śuno
biṣayī durjana      sadā kāma-rata
kichu nāhi mora guṇa

     gopīnātha—O master of the gopīs; mama—my; nibedana—statement; śunaḥ—please hear; biṣayī—materialist; durjana—wicked; sadā—always; kāma—to lust; rata—devoted; kichu—something; nāhi—not; mora—of me; guṇa—virtue.

     O Gopīnātha, please hear my confession. I am a materialist. I am a sinner. I am always lusty. I have no virtues.

Text 2 

gopīnātha āmāra bharasā tumi
tomāra caraṇe       loinu śaraṇa
tomāra kiṅkora āmi

     gopīnātha—O Gopinatha; āmāra—of me; bharasā—faith; tumi—You; tomāra—of You; caraṇe—at the feet; loinu—I accpet; śaraṇa—shelter; tomāra—of You; kiṅkora—servant; āmi—I.

     O Gopīnātha, I have faith in You. I take shelter of Your feet. I am Your servant.

Text 3 

gopīnātha kemone śodhibe more
nā jāni bhakati          karme joḍa-mati
poḍechi soṁsāra-ghore

     gopīnātha—O Gopinatha; kemone—how?; śodhibe—will You purify; more—me; nā—not; jāni—I know; bhakati—devotinal service; karme—by karma; joḍa—material; mati—mind; poḍechi—I fell; soṁsāra-ghore—in the horrible world of birth and death.

     O Gopīnātha, how will You purify me? I do not understand devotional service. I think always of material things. Because of my own actions I have fallen into this horrible world.

Text 4 

gopīnātha sakali tomāra māyā
nāhi mama bala      jñāna su-nirmala
swādhīna nāhe e kāyā

     gopīnātha—O Gopinatha; sakali—all; tomāra—of You; māyā—the Maya; nāhi—not; mama—of me; bala—strength; jñāna—knowledge; su-nirmala—very pure; swādhīna—independent; nāhe—not; e—this; kāyā—body.

     O Gopīnātha, everything here is Your Māyā. I have no power, knowledge, or purity. I am not independent.

Text 5 

gopīnātha niyata caraṇe sthāna
māge e pāmora       kāndiyā kāndiyā
korohe koruṇā dāna

     gopīnātha—O Gopinatha; niyata—always; caraṇe—at the feet; sthāna—place; māge—begs; e—this; pāmora—sinner; kāndiyā—weeping; kāndiyā—and weeping; korohe—please do; koruṇā—of mercy; dāna—the gift.

     O Gopīnātha, weeping and weeping, this sinner begs for an eternal place at Your feet. Please give him a gift of Your mercy.

Text 6 

gopīnātha tumi to' sakali pāra
durjane tarite      tomāra śakati
ke āche pāpīra āra

     gopīnātha—O Gopinatha; tumi—You; to'—indeed; sakali—all; pāra—power; durjane—sinner; tarite—to deliver; tomāra—of You; śakati—the power; ke—who?; āche—is; pāpīra—sinner; āra—other.

     O Gopīnātha, You have all power. You have the power to deliver any sinner. Who is more sinful than me?

Text 7 

gopīnātha tumi kṛpā pārābāra
jībera kāraṇe       āsiyā prapañce
līlā koile su-bistāra

     gopīnātha—O Gopinatha; tumi—You; kṛpā—mercy; pārābāra—ocean; jībera—of the souls; kāraṇe—the origin; āsiyā—going; prapañce—to the material world; līlā—pastimes; koile—do; su-bistāra—many.

     O Gopīnātha, You are an ocean of mercy. For the conditioned souls' sake You come to this world and enjoy many pastimes.

Text 8 

gopīnātha āmi ki doṣe doṣī
asura sakala        pāilo caraṇa
binoda thākilo bāsi'

     gopīnātha—O Gopinatha; āmi—I; ki—what?; doṣe—fault; doṣī—a sinner; asura—demons; sakala—all; pāilaḥ—attained; caraṇa—feet; binoda—Bhaktivinoda; thākilaḥ—stays; bāsi'—residing.

     O Gopīnātha, I am the sinner of sinners. All the demons have already attained Your feet. Only Bhaktivinoda was left behind.




Song 2

Text 1

gopīnātha ghucāo soṁsāra-jwālā
abidyā-jātanā       āra nāhi sahe
janama-maraṇa-mālā

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; ghucāaḥ—please destroy; soṁsāra—of the material world; jwālā—flames; abidyā—of ignroance; jātanā—the suffer8ings; āra—and; nāhi—not; sahe—I tolerate; janama—of births; maraṇa—and deaths; mālā—this garland.

     O Gopīnātha, please extinguish these flames of material life. I cannot bear the tortures of ignorance. I cannot bear the weight of this necklace of births and deaths.

Text 2 

gopīnātha āmi to' kāmera dāsa
biṣaya-bāsanā       jāgiche hṛdoye
phāndiche karama phāṅse

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; āmi—I; to'—indeed; kāmera—of lust; dāsa—the servant; biṣaya—material; bāsanā—desires; jāgiche—awaken; hṛdoye—in the heart; phāndiche—caught; karama—of karma; phāṅse—in the noose.

     O Gopīnātha, I am lust's servant. Material desires have awakened in my heart. I stand with the noose of karma around my neck.

Text 3 

gopīnātha kabe bā jāgibo āmi
kāma-rūpa ari       dūre teyāgibo
hṛdoye sphuribe tumi

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; kabe—when?; bā—or; jāgibaḥ—will awaken; āmi—I; kāma-rūpa—in the form of lust; ari—the enemy; dūre—far away; teyāgibaḥ—I will abandon; hṛdoye—in the heart; sphuribe—manifest; tumi—You.

     O Gopīnātha, when will I awaken? When will I flee far away from my enemy lust? When will You appear in my heart?

Text 4 

gopīnātha āmi to' tomāra jana
tomāre chāriyā      soṁsāra bhajinu
bhuliyā āpana dhana

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; āmiĪ; to'—indeed; tomāra—of You; jana—persons; tomāre—of You; chāriyā—renouncing; soṁsāra—material world; bhajinu—worship; bhuliyā—forgetting; āpana—own; dhana—treasure.

     O Gopīnātha, I am Your servant. I left You and came to the world of birth and death. I forgot my treasure.

Text 5 

gopīnātha tumi to' sakali jāno
āpanara jane        daṇḍiyā ekhona
śrī-caraṇe deho sthāna

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; tumi—You; to'—indeed; sakali—everything; jānaḥ—know; āpanara—own; jane—person; dandiyā—punishing; ekhona—one; śrī-caraṇe—at the feet; dehaḥ—please give; sthāna—a place.

     O Gopīnātha, You know everything. Please punish this servant, and then give him a place at Your feet.

Text 6 

gopīnātha ei ki bicāra taba
bimukha dekhiyā          chāro nija-jane
na koro' koruṇa-laba

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; ei—this; ki—what; bicāra—consideration; taba—of You; bimukha—averse; dekhiyā—seeing; chāraḥ—abandon; nija-jane—own servant; na—not; koro'—do; koruṇa-laba—a fragment of mercy.

     O Gopīnātha, when You see a servant turns away from You, do You abandon him? Do You not give him even a small particle of mercy? Is that Your idea?

Text 7 

gopīnātha āmi to' mūrakha ati
kise bhālo hoya          kabhu nā bujhinu
tāi heno mama gati

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; āmi—I; to'—indeed; mūrakha—a fool; ati—very; kise—what kind of?; bhālaḥ—good; hoya—is; kabhu—when; nā—not; bujhinu—I understood; tāi—because; henaḥ—like this; mama—my; gati—destination.

     O Gopīnātha, I am a great fool. I never knew what was good for me. That was my fate.

Text 8 

gopīnātha tumi to' paṇḍita bara
mūḍhera maṅgala          tumi anweṣibe
e dāse nā bhābo' para

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; tumi—You; to'—indeed; paṇḍita—learned; bara—best; mūḍhera—of fools; maṅgala—auspiciousness; tumi—You; anweṣibe—seek; e—this; dāse—swrvant; nā—not; bhābo'—this; para—an outsider.

     O Gopīnātha, You are very wise. You try to do good to fools. Please don't think this servant is a stranger.




Song 3

Text 1

gopīnātha āmāra upāya nāi
tumi kṛpā kori'          āmāre loile
soṁsāre uddhāra pāi

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; āmāra—of me; upāya—method; nāi—not; tumi—You; kṛpā—mercy; kori'—doing; āmāre—me; loile—take; soṁsāre—from the material world; uddhāra—deliverance; pāi—I attain.

     O Gopīnātha, I have no other hope. Only if You kindly take me will I escape this world of birth and death.

Text 2 

gopīnātha porechi māyāra phere
dhana dārā suta          ghireche āmāre
kāmete rekheche jere

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; porechi—I fell; māyāra—of Maya; phere—in the calamity; dhana—wealth; dārā—wife; suta—children; ghireche—surround; āmāre—me; kāmete—in list; rekheche jere—bringing the consequences.

     O Gopīnātha, I fell into Māyā's dangerous trap. Wife, children, and wealth surround me. Now I must face the consequences of my material desires.

Text 3 

gopīnātha mana je pāgala mora
nā māne śāśana      sadā acetana
biṣaye ro'yeche ghora

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; mana—mind; je—which; pāgala—crazy; mora—of me; nā—not; māne—understands; śāśana—instruction; sadā—always; acetana—unconscious; biṣaye—in matwrial sense objects; ro'yeche—mnakes stay; ghora—horrible.

     O Gopīnātha, my crazy mind never understands good advice. It keeps me stunned, trapped in the horrors of sense pleasures.

Text 4 

gopīnātha hāra je menechi āmi
aneka jatana        hoilo biphala
ekhona bharasā tumi

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; hāra—defeat; je—which; menechi—i accept; āmi—I; aneka—many; jatana—effeorts; hoilaḥ—was; biphala—useless; ekhona—only; bharasā—faith; tumi—You.

     O Gopīnātha, now I accept defeat. My many struggles were fruitless. I have faith only in You.

Text 5 

gopīnātha kemone hoibe gati
prabala indriyā          baśī-bhūta mana
na chāre biṣaya-rati

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; kemone—like what?; hoibe—will be; gati—destination; prabala—powerful; indriyā—senses; baśī-bhūta—subdued; mana—mind; na—not; chāre—abandons; biṣaya—to matwrial sense objects; rati—attraction.

     O Gopīnātha, what will become of me? My mind has become the slave of my powerful senses. It will not give up its love for sense pleasures.

Text 6 

gopīnātha hṛdoye basiyā mora
manake śamiyā       loho nija pāne
ghucibe bipada ghora

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; hṛdoye—in the heart; basiyā—residing; mora—of me; manake—the mind; śamiyā—pacifying; lohaḥ—take; nija—own; pāne—in the direction; ghucibe—destroy; bipada—calamities; ghora—horrible.

     O Gopīnātha, please stay in my heart. Please pacify my mind. Please accept me. Please destroy these terrible calamities.

Text 7 

gopīnātha anātha dekhiyā more
tumi hṛṣīkeśa       hṛṣīka damiyā
tārahe samsṛti-ghore

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; anātha—without a master; dekhiyā—seeing; more—me; tumi—You; hṛṣīkeśa—the master of the senses; hṛṣīka—senses; damiyā—subduing; tārahe—please deliver; samsṛti-ghore—in the horrible material world.

     O Gopīnātha, You are the master of the senses. Seeing that I have no one to protect me, please control my senses and deliver me from this horrible world of birth and death.

Text 8 

gopīnātha galāya legeche phaṅsa
kṛpā-asi dhori'          bandhana chediyā
binode koroho dāsa

     gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; galāya—on the neck; legeche—rests; phaṅsa—noose; kṛpā—of mercy; asi—the sword; dhori'—grasping; bandhana—bondage; chediyā—cutting; binode—Bhaktivinoda; korohaḥ—please make; dāsa—servant.

     O Gopīnātha, the noose is now around my neck. Grasping the sword of mercy, please cut that noose. Please make Bhaktivinoda Your servant.




Song 4

Text 1

śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pada-kamale mana
kemone lobhibe carama śaraṇa

     śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pada-kamale—at the lotus feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; mana—O my heart; kemone—how?; lobhibe—I will obtain; carama—final; śaraṇa—shelter.

     O my heart, how will I take shelter of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet?

Text 2 

cira-dina koriyā o caraṇa āśa
āche he basiyā e adhama dāsa

     cira—many; dina—days; koriyā—doing; aḥ—that; caraṇa—feet; asa—desire; āche—is; he—O; basiyā—residing; e—this; adhama—lowly; dāsa—servant.

     For many days this lowly servant has yearned to attain Their feet.

Text 3 

he rādhe he kṛṣṇacandra bhakta-praṇa
pāmāre jugala-bhakti koro' dāna

     he—O; rādhe—Rādhā; he—O; kṛṣṇacandra—Kṛṣṇa; bhakta-praṇa—O life of the devotees; pāmāre—sinner; jugala—for the divine couple; bhakti—devotion; koro'—please do; dāna—gift.

     O Rādhā! O Kṛṣṇacandra! O life of the devotees! To this sinner please give devotion to You both.

Text 4 

bhakti-hīna boli' nā koro' upekhā
mūrkha-jane deho' jñāna-su-śikhā

     bhakti—devotion; hīna—withjout; boli'—saying; nā—not; koro'—do; upekhā—neglect; mūrkha-jane—to the fool; deho'—please give; jñāna-su-śikhā—good instruction.

     Please don't say, "Ah! He has no devotion." Please don't abandon me. Please teach this fool what is right.

Text 5 

biṣaya-pipāsā-prapīḍita dāse
deho' adhikāra jugala-bilāse

     biṣaya—for material sense objects; pipāsā—by the thirst; prapīḍita—tortured; dāse—servant; deho'—give; adhikāra—qualification; jugala—of the divine couple; bilāse—in the pastimes.

     Please make this servant, this servant now tortured by the thirst for sense pleasures, qualified to serve You in Your pastimes.

Text 6 

cañcala-jībana-          srota prabahiyā
kālera sāgore dhāya
gelo je dibasa      nā āsibe āra
ebe kṛṣṇa ki upāya

     cañcala—flickering; jībana—life; srota—stream; prabahiyā—powerful; kālera—of time; sāgore—in the ocean; dhāya—running; gelaḥ—goes; je—which; dibasa—days; nā—not; āsibe—will be; āra—and; ebe—now; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; ki—what?; upāya—solution.

     The powerful river of this flickering life runs into the ocean of time. The days that have gone will not come again. O Kṛṣṇa, what will I do?

Text 7 

tumi patita-janera bandhu
jāni he tomāra nātha
tumi to' koruṇa-jala-sindhu

     tumi—You; patita-janera—of the fallen; bandhu—the friend; jāni—I know; he—O; tomāra—of You; nātha—O master; tumi—You; to'—indeed; koruṇa-jala-sindhu—an ocean of mercy.

     You are the friend of the fallen. You are an ocean of mercy. O master, I know this very well.

Text 8 

āmi bhāgya-hīna          ati arbacīna
nā jāni bhakati-leśa
nija-guṇe nātha          koro' ātmasāta
ghucaiyā bhaba-kleśa

     āmi—I; bhāgya-hīna—unfortunate; ati—very; arbacīna—foolish; nā—not; jāni—I know; bhakati-leśa—a little about devotional service; nija—own; guṇe—virtue; nātha—O Lord; koro'—please do; ātmasāta—Your own; ghucaiyā—destroying; bhaba—of this world fo birth and death; kleśa—the sufferings.

     I am very unfortunate. I am a great fool. I do not know anything about devotional service. O master, please destroy these material sufferings. Please, because You are so kind and virtuous, accept me.

Text 9

siddha-deha diyā         bṛndābana-mājhe
sebāmṛta koro' dāna
piyāiyā prema       matta kori' more
śuno nija guṇa-gāna

     siddha—perfect; deha—body; diyā—giving; bṛndābana-mājhe—in Vṛndāvana; sebā—of service; amṛta—nectar; koro'—do; dāna—gift; piyāiyā—giving; prema—pure love; matta—intoxicated; kori'—doing; more—to me; śunaḥ—please hear; nija—own; guṇa—of the virtues; gāna—the song.

     Please give me a spiritual body. In the world of Vṛndāvana please make me drink the nectar of service to You. Please make me drunk with love for You. Please listen as I sing Your glories.

Text 10 

jugala-sebāya       śrī-rāsa-maṇḍale
nijukta koro' āmāya
lalitā sakhīra      ajogyā kiṅkorī
binoda dhoriche pāya

     jugala—for the divine couple; sebāya—service; śrī-rāsa-maṇḍale—in the rasa dance circle; nijukta—engaged; koro'—doing; āmāya—of me; lalitā sakhīra—of Lalita-sakhi; ajogyā—unqualified; kiṅkorī—maidservant; binoda—Bhaktivinoda; dhoriche—grasps; pāya—the feet.

     Please allow me to serve You in the rāsa-dance circle. Lalitā-sakhī's unworthy maidservant Bhaktivinoda grasps Your feet.






Part 8 Nama kīrtana-Chanting of the Holy Names

Song 1

Text 1

kali-kukkura-kadana jadi cāo (he)
kali-juga-pābana         kali-bhoya-nāśana
śrī-sacī-nandana gāo (he)

     kali—of Kali-yuga; kukkura—the dog; kadana—beating; jadi—if; cāaḥ—desire; (he)—Oh; kali-juga-pābana—the purifier of the Kali-yuga; kali-bhoya—the fears of the Kali-yuga; nāśana—destroying; śrī-sacī-nandana—the son of Śaci; gāaḥ—chant; he—Oh.

     If you desire to beat the dog of Kali-yuga and chase it away, then please chant, "Kali-juga-pāvana (O purifier of the Kali-yuga)! Kali-bhaya-nāśana (O destroyer of the fears Kali-yuga brings), Śrī Śacī-nandana (O son of Śacī)!

Text 2 

gadādhara-madana         nitā'yera prāṇa-dhana
adwaitera prapūjita gorā
nimāyi biśwambhara       śrīnibāsa-īśwara
bhakta-samūha-cita-corā

     "Gadādhara-madana (O delight of Gadādhara)! Nitā'yera prāṇa-dhana (O treasure of Nityānanda's life)! Adwaitera prapūjita (O Lord worshiped by Advaita)! Gorā (O fair Lord)! Nimāyi (O Nimāi)! Viśvambhara (O maintainer of the worlds)! Śrīnivāsa-īśwara (O master of Śrīvāsa)! Bhakta-samūha-cita-corā (O Lord who charms the devotees' hearts)!

Text 3 

nadīyā-śaśadhara         māyāpura-īśwara
nāma-prabartana sura
gṛhi-jana-śikhaka        nyāsi-kula-nāyaka
mādhaba rādhā-bhāba-pūra

     "Nadīyā-śaśadhara (O moon of Nadīyā)! Māyāpura-īśwara (O master of Māyāpura)! Nāma-pravartana (O preacher of the holy names)! Sura (O Supreme Personality of Godhead)! Gṛhi-jana-śikṣaka (O teacher of the householders)! Nyāsi-kula-nāyaka (O leader of the sannyāsīs)! Mādhava (O husband of the goddess of fortune)! Rādhā-bhāva-pūra (O master flooded with Śrī Rādhā's ecstatic love)!

Text 4 

sārbabhauma-śodhana      gajapati-tāraṇa
rāmānanda-poṣaṇa bīra
rūpānanda-bardhana       sanātana-pālana
haridāsa-modana dhīra

     Sārvabhauma-śodhana (O purifier of Sārvabhauma)! Gajapati-tāraṇa (O delivere of King Pratāparudra)! Rāmānanda-poṣaṇa (O maintainer of Rāmānanda Rāya)! Vīra (O hero)! Rūpānanda-vardhana (O delight of Rūpa Gosvāmī)! Sanātana-pālana (O protector of Sanātana Gosvāmī)! Haridāsa-modana (O delight of Haridāsa Ṭhākura)! Dhīra (O saintly Lord)!

Text 5 

braja-rasa-bhābana       duṣṭa-mana-śātana
kapaṭī bighātana kāma
śuddha-bhakta-pālana          śuṣka-jana-tāḍana
chala-bhakti-dūṣaṇa rāma

     Vraja-rasa-bhāvana (O Lord who tastes the nectar of the ecstatic love present in Vraja)! Duṣṭa-mana-śātana (O Lord who punishes the wicked mind)! Kapaṭī-vighātana (O Lord who punishes the hypocrites)! Kāma (O Lord splendid like Kāmadeva)! Śuddha-bhakta-pālana (O protector of the pure devotees)! Śuṣka-jana-tāḍana (O punisher of the dry so-called ascetics)! Chala-bhakti-dūṣaṇa (O punisher of the hypocrites)! Rāma (O supreme enjoyer)!




Song 2

Text 1

bibhābarī śeṣa      āloka prabeśa
nidrā chāri' utho jība
bolo hari hari      mukunda murāri
rāma kṛṣṇa hayagrība

     bibhābarī—of night; śeṣa—at the end; āloka—glimpses of sunlight; prabeśa—manifestation; nidrā—sleep; chāri'—abandoning; uthaḥ—rise; jība—O souls; bolaḥ—chant; hari—Hari; hari—Hari; mukunda—Mukunda; murāri—Murāri; rāma—Rāma; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; hayagrība—Hayagrīva.

     This is a song sung by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. He's asking everyone to rise early in the morning. "Bibhābarī śeṣa", the night is over. "Aloka prebeśa", the glimpses of sunlight are there. Now you get up. "Nidrā chāri' utho jība." Don't sleep any more. That is way of Vedic life. One should not sleep after sunrise. You must rise before sunrise. That is healthy life also. So, just instantly after rising from the bed, one should chant the holy names of the Lord. Here it is suggested: "Bolo Hari Hari" Now we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.*

     Mukunda means one who gives liberation. Murāri means Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of the demon of the name Mura. Rāma. His another name celebrated as Rāma. Hayagrīva is another incarnation of Kṛṣṇa.*

Text 2 

nṛsiṁha bāmana      śrī-madhusūdana
brajendra-nandana śyāma
pūtanā-ghātana      kaiṭabha-śātana
jaya dāśarathi rāma

     Similary, Nṛsiṁha, Narahari: Half-lion half-man Nṛsiṁhadeva. Vāmana incarnation. Nrsimha, Vamana, Śrī Madhusūdana. Madhusūdana: There was a demon Madhu and Kaitabha. They came to swallow up Brahma after his creation. So they were killed. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's another name is Madhusdana. Madhusudana name is found in Bhagavad-gita in various places. Madhusudana means "the enemy of Madhu". Kṛṣṇa is both friend and enemy. He's actually friend of everyone, but He becomes enemy-like for one who treats Him like an enemy. He's nobody's enemy, but if someone wants to see Him as an enemy, He appears like enemy. That is absolute. So the demons, they want to see Kṛṣṇa as enemy. So, accepting the desire of the demons, He appears before him as enemy, kills him, and gives him liberation. That is absolute pastime of Kṛṣṇa. Madhusudana. Vrajendra-nandana. Syama. Actually, God has no name, but His names are selected according to His pastimes. Just like this Madhusudana name is given to Him because He killed the Madhu demons. Similarly, He is known as Vrajendra-nandana, the son of Vṛndāvana, because He appeared as the son of Vraja's Yaśodā and Nanda, so Vrajendra-nandana. Śyāma. His bodily hue is black hue, therefore He is called Syamasundara. Pūtanā-ghātana, Kaitabha-satana, Jaya Dasarathi Rama. In connection of His killing of the Ravana, He is glorified: Jaya. Dāśarathi means His father's name was Daśartaha, so He's Dāśarathi. Dāśarathi Rāma. Jaya Dāśarathi Rāma. Dāśarathi Rāma.*

Text 3 

jaśodā-dulāla       gobinda gopāla
bṛndābana-purandara
gopī-priya-jana          rādhikā-ramaṇa
bhūbana-sundara-bara

     Yaśodā-dulāla, Govinda, Gopāla. Yaśodā-dulāla means pet son of Mother Yaśodā. Govinda, Gopāla.And He's cowherd boy. Govinda, giving pleasure to the cows. Vṛndāvana-purandara, the chief of the Vṛndāvana land. He's the center of attraction for everyone in Vṛndāvana. Gopī-priya-jana, He's very favorable to the gopīs. Gopī-priya. Rādhikā-ramaṇa, and He's always enjoying the company of Rādhārāṇī. Therefore His name is Rādhikā-ramaṇa. Bhuvana-sundara-vara. So, He's attracted so many gopīs. That means He's attractive to the whole universe. Nobody is more attractive than Kṛṣṇa within this universe, or within anywhere. Therefore He's called Bhuvana-sundara-vara. "Vara" means the chief*

Text 4 

rābaṇānta-kora      mākhana-taskora
gopī-jana-bastra-hārī
brajera rākhala          gopa-bṛnda-pāla
citta-hārī baṁśī-dhārī

     Rāvaṇāntakara, Mākhana-taskara. Gopī-jana-vastra-hārī. As Rama, when He appeared as Lord Ramacandra, He killed Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇāntakara. Makhana-taskara. And in Vṛndāvana He is known as the butter-thief. In His childhood pastimes He used to steal butter from the pots of the gopīs. That was His pleasure pastimes. Therefore He's called Makhana-taskara, Makhana-cora. Gopī-vastra-hārī. And He also stole the garments of the gopīs while they were taking bath. This is very confidential. Actually, the gopīs wanted Kṛṣṇa. They prayed to Katyayani-devi, Goddess Katyayani, prayeed to mother Katyayani, because He was attractive to all the girls of His age. So they wanted Kṛṣṇa as husband. So, superficially Kṛṣṇa was of the same age, and how could He be husband for all the gopīs? That is superficial. But He accepted. Because the gs wanted to become wives of Kṛṣṇa, therefore Kṛṣṇa accepted that proposal. In order to show them the mercy, He stole the garments, because the husband can take away the covering of the wife's bodily garment. Nobody can touch her. So that is the purport. But people do not know, and therefore Kṛṣṇa's lila has to be heard from realized soul, or these portions should be avoided. Otherwise we shall misunderstand that Kṛṣṇa took away the garments and He was woman-hunter. Not like that. He's Supreme Lord. He fulfills the desire of every devotee. So Kṛṣṇa had no business to see the gopīs naked, but because they wanted to become wife, and He fulfilled their desire. Token. "Yes. I'm your husband. I'm taking your garment. Now take your garment and go home." Therefore He is known as Gopī-jana-vastra-hārī. Brajera Rākhala, Gopa-vṛnda-pāla, Citta-hārī, Vaṁśī-dhārī. Brajera Rākhala, the cowherd boys in Vṛndāvana. And Gopa-vṛnda-pāla. His only object was to satisfy the cowherdsmen, including Hid father and uncle. They're all keeping cows. To please them. So He's Gopa-vṛnda-pāla. Ciita-hārī Vaṁśī-dhārī. And when He's playing the flute, it taking away the heart of everyone.*

Text 5 

jogīndra-bandana         śrī-nanda-nandana
braja-jana-bhoya-hārī
nabīna-nīrada       rūpa-manohara
mohana-baṁśī-bihārī

     Yogīndra-vandana. In spite of Kṛṣṇa's playing like a samll cowherd boy in Vṛndāvana, just like a village boy making jokes with His friends, but still He's Yogīndra-vandana. Yogīndra means "greatest yogīs, mystics". The meditation, whom are they trying to find out? This Kṛṣṇa. They are trying to find out Kṛṣṇa. But they do not know they're tryingto find out Kṛṣṇa. They're thinking something else. So unless they come to the point of concentrating their mind on Kṛṣṇa, their yogic principle or mystic power is baffled. "Yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntarātmanaḥ". The yogī, the first-calls yogī, must keep always Kṛṣṇa within his heart. Thatis perfection of yoga. Therefore He is called Yogīndra-vandana. Śrī Nanda-nandana, Vraja-jana-bhaya-hārī. Although He's worshiped by the great mystics, still He lives in Vṛndāvana as the son of Nanda Mahārāja. The residents of Vṛndāvana, they feel safe and sound underthe protection of Kṛṣṇa. Navīna-nīrada, Rūpa-manohara, Mohana-vaṁśī-vihārī. Navīna-nīrada. Nīrada means “cloud". His complexion is just like a new cloud. New cloud, blackish. Generally black is not considered very beautiful within this material world, but becauase His body's transcendental, even He's blackish, He's the universally attractive: Rūpa-manohara. Mohana-vaṁśī-vihārī. Simply when He stands with His flute, He, even though He's blackish, He beocmes so attractive to everyone.*

Text 6 

jaśodā-nandana      kaṁsa-niṣūdana
nikuñja-rāsa-bilāsī
kadamba-kānana      rāsa-parāyaṇa
bṛndā-bipina-nibāsī

     Yaśodā-nandana, Kaṁsa-nisūdana. He is very much celebrated as the son of Mother Yaśodā. He's the killer of Kaṁsa, and Nikuñja-rāsa-vilāsī. And used to dance rāsa-dance in the nikuñja. Vaṁśī-vaṭa, nikuñja. Kadamba-kānana-rāsa-parāyaṇa. There are many kadamba trees. Kadamba is a kind of flower that is especially grown in Vṛndāvana. Very fragrant and beautiful soild flower, round. So Kadmaba-kānana. He used to enjoy the rāsa dance underneath the tree of this kadamba.*

Text 7 

ānanda-bardhana          prema-niketana
phula-śara-jojaka kāma
gopāṅganā-gaṇa-          citta-binodana
samasta-guṇa-gāna-dhāma

     Ananda-vardhana, Prema-niketana, Phula-śara-yojaka-kāma. So He was exciting the lusty desires of the gopīs and increasing their transcendental bliss: Ananda-vardhana. Prema-niketana. Becausee's the reservoir of all pleasure. The gopīs used to come because He's the reservoir of all pleasure. Just like if we go to take water from a lake, where there is water. Similarly, if we want actually blissful life, then we should draw it from the reservoir of all pleasure: Kṛṣṇa. Ananda-vardhana. That pleasure will increase. In the material pleasure it'll decrease. You cannot enjoy for a long time. It will decrease. But spiritual pleasure, if you want to draw it from the reservoir of all pleasure, Kṛṣṇa, then it will increase. Your pleasure potency will increase and you'll get more and more pleasure. As you increase your pleasure potency or desire, the supply is also incessant. There's no limit. Phula-śara-yojaka-kāma. He's the transcendental Cupid. Cupid, with his bows and arrows, increases the lusty desires of the material world. Similarly, in the spiritual world He's the supreme Cupid. He was increasing the lusty desires of the gopīs. They used to come there, and both of them, there was no decrease. They were increasing their desire, and Kṛṣṇa was supplying that. Without any material concept of life they were simply dancing, that's all. Gopāṅganā-gaṇa-citta-vinodana. Samasta-guṇa-gaṇa-dhāma. He's especially attractive for the gopāṅganā. Gopāṅganā means the damsels of Vraja-dhāma. Gopāṅganā-gaṇa-citta-vinodana. They were simply absorbed in Kṛṣṇa's thought. They were so much become attracted and attached to Kṛṣṇa that they could not give up His existence of His form within the heart for a moment. Citta-vinodana. He captured the hearts of the gopīs. Samasta-guṇa-gaṇa-dhāma. He's the reservoiur of all transcendental qualities.*

Text 8 

jamunā-jībana       keli-parāyaṇa
mānasa-candra-cakora
nāma-sudhā-rasa          gāo kṛṣṇa-jaśa
rākho bacana mana mora

     Yamunā-jīvana. Keli-parāyaṇa. Mānasa-candra-cakora. Mānasa-candra-cakora: There's a bird which is known as cakora. He looks toward the moonshine. Similarly, He was the moon among the gopīs, and they were simply looking after Him. And He's the life of the river Yamunā.*

     Nāma-sudhā-rasa, gāo kṛṣṇa-jaśa rākho bacana. So Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is requesting everyone, "Now you chant all these different names of the Lord, and sing. Rākho bacana mama. My dear mind, please keep my word. Don't refuse. Go on chanting all these holy names of Kṛṣṇa."*





Part 9 Rūpa kīrtana-Singing the Glories of the Lord's Form

Song 1

(Kāmoda-rāga)

Text 1

janama sa-phala tā'ra         kṛṣṇa-daraśana jā'ra
bhāgya hoiyāche eka-bāra
bikaśiyā hṛn-nayana      kori' kṛṣṇa-daraśana
chāre jība cittera bikāra

     janama—birth; sa-phala—fruitful; tā'ra—of him; kṛṣṇa-daraśana—the sight of Lord Kṛṣṇa; jā'ra—of whom; bhāgya—good fortune; hoiyāche—is; eka-bāra—one time; bikaśiyā—manifesting; hṛn-nayana—in the eyes of the heart; kori'—doing; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; daraśana—the sight; chāre—abandond; jība—the soul; cittera—of the heart; bikāra—material misconceptions.

     A person who once sees Lord Kṛṣṇa becomes fortunate. His birth in this world has borne its true fruit. Gazing at Lord Kṛṣṇa with the eyes of his heart, that soul becomes free of the disease of material desire in his heart.

Text 2 

bṛndābana-keli catura bana-mālī
tri-bhaṅga-bhaṅgima-rūpa      baṁśī-dhārī aparūpa
rasamoya-nidhi guṇa-śālī

     bṛndābana-keli—Vṛndāvana pastimes; catura—expert; bana-mālī—wearing a forest garland; tri-bhaṅga-bhaṅgima-rūpa—threefold bending form; baṁśī-dhārī—holding a flute; aparūpa—wonderful; rasamoya-nidhi—ocean of nectar; guṇa-śālī—filled with transcendental qualities.

     Lord Kṛṣṇa is expert at enjoying pastimes in Vṛndāvana. He plays the flute and wears a forest-flower garland. His wonderful form is threefold-bending. His is full of transcendental qualities. He is an ocean of nectar.

Text 3 

barṇa-naba-jaladhara          śire śikhi-piccha-bara
alaka tilaka śobhā pāya
paridhana pīta-bāsa      badane madhura-hāsa
heno rūpa jagata mātāya

     barṇa-naba-jaladhara—the color of a new cloud; śire—on His head; śikhi-piccha-bara—a graceful peacock-feather; alaka—curling hair; tilaka—tilaka; śobhā—beauty; pāya—attaining; paridhana—wearing; pīta-bāsa—yellow garments; badane—on His mouth; madhura—sweet; hāsa—smile; henaḥ—like; rūpa—form; jagata—the world; mātāya—wild.

     He is the color of a new raincloud. On His head is a graceful peacock feather. His tilaka and His curly locks are graceful and splendid. He wears yellow garments. A sweet smile stays on His lips. His handsomeness makes the world wild with joy.

Text 4 

indranīla jini'         kṛṣṇa-rūpa-khani
heriyā kadamba-mūle
mana ucāṭana       nā cale caraṇa
soṁsāra gelāma bhule

     indranīla—sapphire; jini'—defeating; kṛṣṇa-rūpa-khani—the mine of Kṛṣṇa's handsomeness; heriyā—seeing; kadamba—kadamba; mūle—at the root; mana—heart; ucāṭana— nā cale caraṇa      soṁsāra gelāma bhule.

     As I gaze at Kṛṣṇa under that kadamba tree, Kṛṣṇa whose dark complexion defeats the sapphires, Kṛṣṇa who is a jewel mine of handsomeness, my heart yearns to stay with Him. My feet do not move from that place. I have forgotten everything about the material world.

Text 5 

(sakhī he) sudhāmoya          se rūpa-mādhurī
dekhile nayana      hoya acetana
jhare premamoya bāri

     sakhī—friend; he—O; sudhāmoya—nectar; se—thus; rūpa—of handsomeness; mādhurī—sweetness; dekhile—saw; nayana—eyes; hoya—is; acetana—unconscious; jhare—flows; premamoya—of love; bāri—tears.

     O my friend, as I gaze at the nectar sweetness of Kṛṣṇa's form, tears of love flow from my eyes, and I fall unconscious.

Text 6 

kibe cūrā śire       kiba baṁśī kare
kibe se tri-bhaṅga-ṭhama
caraṇa-kamale       āmiyā uchale
tāhāte nūpura-dāma

     kibe—how glorious!; cūrā—the crown; śire—on His head; kiba—how glorious!; baṁśī—the flute; kare—in His hand; kibe—how glorious!; se tri-bhaṅga-ṭhama—Hi threefold-bending form; caraṇa-kamale—on His lotus feet; āmiyā—nectar; uchale—flooding; tāhāte—there; nūpura—of anklets; dāma—string.

     How glorious is the crown on His head! How glorious is the flute in His hand! How glorious is His threefold-bending form! His tinkling anklets are a flood of nectar at His lotus feet!

Text 7 

sadā āśā kori       bhṛṅga-rūpa dhori'
caraṇa-kamale sthāna
anāyāse pāi         kṛṣṇa-guṇa gāi
āra nā bhajabo āna

     sadā—eternally; āśā—desire; kori—I do; bhrṅga-rūpa—the form of a bee; dhori'—holding; caraṇa-kamale—at the lotus feet; sthāna—place; anāyāse—easily; pāi—I attain; kṛṣṇa-guṇa—teh glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; gāi—I sing; āra—and; nā—not; bhajabaḥ—worship; āna—another.

     Again and again I yearn to become a bumblebee, for then I may easily approach Lord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet and sing His glories. No one else will I worship.




Part 10 Guṇa kīrtana-Singing the Glories of the Lord's Qualities

Song 1

(Dhanaśī-rāga)

Text 1

bahirmukha ho'ye         māyāre bhajiye
soṁsāre hoinu rāgī
kṛṣṇa doyāmoya      prapañce udoya
hoila āmāra lāgi

     bahirmukha—outside; ho'ye—is; māyāre—of Maya; bhajiye—worshiping; soṁsāre—material world; hoinu—do; rāgī—love; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; doyāmoya—merciful; prapañce—in the material world; udoya—arisal; hoila—was; āmāra—me; lāgi—taking.

     I turned away from Lord Kṛṣṇa. I worshiped Māyā. I fell in love with the world of birth and death. Then merciful Kṛṣṇa came to this world to rescue me.

Text 2 

(sakhī he) kṛṣṇacandra guṇera sāgara
aparādhi jane       kṛpā bitaraṇe
śodhite nāhe kātara

     sakhī—friend; he—O; kṛṣṇacandra—Kṛṣṇa; guṇera—of virtues; sagara—an ocean; aparādhi—offender; jane—persons; kṛpā—mercy; bitaraṇe—to give; śodhite—to purify; nāhe—not; kātara—unhappy.

     O my friend, Kṛṣṇa is an ocean of virtues. He gives His mercy even to the offenders. He is not unhappy to purify them.

Text 3 

soṁsāre āsiyā       prakṛti bhajiyā
puruṣābhimāne māri
kṛṣṇa doyā kori'         nije abatori'
baṁśī-rabe nilā hari'

     soṁsāre—to the material weorld; āsiyā—going; prakṛti—matter; bhajiyā—worshiping; puruṣa—of being an enjoyer; abhimāne—by the proud idea; māri—destroyed; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; doyā—mercy; kori'—doing; nije—personally; abatori'—descended; baṁśī-rabe—with the sound of the flute; nilā—misconceptions; hari'—removing.

     Coming to the world of birth and death, I worshiped matter. Proud to be an enjoyer, I was lost. Then Lord Kṛṣṇa kindly descended to this world. With the sound of His flute He removed my illusions.

Text 4 

emone ratane       biśeṣa jatane
bhajo sakhī abirata
binoda ekhone       śrī-kṛṣṇa-caroṇe
guṇe bandha sadā nata

     emone—this; ratane—jewel; biśeṣa—specific; jatane—with earnestness; bhajaḥ—please worship; sakhī—O friend; abirata—without stop; binoda—Bhaktivinoda; ekhone—one; śrī-kṛṣṇa-caroṇe—T Śrī Kṛṣṇa's feet; guṇe—virtues; bandha—bound; sadā—always; nata—bowed down.

     O my friend, please earnestly worship Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet without stop. Indebted to Him for His noble virtues, Bhaktivinoda again and again bows before Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet.




Song 2

(Bhāṭīyārī-rāga)

Text 1

śuno he rasika-jana      kṛṣṇa-guṇa agaṇana
ananta kahite nāhi pāre
kṛṣṇa jagatera guru      kṛṣṇa bañchā-kalpa-taru
nābika se bhaba-pārābāre

     śunaḥ—please hear; he—O; rasika-jana—tasters of nectar; kṛṣṇa-guṇa—Kṛṣṇa's virtues; agaṇana—countless; ananta—endless; kahite—to describe; nāhi—not; pāre—has the power; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; jagatera—of the world; guru—the guru; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; bañchā-kalpa-taru—a kalpa-vrksa tree; nābika—boatman; se—he; bhaba-pārābāre—in the ocean of birth and death.

     O tasters of nectar, please hear of Lord Kṛṣṇa's numberless transcendental qualities, qualities that no one has the power to describe in full. Lord Kṛṣṇa is the guru of all the worlds. Lord Kṛṣṇa is a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree. He is the boatman that crosses the ocean of birth and death.

Text 2 

hṛdoya pīḍita jā'ra      kṛṣṇa cikitsaka tā'ra
bhaba-roga nāśite catura
kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha-jane         premāmṛta-bitaraṇe
krame loya nija antaḥpura

     hṛdoya—heart; pīḍita—tormented; jā'ra—of whome; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; cikitsaka—the physician; tā'ra—of him; bhaba—of material life; roga—the disease; nāśite—to destroy; catura—expert; kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha-jane—to the people averse to Lord Kṛṣṇa; prema—of pure love; amṛta—the nectar; bitaraṇe—in giving; krame—gradually; loya—accepting; nija—on; antaḥpura—private rooms in the palace.

     Lord Kṛṣṇa is the perfect physician for one whose heart is tormented. He expertly cures the disease of repeated birth and death. To the souls who have turned away from Him, He gives the nectar of spiritual love. Step by step, He takes them back to His spiritual world.

Text 3 

karma-bandha jñāna-bandha          ābeśe mānaba andha
tā'ra kṛṣṇa koruṇā-sāgara
pada-padma-madhu diyā         andha-bhāba ghucāiyā
caraṇe korena anucāra

     karma-bandha—the bonds of karma; jñāna-bandha—the bonds of jnana; ābeśe—bewildered; mānaba—people; andha—blind; ta'ra—of them; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; koruṇā-sāgara—and ocean of mercy; pada-padma-madhu—the nectar of the lotus feet; diyā—giving; andha—blind; bhāba—nature; ghucāiyā—destroying; caraṇe—at the feet; korena—does; anucāra—follower.

     Lord Kṛṣṇa is an ocean of kindness to the bewildered blind people bound by ropes of karma (materialism) and jñāna (impersonal speculation). Giving them the nectar of His lotus feet, He cures their blindness and transforms them into servants of His feet.

Text 4 

bidhi-mārga-rata-jane         swādhīnata-ratna-dane
rāga-mārge korāna prabeśa
rāga-baśa-vartī ho'ye         pārakīya-bhābāśroye
labhe jība kṛṣṇa-premābeśa

     bidhi—of rules and regulations; mārga—path; rata—attached; jane—to the people; swādhīnata—of independence; ratna—of the jewel; dane—gift; rāga—of love; mārge—on the path; korāna—does; prabeśa—entrance; rāga-baśa-vartī—overcome with love; ho'ye—makes; pārakīya-bhāba—parakiya-bhava; āśroye—shelter; labhe—attainment; jība—the soul; kṛṣṇa-prema—of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa; ābeśa—entrance.

     To the devotees who diligently follow the path of vaidhi-bhakti, Lord Kṛṣṇa gives the jewel of independence. He places them on the path of rāga-bhakti. Overcome with ecstatic love, the devotee takes shelter of pārakīya-bhāva. The devotee becomes filled with pure love (prema) for Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 5 

premāmṛta-bāri-dhārā          sadā pāna-rata tāṅra
kṛṣṇa tāṅhādera bandhu pati
sei saba braja-jana      su-kalyāṇa-niketana
dīna-hīna-binodera gati

     prema—of love; amṛta—nectat; bāri—water; dhārā—flood; sadā—always; pāna—drinking; rata—devoted; tāṅra—of him; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; tāṅhādera—of him; bandhu—friend; pati—husband; sei—He; saba—all; braja-jana—people of Vraja; su-kalyāṇa—of great auspiciousness; niketana—the abode; dīna—poor; hīna—lowly; binodera—of bBhaktivinoda; gati—the goal.

     For a devotee who always eagerly drinks from the nectar flood of ecstatic spiritual love (prema), Lord Kṛṣṇa becomes the friend or the husband. For the people of Vraja He is the abode of auspiciousness. He is poor and fallen Bhaktivinoda's shelter.




Part 11 Līlā kīrtana-Chanting the Glories of the Lord's Pastimes

Song 1

(Dhānaśī-rāga)

Text 1

jībe kṛpā kori'          golokera hori
braja-bhāba prokāśilo
se bhāba-rasajña         bṛndābana-jogya
joḍa-buddhi nā hoilo

     jībe—to the souls; kṛpā—mercy; kori'—doing; golokera—of Goloka; hori—Kṛṣṇa; braja-bhāba—the ecstasy of Vraja; prokāśilaḥ—manifested; se—He; bhāba-rasajña—they who know the nectar of ecstatic love; bṛndābana-jogya—proper for Vṛndāvana; joḍa—material; buddhi—idea; nā—not; hoilaḥ—is.

     Kind to the conditioned souls, Goloka's Lord Kṛṣṇa reveals the ecstatic love felt by Vraja's people. They who understand the nectar of this love are qualified to enter Vṛndāvana. They who think this love is material may not enter.

Text 2 

kṛṣṇa-līlā-samudra apāra
baikuṇṭha-bihāra         samāna ihāra
kabhu nāhe jā'no sāra

     kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; līlā—of the pastimes; samudra—the ocean; apāra—shoreless; baikuṇṭha-bihāra—pastimes in Vaikuṇṭha; samāna—equal; ihāra—in that; kabhu—ever; nāhe—not; ja'naḥ—think; sāra—essence.

     Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are a shoreless ocean. The Lord's Vaikuṇṭha pastimes can never be their equal.

Text 3 

kṛṣṇa narākāra      sarba-rasādhāra
śṛṅgārera biśeṣatah
baikuṇṭha-sādhaka        sakhye apāraka
madhure nā hoya rata

     kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; nara—human; ākāra—form; sarba—all; rasa—nectar; ādhāra—the restinmg place; śṛṅgārera—of conjugal love; biśeṣatah—especially; baikuṇṭha-sādhaka—the person aspiring for Vaikuṇṭha; sakhye—in friendhip; apāraka—incapable; madhure—to sweetness; nā—not; hoya—is; rata—devoted.

     Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose form is humanlike, is the reservoir of all nectar mellows, especially the mellow of conjugal love. Situated in sakhya-rasa, the devotees in Vaikuṇṭha have no power to taste the sweetness of these mellows.

Text 4 

braje kṛṣṇa-dhana        nabīna-madana
aprākṛta rasamoya
jībera sahita       nitya-līlocita
kṛṣṇa-guṇa-gāna hoya

     braje—in Vraja; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; dhana—treasure; nabīna-madana—new Kamadevqa; aprākṛta—not material; rasamoya—full of nectar; jībera—the souls; sahita—with; nitya—eternal; līlā—pastimes; ucita—appropriate; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa's; guṇa—transcendental qualities; gāna—singing; hoya—is.

     In Vraja Lord Kṛṣṇa is a great treasure. He is the new Kāmadeva. He is full of transcendental nectar. He eternally enjoys pastimes with the liberated souls. In this way I sing of Lord Kṛṣṇa's transcendental qualities.




Song 2

(Dhānaśī-rāga)

Text 1

jamunā-puline       kadamba-kānane
ki herinu sakhī āja
śyāma baṁśī-dhārī        maṇi-mañcopari
kore' līlā rāsa-rāja

     jamunā-puline—on the Yamuna's bank; kadamba-kānane—in a kadamba forest; ki—wheat; herinu—I saw; sakhī—O friend; āja—today; śyāma—dark; baṁśī-dhārī—holding a flute; maṇi-mañcopari—on a jewel platform; kore'—did; līlā—pastimes; rāsa—of the rasa dance; rājathe king.

     O my friend, what did I see today in a kadamba grove by the Yamunā's bank? I saw the dark king of the rāsa dance playing the flute and enjoying pastimes in a jewel courtyard.

Text 2 

kṛṣṇa-keli sudhā-prasrabana
aṣṭa-dalopari       śrī-rādhā śrī-hari
aṣṭa-sakhī parijana

     kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; keli—pastimes; sudhā—nectar; prasrabana—stream; aṣṭa—eight; dala—petals; upari—on; śrī-rādhā—Śrī Rādhā; śrī-hari—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; aṣṭa-sakhī—eight gopī friends; parijana—associates.

     Standing on an eight-petal lotus with Śrī Rādhā and Her eight gopī friends, Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoyed pastimes that were streams of nectar.

Text 3 

su-gīta nartane          saba sakhī-gaṇe
tuṣiche jugala-dhana
kṛṣṇa-līlā heri'         prakṛti-sundarī
bistāriche śobhā bane

     su-gīta—beautiful singing; nartane—dancing; saba—all; sakhī-gaṇe—gopī friends; tuṣiche—pleased; jugala-dhana—the treasure that is the divine couple; kṛṣṇa-līlā—Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes; heri'—seeing; prakṛti—His potency; sundarī—beautiful; bistāriche—expanded; śobhā—beauty; bane—in the forest.

     With singing, music, and dancing, the gopīs pleased the great treasure that is the divine couple. I saw Kṛṣṇa's pastimes and I saw His beautiful beloved fill the forest with splendor.

Text 4 

ghare nā jāibo      bane prabeśibo
o līlā-rasera tore
tyaji' kūla-lāja         bhaja braja-rāja
binoda minati kore'

     ghare—home; nā—not; jāibaḥ—I will go; bane—in the forest; prabeśibaḥ—I will enter; aḥ—this; līlā-rasera—of nectar pastimes; tore—crossing; tyaji'—renouncing; kūla—family; lāja—shyness; bhaja—worship; braja-rāja—the king of Vraja; binoda—Bhaktivinoda; minati—request; kore'—does.

     I will not return home. I will enter the forest to taste the nectar of these pastimes. Leaving behind my family and my shyness, Ia will worship Vraja's king. That is Bhaktivinoda's prayer.




Part 12 Rasa kīrtana-Chanting the Glories of the Transcendental Mellows

Song 1

(Kāmoda-rāga)

Text 1

kṛṣṇa-baṁśī-gīta śuni'        dekhi' citra-pata-khani
loka-mukhe guṇa śrabaṇiyā
pūrba-rāgākrānta cita         unmāda-lakhaṇānwita
sakhī-saṅge calilā dhāiyā

     kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; baṁśī—flute; gīta—music; śuni'—hearing; dekhi'—seeing; citra-pata-khani—the painting; loka—of the world; mukhe—in the face; guṇa—the virtues; śrabaṇiyā—hearing; pūrba-rāga—with the beginnings of love; ākrānta—overcome; cita—heart; unmāda—of madness; lakhaṇa—signs; anwita—with; sakhī-saṅge—in the company of the gs; calilā— dhāiyā—ran.

     Hearing Kṛṣṇa's flute-music, seeing His wonderful picture, and hearing His virtues from the people's mouths, I find that I have fallen in love with Him. With the other gopīs, I wildly run to Him.

Text 2 

nikuñja-kānane korilo abhisāra
na mānilo nibaraṇa       gṛha-kārya agaṇana
dharmādharma nā korilo bicāra

     nikuñja-kānane—in the forest grove; korilaḥ—did; abhisāra—meeting; na—not; mānilaḥ—knre; nibaraṇa—prohibition; gṛha-kārya—household duties; agaṇana—not considering; dharmādharma—piety or impiety; nā—not; korilaḥ—did; bicāra—consideration.

     Not considering household duties, piety, or sin, and not allowing anyone to stop me, I go to meet Kṛṣṇa.

Text 3 

jamunā-puline giyā       sakhī-gaṇe sambodhiyā
jijñāsilo priyera uddeśa
chārilo prāṇera bhoya         banete prabeśa hoya
baṁśī-dhwani koriyā nirdeśa

     jamunā-puline—to the Yamuna's bank; giyā—going; sakhī-gaṇe—with the gopīs; sambodhiyā—addressing; jijñāsilaḥ—I ask; priyera—of the beloved; uddeśa—news; chārilaḥ—abandoned; prāṇera—of life; bhoya—fear; banete—the forest; prabeśa—entrance; hoya—was; baṁśī-dhwani—the sound of the flute; koriyā—doing; nirdeśa—instruction.

     Going to the Yamunā's bank, I ask the gopīs for news of my beloved. Following the command spoken by the flute's melody, I spurn all fear for my life and enter the forest.

Text 4 

nadī jathā sindhu prati       dhāya ati begabatī
sei rūpa rasabatī satī
ati bege kuñja-bane         giyā kṛṣṇa-sannidhane
ātma-nibedane koilo mati

     nadī—river; jathā—as; sindhu—the ocean; prati—to; dhāya—runs; ati—very; begabatī—strong; sei—this; rūpa—form; rasabatī—nectar; satī—sianlty; ati—very; bege—srtong; kuñja-bane—in the forest; giyā—going; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; sannidhane—in the presence; ātma-nibedane—surrendering the self; koilaḥ—do; mati—heart.

     As a river very strongly runs to the ocean, so this beautiful, sweet, saintly girl strongly runs into the forest. Finding Lord Kṛṣṇa, she offers herself to Him.

Text 5 

keno mora durbala lekhanī nāhi sare
abhisāra ārambhiyā sa-kampa antare

     kenaḥ—why?; mora—my; durbala—weak; lekhanī—pen; nāhi—not; sare—moves; abhisāra—meeting; ārambhiyā—beginning; sa-kampa—with trembling; antare—within.

     Why does my weak pen no longer move? As I begin to describe this meeting, my heart trembles.

Text 6 

milana sambhoga bipralambādi-barṇana
prakāśa korite nāhi sare mama mana

     milana—meeting; sambhoga—enjoyment; bipralamba—separation; ādi—beginning; barṇana—decsription; prakāśa—manifestation; korite—to do; nāhi—not; sare—moves; mama—my; mana—heart.

     My heart does not move to describe the meeting, enjoyment, separation, or anything else about these lovers.

Text 7 

durbhaga nā bujhe rāsa-līlā-tattwa-sāra
sūkara jemona nāhi cine muktā-hāra

     durbhaga—unfortunate; nā—not; bujhe—understand; rāsa-līlā-tattwa-sāra—the truth opf the rasa dance pastimes; sūkara—swine; jemona—like; nāhi—not; cine—appreciate; muktā-hāra—a necklace of pearls.

     As swine cannot appreciate a string of pearls, so the unfortunate people cannot understand the Lord's rāsa-dance pastimes.

Text 8 

adhikāra-hīna-jana-maṅgala cintiyā
kīrtana korinu śeṣa kāla bicāriyā

     adhikāra—qualification; hīna—without jana—people; maṅgala—welfare; cintiyā—considering; kīrtana—glification; korinu—I do; śeṣa—end; kāla—time; bicāriyā—considering.

     Considering the benefit of persons who are not qualified to hear of these things, and understanding that the time is not right, I end my kīrtana here.
