More songs of the Vaiṣṇava Ācāryas
Compiled and Translated 
by Daśarath Suta Dāsa

 1.  Madhurāṣṭakam
 2.  Akrodha Paramānanda "Supreme Bliss that is Never Angry"
 3.  Ambudāñjanendra-Nīla Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Candrāṣṭaka
 4.  Āmi Yamunā Puline "On the Bank of the Yamunā River"
 5.  Antara Mandire Jāgo Jāgo "Arise, Arise in the Temple of My Heart"
 6.  Ār Koto Kāl "After How Much Time?"
 7.  Boro Sukher Khabor Gāi "The song of the Broker"
 8.  Caraṇa Kamal "Lotus Feet"
 9.  Dhana Mor Nityānanda "My Treasure Nityānanda"
 10.  Dhule Dhule Gorā Chāṅda "Moonlike Gaura Swaying To and Fro"
 11.  Duḥkher Sāgore "In the Ocean of Misery"
 12.  Durlabha Mānava Janma "Rare Human Birth"
 13.  Duṣṭa Mana Vaiṣṇava Ke?-"Who is a Real Vaiṣṇava?"
 14.  Gaurāṅga Karuṇā Koro "Be Merciful Lord Gaurāṅga"
 15.  Gaurāṅga Tumi More Doyā Nā Chāḍiho "Don't Neglect Giving Me Your Mercy"
 16.  Gorā Pahuṅ Ākṣepa-"Lamentation"
 17.  Hari He Doyāl Mor Dainya O Prapatti
 18.  He Govinda He Gopāl "O Govinda! O Gopāl!"
 19.  Jaya Jaya Jagannātha Śacīra Nandan "Glories to the Son of Jagannātha and Śacī"
 20.  Jaya Mādhava Madana Murāri
 21.  Jaya Rādhā Girivara Dhāri
 22.  Jaya Rādhe Jaya Rādhe Rādhe
 23.  Kabe Śrī Caitanya More Koribena Doyā "When Will Lord Caitanya Be Merciful to Me?"
 24.  Śrī Jagannāthāṣṭakam
 25.  Names of Lord Chaitanya
 26.  Keno Hare Kṛṣṇa Nām "Oh Why While Chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa...?"
 27.  Kṛṣṇa Deva Bhavantam Vande "I Praise You Lord Kṛṣṇa"
 28.  Kṛṣṇa Jinakā
 29.  Kṛṣṇa Prema Mayī Rādhā Yugalāṣṭakam Eight Verses Glorifying the Divine Couple
 30.  Kuṅkumākta Kāñcanābja Śrī Rādhikāṣṭaka
 31.  Kusumita Vṛndāvane Nācato Śikhi Gaṇe "Peacocks Dance in Flowering Vṛndāvana"
 32.  Madhuram Madhurebhyo Śrī Kevalāṣṭakam
 33.  Maine Raṭanā Lagāi Rādhā Nāmakī "I Practice the Repetition of Rādhā's Name"
 34.  Mama Mana Mandire "In the Temple of My Heart"
 35.  Nava Gaura Varam Śrī Śacī-Sutāṣṭakam Eight Prayers Glorifying the Son of Śrīmatī Śacī Devī
 36.  Nava Nīrada Nindita Śrī Vraja-Rāja-Sutāṣṭakam Eight Prayers Glorifying the Son of the King of Vraja
 37.  Nitāi Guṇa Maṇi "Nityānanda My Treasure"
 38.  Nitāi Nām Hāṭe Nām Haṭṭa Bhajan
 39.  Ore Vṛndāvaner Nanda Dulāl "Nanda's Boy From Vṛndāvana"
 40.  Praṇām Tomāi Ghana-śyām "Bowing Unto You, O Cloudlike Beauty"
 41.  Rāj-Rāṇī Mīrā
 42.  Śrī Guru Caraṇ Kamal
 43.  Śrī Rādhe Govinda
 44.  Śrita Kamalā Maṅgala Gītam
 45.  Sundara Bālā "Beautiful Boy"
 46.  Sundara Mor "My Beautiful One"
 47.  Tātala Saikate "Scorched on the Sandy Beach"
 48.  Ujjvala Varaṇa Śrī-Śacī-Tanayāṣtakam Eight Prayers Glorifying the Son of Śrīmatī Śacīdevī
 49.  Vaṁśī-dhārī Kṛṣṇa Murāri
 50.  Vande Kṛṣṇa Nanda Kumāra
 51.  Vṛndāvana Ramya Sthāna Vāsantī-Rāsa "Amorous Pastimes in the Spring"
 52.  Yadi Gaura Nā Hoito "If Lord Gaura Had Not Incarnated"
     Languages of the Vaiṣṇava songs


[Many songs that were originally included in this publication are now to be found in the sections on Gītāvalī, Śaraṇāgatī, etc. of which they are a part.]
Song 1: Madhurāṣṭakam
1. Madhurāṣṭakam
By Śrī Vallabhācārya
Text 1
adharaṁ madhuraṁ vadanaṁ madhuraṁ
nayanaṁ madhuraṁ hasitaṁ madhuraṁ
hṛdayaṁ madhuraṁ gamanaṁ madhuraṁ
madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuraṁ

adharam—lips; madhuram—sweet; vadanam—face; madhuram—sweet; nayanam—eyes; madhuram—sweet; hasitam—smile; madhuram—sweet; hṛdayam—heart; madhuram—sweet; gamanam—gait; madhuram—sweet; madhura-adhi-pateḥ—of the Emperor of sweetness; akhilam—all; madhuram—sweet.

 His lips are sweet, His face is sweet His eyes are sweet, His smile is sweet His heart is sweet, His gait is sweet—Everything is sweet about the Emperor of Sweetness!
Text 2
vacanaṁ madhuraṁ caritaṁ madhuraṁ
vasanaṁ madhuraṁ valitaṁ madhuraṁ
calitaṁ madhuraṁ bhramitaṁ madhuraṁ
madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuraṁ

vacanam—speech; madhuram—sweet; caritam—character; madhuram—sweet; vasanam—clothing; madhuram—sweet; valitam—belly folds; madhuram—sweet; calitam—wandering; madhuram—sweet; bhramitam—wandering; madhuram—sweet; madhura-adhi-pateḥ—of the Emperor of sweetness; akhilam—all; madhuram—sweet.

 His words are sweet, His character is sweet  His dress is sweet, His belly-folds are sweet  His movements are sweet, His wandering is sweet—Everything is sweet about the Emperor of Sweetness!
Text 3
veṇur madhuro reṇur madhuraḥ
pāṇir madhuraḥ pādau madhurau
nṛtyaṁ madhuraṁ sakhyaṁ madhuraṁ
madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuraṁ

veṇuḥ—flute; madhuraḥ—sweet; reṇuḥ—dust; madhuraḥ—sweet; pāṇiḥ—hands; madhuraḥ—sweet; pādau—feet; madhurau—sweet (pair); ntyam—dancing; madhuram—sweet; sakhyam—friendship; madhuram—sweet; madhura-adhi-pateḥ—of the Emperor of sweetness; akhilam—all; madhuram—sweet.

 His flute is sweet, His foot-dust is sweet  His hands are sweet, His feet are sweet  His dancing is sweet, His friendship is sweet—Everything is sweet about the Emperor of Sweetness!
Text 4
gītaṁ madhuraṁ pītaṁ madhuraṁ
bhuktaṁ madhuraṁ suptam madhuraṁ
rūpaṁ madhuraṁ tilakaṁ madhuraṁ
madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuraṁ

gītam—singing; madhuram—sweet; pītam—yellow cloth; madhuram—sweet; bhuktam—eating; madhuram—sweet; suptam—sleeping; madhuram—sweet; rūpam—beauty; madhuram—sweet; tilakam—forehead marking; madhuram—sweet; madhura-adhi-pateḥ—of the Emperor of sweetness; akhilam—all; madhuram—sweet.

 His singing is sweet, His yellow cloth is sweet  His eating is sweet, His sleeping is sweet  His beauty is sweet, His tilaka is sweet—Everything is sweet about the Emperor of Sweetness!
Text 5
karaṇaṁ madhuraṁ taraṇaṁ madhuraṁ
haraṇaṁ madhuraṁ ramaṇaṁ madhuraṁ
vamitaṁ madhuraṁ śamitaṁ madhuraṁ
madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuraṁ

karaṇam—deeds; madhuram—sweet; taraṇam—deliverance; madhuram—sweet; haraṇam—stealing; madhuram—sweet; ramaṇam—love-making; madhuram—sweet; vamitam—offering oblations; madhuram—sweet; śamitam—tranquility; madhuram—sweet; madhura-adhi-pateḥ—of the Emperor of sweetness; akhilam—all; madhuram—sweet.

 His deeds are sweet, His liberating is sweet, His stealing is sweet, His love-sports are sweet, His oblations are sweet, His tranquility is sweet—Everything is sweet about the Emperor of Sweetness!
Text 6
guñjā madhurā mālā madhurā
yamunā madhurā vīcī madhurā
salilaṁ madhuraṁ kamalaṁ madhuraṁ
madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuraṁ

guñjā—berry necklace; madhurā—sweet; mālā—garland; madhurā—sweet; yamunā—the river; madhurā—sweet; vīcī—ripples; madhurā—sweet; salilam—water; madhuram—sweet; kamalam—lotuses; madhuram—sweet; madhura-adhi-pateḥ—of the Emperor of sweetness; akhilam—all; madhuram—sweet.

 His guñjā-berry necklace is sweet, His flower garland is sweet, His Yamunā river is sweet, His ripples are sweet His water is sweet, His lotuses are sweet—Everything is sweet about the Emperor of Sweetness!
Text 7
gopī madhurā līlā madhurā
yuktaṁ madhuraṁ bhuktaṁ madhuraṁ
hṛṣṭaṁ madhuraṁ śiṣṭaṁ madhuraṁ
madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuraṁ

gopī—cowherd girls; madhurā—sweet; līlā—pastimes; madhurā—sweet; yuktam—union; madhuram—sweet; bhuktam—food; madhuram—sweet; hṛṣṭam—delight; madhuram—sweet; śiṣṭam—courtesy; madhuram—sweet; madhura-adhi-pateḥ—of the Emperor of sweetness; akhilam—all; madhuram—sweet.

 His gopīs are sweet, His Pastimes are sweet, His union is sweet, His food is sweet, His delight is sweet, His courtesy is sweet—Everything is sweet about the Emperor of Sweetness
Text 8
gopā madhurā gāvo madhurā 
yaṣṭir madhurā sṛṣṭir madhurā 
dalitaṁ madhuraṁ phalitaṁ madhuraṁ 
madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuraṁ

gopāḥ—cowherd boyfriends; madhurā—sweet; gāvaḥ—cows; madhurā—sweet; yaṣṭiḥ—staff; madhurā—sweet; sṛṣṭiḥ—creation; madhurā—sweet; dalitam—trampling; madhuram—sweet; phalitam—fruitfulness; madhuram—sweet; madhura-adhi-pateḥ—of the Emperor of sweetness; akhilam—all; madhuram—sweet.

 His gopas are sweet, His cows are sweet,  His staff is sweet, His creation is sweet,  His trampling is sweet, His fruitfulness is sweet—Everything is sweet about the Emperor of Sweetness!
Song 2: Akrodha Paramānanda
"Supreme Bliss that is Never Angry"
2. Akrodha Paramānanda
"Supreme Bliss that is Never Angry"
From Caitanya Maṅgala by Locana Dāsa Ṭhākura
Text 1
akrodha paramānanda nityānanda rāy
abhimāna śūnya nitāi nagare beḍāy

akrodha—not angry; paramānanda—supreme bliss; nityānanda rāy—the venerable Lord Nityānanda; abhimāna śūnya—without pride; nitāi—Nitāi; nagare—in the village; beḍāy—wanders.

 The noble Lord Nityānanda Rāy is never angry, for He is the personification of supreme transcendental bliss. Devoid of any concept of false ego, Nitāi wanders about the town.
Text 2
adhama patita jīver dvāre dvāre giyā
hari-nāma mahā-mantra deno bilāiyā

adhama—wretched; patita—fallen; jīver—of the souls; dvāre dvāre—door to door; giyā—having gone; hari-nāma mahā-mantra—the great chanting of the Lord's holy names; deno—He gives; bilāiyā—distributing.

 Going from door to door in the residences of the most fallen and wretched souls, He freely distributes the gift of the Hari-nāma mahā-mantra.
Text 3
jāre dekhe tāre kohe dante tṛṇa dhori'
āmāre kiniyā loho bhajo gaura-hari

jāre dekhe—whoever He sees; tāre kohe—to them He says; dante—in the teeth; tṛṇa dhori'—holding straw; āmāre kiniyā—purchasing me; loho—please take; bhajo—do worship; gaura-hari—Lord Chaitanya.

 He exclaims to whomever he sees while holding straw between his teeth, "Please purchase me by worshipping Gaurahari!"
o bhāi re tādera pāye dhori
mādhāi re tor pāye boli
bolo re ek-bār hari hari
bhāi mādhāi re tor pāye boli
bolo re ek-bār gaura hari
bhāi mādhāi re tor pāye boli
o tui bolo re ek-bār gaura hari
bhavopari tore jābi
o tui bolo re ek-bār hari hari
bhavopari jābi tore
o tui bolo re ek-bār hari hari
bhavopari tore jābi

("O my dear brother! I am grasping your feet! O Mādhāi, at your feet I request you to just once chant 'Hari, Hari!' Only once, dear Mādhāi, just chant 'Gaura Hari!' Please chant His holy name and you will be delivered from the material world.")
Text 4
eto boli' nityānanda bhūme gaḍi jāy
sonāra parvata jeno dhūlāte loṭāy

eto boli'—saying thus; nityānanda—Nityānanda; bhūme—on the ground; gaḍi jāy—rolls about; sonār parvata—a mountain of gold; jeno—just like; dhūlāte loṭāy—tumbling in the dust.

 Saying thus, Nityānanda Prabhu rolls about on the ground, appearing like a golden mountain tumbling in the dust.
dhūlāte loṭāy, dhūlāte loṭāy
sonāra parvata jeno dhūlāte loṭāy
sonāra parvata jeno dhūlāte loṭāy
sonāra parvata jeno gaura hari hari bole
sonāra parvata jeno dhūlāte loṭāy
gaura hari hari bole dhūlāte loṭāy

(He rolls on the ground, tumbling in the dust. He looks just like a golden mountain rolling upon the earth. The golden mountain roars 'Gaura Hari Hari!' while rolling in the dust, and again chants 'Gaura Hari Hari!')
Text 5
heno avatāre jār rati nā janmilo
locan bole sei pāpī elo ār gelo

heno avatāre—for such an incarnation; jār—whose; rati—affection; nā janmilo—has not come about; locan bole—Locana Dāsa says; sei pāpī—that sinful person; elo—comes; ār—and; gelo—goes (in repeated birth and death).

 Locana Dāsa says, "Whoever has not experienced the awakening of affection for such an avatār as this, that sinful person simply comes and goes uselessly in the cycle of repeated birth and death."
Song 3: Ambudāñjanendra-Nīla
Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Candrāṣṭaka
3. Ambudāñjanendra-Nīla
Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Candrāṣṭaka
From Govinda-Līlāmṛta by 
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Goswāmī
   [Midday Pastimes, chapter 17.50-58, as chanted by the male parrot Śuka]-please see accompanying song Kuṅkumākta-Kāñcanābha-
Text 1
ambudāñjanendra-nīla-nindi-kānti-ḍambaraḥ
kuṅkumodyad-arka-vidyud-aṁśu-divyad-ambaraḥ
śrīmad-aṅga-carcitendu-pītanākta-candanaḥ
svāṅghri-dāsyado 'stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ

ambuda—of clouds; añjana—black eye ointment; indra-nīla—sapphires; nindi—belittling; kānti—splendor; ḍambaraḥ—He who possesses the abundance; kuṅkuma—reddish powder; udyat—rising; arka—sun; vidyut—lightning; aṁśu—beams of light; divyat—shining; ambaraḥ—He who wears the garments (or the sky); śrīmat—beautiful; aṅga—limbs; carcita—anointed; indu—camphor; pītana—saffron; akta—anointed; candanaḥ—He who wears the sandalwood; sva—His own; aṅghri—feet; dāsya—of the devotional service; daḥ—the giver; astu—may become; me—to me; saḥ—He; ballava—of the cowherd men; indra—of the king (Nanda); nandanaḥ—He who is the son (Śrī Kṛṣṇa).

 His abundantly beautiful complexion belittles the splendor of combined rainclouds, black eye cosmetics, and sapphires. His garments appear effulgent like a rising sun tinted like kuṅkum powder and enhanced by shining bolts of lightning. His perfectly-formed limbs are anointed with sandalwood paste mixed with camphor and saffron. May Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Son of the king of the cowherd men, grant me the service of His own lotus feet.
Text 2
gaṇḍa-tāṇḍavāti-paṇḍitāṇḍajeśa-kuṇḍalaś
candra-padma-ṣaṇḍa-garva-khaṇḍanāsya-maṇḍalaḥ
ballavīṣu vardhitātma-gūḍha-bhāva-bandhanaḥ
svāṅghri-dāsyado 'stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ

gaṇḍa—on the cheeks; tāṇḍava—in dancing; ati—very much; paṇḍita—learned; aṇḍaja-īśa—the god of those born from eggs (the shark); kuṇḍalaḥ—He who wears earrings; candra—moon; padma-ṣaṇḍa—a collection of lotuses; garva—pride; khaṇḍana—destruction; āsya-maṇḍalaḥ—the orb of His face; ballavīṣu—amongst the gopīs; vardhita—increased; ātma-gūḍha—concealed within the self; bhāva—by the love; bandhanaḥ—He who is bound.

 He wears shark-shaped earrings that dance very expertly upon His cheeks. The beauty of the orb of His face destroys the pride of a multitude of moons and lotus flowers. He causes the knot of His own secret ecstatic love-moods to increasingly tighten amongst the gopīs. May Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Son of the king of cowherd men, grant me the service of His own lotus feet.
Text 3
nitya-navya-rūpa-veśa-hārda-keli-ceṣṭitaḥ
keli-narma-śarma-dāyi-mitra-vṛnda-veṣṭitaḥ
svīya-keli-kānanāṁśu-nirjitendra-nandanaḥ
svāṅghri-dāsyado 'stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ

nitya—eternal; navya—youthful; rūpa—beautiful form; veśa—mode of dress; hārda—love; keli—pastimes; ceṣṭitaḥ—He who endeavors; keli—amorous pastimes; narma—joking words; śarma—pleasure; dāyi—giving; mitra-vṛnda—the assembly of boyfriends; veṣṭitaḥ—He who is surrounded; svīya—His own; keli-kānana—pastime forest; aṁśu—rays; nirjita—defeated; indra-nandanaḥ—the heavenly Nandana gardens of Lord Indra.

 He is eternally engaged in designing ever-fresh variations of His youthful form, mode of dress, and loving pastimes. He is surrounded by the assembly of His cowherd boyfriends, who excel in giving Him delight by their playful joking words. Even a single brilliant ray of splendor from His personal pleasure-forest defeats the heavenly Nandana gardens of Lord Indra. May Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Son of the king of cowherd men, grant me the service of His own lotus feet.
Text 4
prema-hema-maṇḍitātma-bandhutābhinanditaḥ
kṣauṇi-lagna-bhāla-loka-pāla-pāli-vanditaḥ
nitya-kāla-sṛṣṭa-vipra-gauravāli-vandanaḥ
svāṅghri-dāsyado 'stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ

prema—of pure love; hema—the gold; maṇḍita—decorated; ātma—His own; bandhuta—friendship; abhinanditaḥ—He who is delighted; kṣauṇi—the earth; lagna—touching; bhāla—foreheads; loka-pāla—protectors of the planets; pāli—multitudes; vanditaḥ—He who is praised; nitya-kāla—daily; sṛṣṭa—done; vipra—to the brāhmaṇas; gaurava—reverence; āli—the groups; vandanaḥ—He who offers prayers.

 He is delighted by the friendship of His devotees, whose consciousness is decorated with the golden ornaments of pure love for Him. He is praised by the great demigods who protect various planets in the universe and who offer obeisances to Him by touching their foreheads to the ground. He honors the brāhmaṇas with great reverence at specific times of the day. May Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Son of the king of cowherd men, grant me the service of His own lotus feet.
Text 5
līlayendra-kāliyoṣṇa-kaṁsa-vatsa-ghātakas
tat-tad-ātma-keli-vṛṣṭi-puṣṭa-bhakta-cāṭakaḥ
vīrya-śīla-līlayātma-ghoṣa-vāsi-nandanaḥ
svāṅghri-dāsyado 'stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ

līlayā—easily; indra—King Indra; kāliya—the serpent Kāliya; uṣṇa—angry; kaṁsa—King Kaṁsa; vatsa—Vatsāsura; ghātakaḥ—He who is the killer; tat-tat—by all these; ātma-keli—His own pastimes; vṛṣṭi—the shower; puṣṭa—nourished; bhakta-cāṭakaḥ—whose devotees are like cāṭaka birds; vīrya—heroism; śīla—nature; līlayā—by the pastimes; ātma—His own; ghoṣa-vāsi—of the cowherd residents; nandanaḥ—He who is the delighter.

 He easily removed the pride of Indra as well as the violent anger of Kāliya, and He killed the demons Kaṁsa and Vatsāsura. With the rainfall of these variegated pastimes, He nourishes the chātaka birds who are His devotees. By performing His pastimes of heroic nature, He delights the residents of His own cowherd community. May Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Son of the king of cowherd men, grant me the service of His own lotus feet.
Text 6
kuñja-rāsa-keli-sīdhu-rādhikādi-toṣaṇas
tat-tad-ātma-keli-narma-tat-tad-āli-poṣaṇaḥ
prema-śīla-keli-kīrti-viśva-citta-nandanaḥ
svāṅghri-dāsyado 'stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ

kuñja—in the groves; rāsa-keli—the rāsa dance; sīdhu—with the nectar; rādhikā-ādi—the gopīs headed by Rādhikā; toṣaṇaḥ—He who satisfies; tat-tat—all these; ātma—own; keli—for sport; narma—jokes; tat-tat—all these; āli—cowherd girls; poṣaṇaḥ—He who is the nourisher; prema—love; śīla—good character; keli—of the pastimes; kīrti—the fame; viśva-citta—the minds of the entire universe; nandanaḥ—He who gives delight.

 He satisfies Śrī Rādhikā and the other gopīs with the nectar of the sportive rāsa dance performed in the groves of Vṛndāvana. During the various intrigues of those amorous pastimes, He devises many different playful jokes to sustain the assembly of gopīs. He thus delights the minds of all the people in the universe by the glory of His loving pastimes. May Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Son of the king of cowherd men, grant me the service of His own lotus feet.
Text 7
rāsa-keli-darśitātma-śuddha-bhakti-sat-pathaḥ
svīya-citra-rūpa-veśa-manmathāli-manmathaḥ
gopikāsu netra-koṇa-bhāva-vṛnda-gandhanaḥ
svāṅghri-dāsyado 'stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ

rāsa-keli—by the pastimes of the rāsa dance; darśita—shown; ātma-śuddha-bhakti—His own pure devotional service; sat-pathaḥ—the eternal path; svīya—His own; citra—amazing; rūpa-veśa—form and dress; manmatha—of cupids; āli—multitudes; manmathaḥ—He who is the cupid; gopikāsu—among the cowherd damsels; netra-koṇa—the corner of the eyes; bhāva-vṛnda—heaps of ecstasies; gandhanaḥ—He who hints.

 By revealing His pastimes of the festive rāsa  dance, He also shows the eternal path of His own pure devotional service. By His amazing beauty and fascinating mode of dress, He churns the minds of a vast multitude of cupids. Through the outer corners of His eyes, He casts sidelong glances, aimed at the gopīs, that give hints of a host of affectionate ecstatic moods. May Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Son of the king of cowherd men, grant me the service of His own lotus feet.
Text 8
puṣpa-cāyi-rādhikābhimarśa-labdhi-tarṣitaḥ
prema-vāmya-ramya-rādhikāsya-dṛṣṭi-harṣitaḥ
rādhikorasīha lepa eṣa hāri-candanaḥ
svāṅghri-dāsyado 'stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ

puṣpa-cāyi—She who picks flowers; rādhikā—Rādhikā; abhimarśa—the touch; labdhi—by the attainment; tarṣitaḥ—He who is pleased; prema-vāmya—crookedness of love; ramya—charming; rādhikā-āsya—the face of Rādhikā; dṛṣṭi—by the sight; harṣitaḥ—jubilant; rādhikā-urasi—on the breasts of Rādhikā; iha—here; lepaḥ—ointment; eṣaḥ—He; hāri-candanaḥ—He who is the sandalwood.

 He becomes excited with desire by suddenly touching Śrī Rādhikā while She is busy picking flowers. Then He becomes jubilant when He sees Her charming face decorated with the contrariness of pure love. Verily He is the sandalwood paste that decorates Rādhikā's breasts. May Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Son of the king of cowherd men, grant me the service of His own lotus feet.
Text 9
aṣṭakena yas tv anena rādhikā-suvallabhaṁ
saṁstavīti darśane 'pi sindhujādi-durlabham
taṁ yunakti tuṣṭa-citta eṣa ghoṣa-kānane
rādhikāṅga-saṅga-nanditātma-pāda-sevane

aṣṭakena—by these eight verses; yaḥ—who; tu—indeed; anena—with these; rādhikā-su-vallabham—He who is very dear to Rādhikā; saṁstavīti—praises with full attention; darśane—in the sight; api—even; sindhu-jā—she who was born from the sea (Lakṣmī); ādi—and so on; durlabham—difficult to achieve; tam—to him; yunakti—engages; tuṣṭa-citta—of satisfied mind; eṣaḥ—He; ghoṣa-kānane—in the forest of the cowherds; rādhikā-aṅga—the limbs of Rādhikā; saṅga—by the contact; nandita—delighted; ātma-pāda—His own feet; sevane—in the service.

 It is very difficult for Lakṣmī Devī and other exalted gods and goddesses to attain even a glimpse of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is very dear to Śrī Rādhikā. But if someone glorifies Him by reciting these eight verses with full attention, then He who is delighted by the intimate association with Rādhikā's limbs will become pleased with that person and engage them in the service of His own lotus feet within the cowherd forests of Goloka Vṛndāvana.
Song 4: Āmi Yamunā Puline
"On the Bank of the Yamunā River"
4. Āmi Yamunā Puline
"On the Bank of the Yamunā River"
From Kalyāṇa Kalpataru by 
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
Text 1
(āmi) jamunā-puline, kadamba-kānane,
ki herinu sakhī! āja
(āmār) śyāma baṁśī-dhari, maṇi-mañcopari,
līlā kore' rasa-rāja

āmi—I; jamunā-puline—on the bank of the Yamunā river; kadamba-kānane—in a kadamba—tree grove; ki herinu—what have I seen today?; sakhī—O dear girlfriend!; āja—today; āmār—my; śyāma—dark boy; baṁśī-dhari—holder of the flute; maṇi-mañca-upari—upon a throne of jewels; līlā kore'—performs His pastimes; rasa-rāja—the King of all transcendental mellows.

 O Sakhī! My dear girlfriend! What have I seen today? In a kadamba-tree grove on the bank of the Yamunā river, a beautiful blackish boy holding a long flute named vaṁśī is seated upon a throne of jewels, performing His pastimes as the King of all transcendental mellows!
Text 2
kṛṣṇa-keli sudhā-prasravana
(tāra) aṣṭa-dalopari, śrī-rādhā śrī-hari,
aṣṭa-sakhī parijana

kṛṣṇa-keli—Kṛṣṇa's amorous pastimes; sudhā-prasravana—waterfall of nectar; tāra—their; aṣṭa-dala-upari—upon the eight petals; śrī-rādhā śrī-hari—Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Hari; aṣṭa-sakhī—eight chief gopīs; parijana—associates.

 Kṛṣṇa is performing His amorous pastimes, which are just like a waterfall of nectar. Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Hari are surrounded by Their dearmost attendants, the eight chief gopīs, who are situated upon the eight petals of the jewelled altar.
Text 3
(tāra) sugīta nartane, saba sakhī-gaṇe,
tuṣiche jugala-dhane
(takhan) kṛṣṇa-līlā heri', prakṛti-sundarī,
bistāriche śobhā vane

tāra—their; su-gīta—nice songs; nartane—by dancing; saba—all; sakhī-gaṇe—their girlfriends; tuṣiche—give satisfaction; jugala-dhane—to the treasured couple; takhan—then; kṛṣṇa-līlā—Kṛṣṇa's amorous pastimes; heri'—beholding; prakṛti-sundarī—beautiful female energies; bistāriche—expanding; śobhā—splendor; vane—throughout the forest.

 By singing sweet songs and dancing nicely, all the gopīs satisfy the treasured Divine Couple. Thus His beautiful female energies behold Kṛṣṇa's amorous pastimes expanding throughout the splendrous forest.
Text 4
(āmi) ghare nā jāibo, vane praveśibo,
o līlā-raser tare
(āmi) tyaji' kula-lāja, bhaja braja-rāja,
vinoda minati kore'

āmi—I; ghare—to home; nā jāibo—I will not go; vane—in the forest; praveśibo—I will enter; o—that; līlā-raser tare—on account of the pastime-mellows; āmi—I; tyaji'—giving up; kula-lāja—shyness due to fear of family members; bhaja—just worship; braja-rāja—the Lord of Vraja; vinoda—of Bhaktivinoda; minati kore'—makes the humble submission.

 For the sake of tasting the mellows of such pastimes, I will not go to my home, but will instead enter the forest. O readers! Just worship the Lord of Vraja, renouncing all hesitation due to fear of family members. This is the humble submission of Bhaktivinoda.
Song 5: Antara Mandire Jāgo Jāgo
"Arise, Arise in the Temple of My Heart"
5. Antara Mandire Jāgo Jāgo
"Arise, Arise in the Temple of My Heart"
Traditional Bangladesh Bhajan
(refrain)  antara mandire jāgo jāgo
mādhava kṛṣṇa gopāl

antara mandire—in the temple of my heart; jāgo jāgo—please arise, please arise; mādhava—O Mādhava!; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa!; gopāl—O Gopāl!

(refrain) Please arise, please arise in the temple of my heart, O Mādhava! O Kṛṣṇa! O Gopāl!
Text 1
nava-aruṇa-sama
jāgo hṛdoye mama
sundara giridhārī-lāl
mādhava kṛṣṇa gopāl

nava-aruṇa-sama—like the new sunrise; jāgo—please arise; hṛdoye mama—in my heart; sundara—O beautiful one!; giridhārī-lāl—O darling lifter of Govardhan Hill!

 Please arise, glowing radiantly in my heart like the new sunrise, O beautiful one! O darling Giridhārī-lāl!
Text 2
nayane ghanāye betāri bādol
jāgo jāgo tumi kiśora śyāmal
śrī rādhā-priyatama jāgo hṛdoye mama
jāgo he ghoṣter rākhāl
mādhava kṛṣṇa gopāl

nayane—from my eyes; ghanāye—like a dense cloudburst; betāri—pouring; bādol—raincloud; jāgo jāgo—please arise, please arise; tumi—You; kiśora—O youthful one!; śyāmal—O dark boy!; śrī rādhā-priyatama—O most beloved of Śrī Rādhā!; jāgo—please arise; hṛdoye mama—in my heart; jāgo—please arise; he ghoṣter rākhāl—O maintainer of the cowherds!

 Tears are pouring from my eyes like a monsoon cloudburst! Please arise, please arise, O youthful Kiśora! O dark Śyāmal! O most beloved of Śrī Rādhā! Please arise in my heart! Please arise, O maintainer of the cowherds!
Text 3
yaśodā dulāl eso eso nani-cor
prāṇer devatā eso he kiśor
loye rādhā bāme hṛdi braja dhāme
eso he brajer rākhāl
mādhava kṛṣṇa gopāl

yaśodā dulāl—O darling of Yaśodā!; eso eso—come, please come; nani-cor—O butter thief!; prāṇer devatā—O Lord of my life!; eso—please come; he kiśor—O youthful boy!; loye—taking; rādhā bāme—with Rādhā at Your left; hṛdi—in the heart; braja dhāme—in the abode of Vraja; eso—please come; he brajer rākhāl—O protector of Vraja!

 O darling of Yaśodā! Come, please come, O butter thief! O Lord of my life! Please come, O youthful boy! Bringing Rādhā along at Your left, in the abode of Vraja within my heart, please come O protector of Vraja!
Song 6: Ār Koto Kāl
"After How Much Time?"
6. Ār Koto Kāl
"After How Much Time?"
By Mīrā Bhāi
(refrain) ār koto kāl, giridhārī-lāl
ārale ārale robe

ār—after; koto kāl—how much time; giridhārī-lāl—the darling holder of Govardhan Hill; ārale ārale—I remain waiting; robe—I will stay here.

(refrain) After how long will I see You, O darling Girdhārī-lāl? Until then I will simply remain here, waiting and waiting!
Text 1
nayaneri jal jhore abirol
daraśana pābo kabe
ārale ārale robe

nayaneri—from my eyes; jal jhore—tears flow; abirol—incessantly; daraśana—the vision; pābo kabe—when will I attain?; ārale ārale—I remain waiting; robe—I will stay here.

 Tears are flowing incessantly from my eyes... O when will I attain Your vision?-Until then I will simply remain here, waiting and waiting!
Text 2
tomār caraṇa prabhu niyechi śaraṇa
pūjār kusum sama ei tanu mana
ākul āmār ei maram meri āśā
tabe ki biphale jābe
ārale ārale robe

tomār caraṇa—Your feet; prabhu—O Lord!; niyechi śaraṇa—I have taken shelter; pūjār—of worship; kusum sama—equal to flowers; ei—this; tanu mana—body and mind; ākul—eager; āmār—my; ei maram—this heart; meri āśā—my aspirations; tabe ki—then why; biphale jābe—will go unfulfilled; ārale ārale—I remain waiting; robe—I will stay here.

 O Lord, I have taken shelter of Your lotus feet. In Your worship I offer my body and mind as flowers. My heart is fervent with these aspirations... Will they go unfulfilled?-Until then I will simply remain here, waiting and waiting!
Text 3
dekhā jadi nāhi dibe agaṇir doyā
tabe keno dile āśā bhoriyā hṛdoy
mīrār parāṇe tomāri kāmanā
daraśana pābo kabe
ārale ārale robe

dekhā—a glimpse; jadi—if; nāhi dibe—You will not give; aganir doyā—limitless mercy; tabe keno—then why; dile āśā—have You given me this desire; bhoriyā hṛdoy—filling the heart; mīrār parāṇe—O life and soul of Mīrā!; tomāri—Your; kāmanā—desire; daraśana—vision; pābo kabe—how will I achieve?; ārale ārale—I remain waiting; robe—I will stay here.

 If You will not give me a glimpse of Yourself out of limitless mercy, then why have You given me this desire that completely fills my heart? O life and soul of Mīrā! My desire is only for You! O when will I ever attain Your vision?-Until then I will simply remain here, waiting and waiting!i*
Song 7: Boro Sukher Khabor Gāi
Dālāler Gītā-"The song of the Broker"
7. Boro Sukher Khabor Gāi
Dālāler Gītā-"The song of the Broker"
From Vaiṣṇava-Siddhānta-Mālā by 
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
Text 1
boro sukher khabor gāi
surabhi-kuñjete nāmer hāṭ khule'che / khoda nitāi

boro—great; sukher khabor—news of happiness; gāi—I sing; surabhi-kuñjete—in the grove of Navadvīpa named Surabhi kuñja; nāmer hāṭ—the Marketplace of the Holy Names; khule āche—is opened up; khoda nitāi—Lord Nityānanda is Himself the Owner and Manager.

 I am singing news of the greatest happiness! At the place known as Surabhi Kuñja in Śrī Navadvīpa, the Marketplace of the Holy Name has now been opened-and Lord Nityānanda Himself is the Proprietor.
Text 2
boro mojār kathā tāy
śraddhā-mūlye śuddha-nāma sei hāṭete bikāy

boro—great; mojār kathā—story of the amusing affairs taking place; tāy—there (in that Marketplace); śraddhā-mūlye—for the price of one's faith; śuddha-nām—the pure, original form of the Holy Name; sei—He (Lord Nityānanda); hāṭete—in the Marketplace; bikāy—sells.

 Such wonderful things are going on in that blissful marketplace! Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu is selling the pure Holy Name wholesale, merely for the price of one's faith.
Text 3
jata bhakta-bṛnda basi'
adhikārī dekhe' nāma becche daro kasi'

jata—all; bhakta-bṛnda—the assembly of devotees; basi'—waiting; adhikārī—those having the right to possess; dekhe'—He looks and examines; nām becche—sells the Holy Name; daro—the price; kasi'—enforcing His 'fixed price.'

 Seeing the assembly of devotees eagerly waiting to purchase the Name, Lord Nityānanda first examines each of them to test their qualification, then He sells them the Name by bargaining for His price accordingly.
Text 4
jadi nāma kinbe, bhāi
āmār saṅge calo, mahājaner kāche jāi

jadi—if; nām—the Holy Name; kinbe—will purchase; bhāi—O brother!; āmār saṅge—along with me; calo—come on; mahājaner kāche—in the presence of the great soul Nityānanda; jāi—I am going now.

 O my dear friends! If you really want to buy this pure Holy Name, then just come along with me, for I am now going to meet with this Nityānanda Mahājana.
Text 5
tumi kinbe kṛṣṇa-nāma
dasturi loibo āmi, pūrṇa ha'be kāma

tumi—you; kinbe—will purchase; kṛṣṇa-nām—the Holy Name of Kṛṣṇa; dasturi—commission; loibo āmi—I will take; pūrṇa—fulfilled; ha'be—will become; kām—both of our desires.

 Thus, you will finally be able to acquire the pure Holy Name. I will also take my due commission, and in this way all three of us will fulfill our desires.
Text 6
boro doyāl nityānanda
śraddhā-mātra lo'ye den parama-ānanda

boro—greatly; doyāl—merciful; nityānanda—Lord Nityānanda Prabhu; śraddhā-mātra—only your faith; lo'ye—takes in exchange; den—gives; parama-ānanda—the topmost divine bliss.

 Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu is so extraordinarily merciful-accepting only one's faith in the Holy Name, He bestows the topmost divine bliss.
Text 7
ek-bār dekhle cakṣe jal
'gaura' bole' nitāi den sakala sambal

ek-bār—just once; dekhle—upon seeing; cakṣe—in the eyes; jal—water (tears); 'gaura' bole'—while chanting the name of 'Gaura'; nitāi den—Lord Nityānanda gives; sakala—all; sambal—support and supply of spiritual riches.

 When Nitāi sees a tear welling in someone's eye upon chanting the name of "Gaura!" He instantly gives His support to that person, indeed, He bestows all divine opulences.
Text 8
den śuddha kṛṣṇa-śikṣā
jāti, dhana, vidyā, bala nā kore apekṣā

den—He gives; śuddha kṛṣṇa-śikṣā—the pure teachings of Lord Kṛṣṇa; jāti—caste by birth; dhana—material wealth; vidyā—mundane knowledge; bala—physical strength; nā kore—does not do; apekṣā—care for.

 He gives that person genuine realization of the pure teachings of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as found in the Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. While displaying all this inconceivable mercy, He pays no attention to one's caste, material wealth, mundane knowledge, or physical ability.
Text 9
amani chāḍe māyā-jāl
gṛhe thāko, bane thāko, nā thāke jañjāl

amani—spontaneously; chāḍe—rejecting; māyā-jāl—the network of māyā's traps; gṛhe thāko—just remain at home as a householder; bane thāko—or just remain in the forest as a renunciate; nā thāke—does not exist; jañjāl—troubles.

 Now, dear friends, please reject all of māyā's entangling snares. If you are a householder, then just remain at your home, if you are renounced, then just live in the forest. Either way, nothing more will trouble you.
Text 10
ār nāiko kalir bhoy
ācaṇḍāle den nāma nitāi doyāmoy

ār—any more; nāiko—there is not; kalir bhoy—fear of the Age of Kali; ācaṇḍāle—to everyone including the caṇḍālas (uncivilized people); den—gives; nām—the Holy Name; nitāi doyāmoy—Lord Nityānanda, the most merciful.

 We no longer need to fear the terrible Age of Quarrel, for the most merciful Lord Nityānanda gives the Holy Name to anyone and everyone-even to the lowest among men.
Text 11
bhaktivinoda ḍāki' koy
nitāi-caraṇa binā ār nāhi āśroy

bhaktivinoda—the author, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura; ḍāki'—loudly calling out; koy—says; nitāi-caraṇ—the feet of Lord Nityananda; binā—except for; ār nāhi—there is no other; āśroy—safe shelter.

Bhaktivinoda loudly calls out and proclaims to all, "OTHER THAN THE LOTUS FEET OF LORD NITYĀNANDA, THERE IS NO SHELTER!"
Song 8: Caraṇa Kamal
"Lotus Feet"
8. Caraṇa Kamal
"Lotus Feet"
By Sūrdās
(refrain) caraṇa kamal vandoṅ hari rāyi

caraṇa kamal—unto the lotus feet; vandoṅ—I offer obeisances; hari rāyi—unto the worshipful Lord Hari.

(refrain) I offer prayers unto the lotus feet of the worshipful Lord Hari.
Text 1
jā ki kṛpā pāngu giri lāṅge
āṅdhe kon saba kachu darasāyī

jā ki—whose; kṛpā—mercy; pāngu—a lame person; giri lāṅge—crosses mountains; āṅdhe—a blind person; kon—someone; saba—all; kachu—whatever; darasāyī—the seer.

 By His mercy a lame person crosses mountains, and a blind person sees everything.
Text 2
bahira sunhi muka puni bole
roṅka cale sira chatra dhāraye

bahira—deaf; sunhi—hears; muka—dumb; puni—again; bole—speaks; roṅka—a poor person; cale—walks; sira—head; chatra—umbrella; dhāraye—holds.

 A deaf person hears, and a dumb person again speaks. By His mercy, even a poor person walks with a servant holding an umbrella over his head.
Text 3
surdās swāmī karuṇā-maye
bāra bāra vandoṅ tehi pāye

sūrdās swāmī—the Lord of Sūrdās; karuṇā-maye—unto Him who is full of compassion; bāra bāra—again and again; vandoṅ—obeisances; tehi pāye—unto His feet.

 The Lord of Sūrdās is full of compassion. Therefore I offer my obeisances unto His lotus feet again and again.
Song 9: Dhana Mor Nityānanda
"My Treasure Nityānanda"
9. Dhana Mor Nityānanda
"My Treasure Nityānanda"
From Prārthanā by 
Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura
Text 1
dhana mor nityānanda,  pati mor gaura-candra,
prāṇa mor yugala-kiśor
advaita ācārya bala,  gadādhar mor kula,
narahari vilāsa-i mor

dhana—treasure; mor—my; nityānanda—Lord Nityānanda; pati—master; mor—my; gaura-candra—Lord Gaura-Chandra; prāṇa—life-force; mor—my; yugala-kiśor—the youthful Divine Couple; advaita ācārya—Advaita Ācārya; bala—strength; gadādhar—Gadādhara Paṇḍita; mor—my; kula—family; narahari—Narahari Sārakar; vilāsa-i—verily the activity; mor—my.

 My treasure is Lord Nityānanda, my master is Lord Gaura-Chandra, and my very life-force is the youthful Divine Couple of Vraja. My strength is Advaita Ācārya, my family is Gadādhara Paṇḍita, and Narahari Sārakar is my very activity.
Text 2
vaiṣṇaver pada-dhūli,  tāhe mor snāna-keli,
tarpaṇa mor vaiṣṇaver nāma
vicār koriyā mane,  bhakti-rasa āsvādane,
madhyastha śrī-bhāgavata purāṇa

vaiṣṇaver—of the devotees; pada-dhūli—the dust of the feet; tāhe—in that; mor—my; snāna-keli—playful bath; tarpaṇa—satisfaction; mor—my; vaiṣṇaver nāma—the names of the Vaiṣṇavas; vicār koriyā—in contemplation; mane—within my mind; bhakti-rasa—the nectar of devotion; āsvādane—in tasting; madhyastha—in between; śrī-bhāgavata purāṇa—quotations from the śrīmad Bhāgavatam.

 My playful bath is taken in the dust from the feet of the devotees, and my satisfaction is in hearing and speaking the names of the Vaiṣṇavas. My contemplation time is spent relishing the nectar of devotion, highlighted by periodic quotations from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
Text 3
vaiṣṇaver ucchiṣṭha,  tāhe mor mana niṣṭha,
vaiṣṇaver nāmete ullās
vṛndāvane cabutārā,  tāhe mor mana gherā,
kohe dīna narottam dās

vaiṣṇaver—of the devotees; ucchiṣṭha—food remnants; tāhe—in that; mor—my; mana—mind; niṣṭha—resolution; vaiṣṇaver—of the devotees; nāmete—upon (hearing) the names; ullās—joy; vṛndāvane—in Vṛndāvana; cabutārā—raised square platform; tāhe—in that; mor—my; mana—mind; gherā—surrounds; kohe—thus says; dīna—humble; narottam dās—Narottama Dāsa.

 My mind is fixed on obtaining the devotees' food remnants, and I blossom with joy at the remembrance of the Vaiṣṇavas' names. My mind simply surrounds the raised platform in Vṛndāvana where the rāsa dance is performed. Thus speaks the lowly Narottama Dāsa.
Song 10: Dhule Dhule Gorā Chāṅda
"Moonlike Gaura Swaying To and Fro"
10. Dhule Dhule Gorā Chāṅda
"Moonlike Gaura Swaying To and Fro"
Traditional Bangladesh Bhajan
Text 1
dhule dhule gorā chāṅda
hari guṇa gāi
āsiyā vṛndāvane
nāce gaura rāy

dhule dhule—swaying to and fro; gorā chāṅda—the moonlike Lord Gaura; hari guṇa—the qualities of Lord Hari; gāi—singing; āsiyā—coming; vṛndāvane—to Vṛndāvana; nāce—dances; gaura rāy—the venerable Lord Gaura.

 The moonlike Lord Gaura Cāṅda arrives in Vṛndāvana while dancing, swaying to and fro, and singing the glories of Lord Hari.
Text 2
vṛndāvaner tarur latā
preme koy hari kathā
nikuñjer pakhi guli
hari nām sonāi

vṛndāvaner—of Vṛndāvana; tarur latā—the creepers upon the trees; preme—in love; koy—they speak; hari kathā—discussions about Hari; nikuñjer—of the groves; pakhi guli—flocks of birds; hari nām—the name of Hari; sonāi—cause to hear.

 The creepers adorning the trees of Vṛndāvana are overwhelmed with ecstatic love, and they are speaking about the glories of Lord Hari. Flocks of birds who live in the groves are singing the name of Lord Hari.
Text 3
gaura bole hari hari
śārī bole hari hari
mukhe mukhe śuka śārī
hari nām gāi

gaura bole—Lord Gaura says; hari hari—Hari! Hari!; śārī bole—the female parrot says; hari hari—Hari! Hari!; mukhe mukhe—from each and every mouth; śuka śārī—the male and female parrots; hari nām—the name of Hari; gāi—sings.

 Lord Gaura says, "Hari! Hari!", a female parrot responds, "Hari! Hari!", and then all the male and female parrots start singing a loud chorus of the name of Hari.
Text 4
hari nāme matta hoye
hariṇa āsiche dei
mayūr mayūrī preme
nāciyā khelāy

hari nāme—by the holy name; matta hoye—being maddened; hariṇa—the deer; āsiche dei—come forward; mayūr mayūrī—peacocks and peahens; preme—in ecstatic love; nāciyā—dancing; khelāy—they frolic.

 Becoming intoxicated by the holy name, the deer come forward from out of the forest. The peacocks and peahens are dancing and frolicking in ecstatic love.
Text 5
prāṇe hari dhyāne hari
hari bolo badan bhori
harinām geye geye
rase gale jāi

prāṇe hari—Lord Hari is in His heart; dhyāne hari—Lord Hari is in His meditation; hari bolo—He chants Hari; badan bhori—filling His mouth; harinām—the holy name; geye geye—while singing and singing; rase—in ecstatic mellows; gale jāi—He rolls on the ground.

 Lord Hari is in His heart, Lord Hari is in His meditation, and He always chants the name of Hari with His voice. Gaura Chāṅda is intoxicated by ecstatic mellows and rolls around on the ground while singing and singing harinām.
Text 6
āsiyā jamunār kule
nāce hari hari bole
jamunā uthole ese
caraṇa dhoyāi

āsiyā—arriving; jamunār kule—on the bank of the Yamunā river; nāce—He dances; hari hari bole—chanting Hari! Hari!; jamunā—the river; uthole—arises; ese—and comes forward; caraṇa dhoyāi—washing His feet.

 Arriving on the bank of the Yamunā river, He dances wildly while chanting "Hari! Hari!" Mother Yamunā becomes so ecstatic that she arises and comes forward to wash Lord Gaurāṅga's feet.
Song 11: Duḥkher Sāgore
"In the Ocean of Misery"
11. Duḥkher Sāgore
"In the Ocean of Misery"
Traditional Bangladesh Bhajan
(refrain) duḥkher sāgore bhāsiyechi
uttāriye jāni nā

duḥkher sāgore—in the ocean of suffering; bhāsiyechi—I am swimming; uttāriye—to be lifted out; jāni nā—I know not.

(refrain) I am swimming in the ocean of material suffering, and I do not know of any way to be lifted out.
Text 1
uthāl deu āsiche chuṭiyā
ki habe tāhā jāni nā

uthāl deu—please lift me out; āsiche—coming; chuṭiyā—raining profusely; ki habe—what will be?; tāhā—that; jāni nā—I know not.

 O Lord! Please rescue me from the raging storm that is rapidly approaching with torrents of rain. When it reaches me, I do not know what will happen.
Text 2
dīna-doyāl tumi bhagavān
pār koro āmāi shāmne tuphān

dīna-doyāl—You are merciful to the fallen; tumi bhagavān—You are the Supreme personality; pār koro—please deliver beyond; āmāi—me; shāmne—in front of; tuphān—the violent storm.

 You, O Lord, are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is merciful to poor fallen souls. Please save me from the terrible storm that menaces before me.
Text 3
tumi jadi prabhu nāhi koro pār
pārer āśā rākhi nā

tumi—You; jadi—if; prabhu—O Lord!; nāhi—do not; koro pār—allow me to cross; pārer āśā—hope of going beyond; rākhi nā—I do not keep.

 If You do not deliver me, O Lord, then I do not even hope to be saved.
Song 12: Durlabha Mānava Janma
"Rare Human Birth"
12. Durlabha Mānava Janma
"Rare Human Birth"
From Kalyāṇa Kalpataru by 
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
Text 1
durlabha mānava-janma labhiyā saṁsāre
kṛṣṇa nā bhajinu-duḥkha kahibo kāhāre?

durlabha—rare; mānava-janma—human birth; labhiyā—attaining; saṁsāre—in the material world; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; nā bhajinu—I have not worshipped; duḥkha—the misery; kahibo—I will speak; kāhāre—to whom?

 Although the human form of life is the rarest opportunity for attaining spiritual perfection, I am now lamenting bitterly. This is because somehow or other I have been born with such an opportunity, but have simply wasted it by never worshiping Lord Kṛṣṇa. Oh, to whom shall I tell the tale of my misery?
Text 2
'saṁsār' 'saṁsār', ko're miche gelo kāl
lābha nā koilo kichu, ghaṭilo jañjāl

saṁsār saṁsār—nothing but worldly affairs; ko're—doing; miche—uselessly; gelo kāl—the time has passed; lābha—gain; nā koilo—there has not been; kichu—anything; ghaṭilo—happened; jañjāl—anguish.

 Having married and entered the entanglements of materialistic family life, I passed my time in vain. I never got any tangible gain or permanent benefit, but only trouble and botheration.
Text 3
kiser saṁsār ei chāyābāji prāy
ihāte mamatā kori' bṛthā dina jāy

kiser—what type of; saṁsār—world; ei—this; chāyābāji—shadow-theater; prāy—just like; ihāte—in this; mamatā—false sense of possession; kori'—doing; bṛthā—fruitlessly; dina jāy—the days have passed.

 What kind of world is this? It seems to be just like a magic lantern show, wherein so many shadows and optical illusions dance magically before my eyes. I feel great attachment and identification with such a world, and thus day after day passes without any purpose whatsoever.
Text 4
e deho patana ho'le ki ro'be āmār?
keho sukha nāhi dibe putra-parivār

e deho—this body; patana ho'le—upon falling (dying); ki ro'be—what will remain; āmār—mine; keho—some; sukha—happiness; nāhi dibe—will not give; putra-parivār—sons and family.

 When this body drops dead on the ground, what will then remain mine? At that moment, all of my sons and dearest loved ones will not be able to give me any happiness.
Text 5
gardabher mata āmi kori pariśram
kā'r lāgi' eto kori, nā ghucilo bhram

gardabher mata—just like an ass; āmi kori—I perform; pariśram—labor; kā'r lāgi'—on behalf of whom?; eto kori—I work like this; nā ghucilo—it has not removed; bhram—my bewilderment.

 I work hard just like an ass every day, and now I am wondering: For whom am I working so hard? I am still surrounded by so many illusions.
Text 6
dina jāy micha kāje, niśā nidrā-baśe
nāhi bhāvi-maraṇa nikaṭe āche bo'se

dina jāy—the day passes; micha kāje—in trivial endeavors; niśā—the night; nidrā-baśe—under the control of sleep; nāhi bhāvi—I do not think; maraṇa—death; nikaṭe āche—is just before me; bo'se—waiting.

 I waste every day in useless, insignificant work, and I waste every night controlled by sleep. And in every twenty-four hours I never consider that cruel death is always sitting right in front of me.
Text 7
bhālo manda khāi, heri, pari, cintā-hīna
nāhi bhāvi, e deho chāḍibo kon dina

bhālo—very much; manda—or a little; khāi—I eat; heri—I see; pari—I wear; cintā-hīna—carefree; nāhi bhāvi—I do not think; e deho—this body; chāḍibo—I will leave; kon dina—some day.

 I imagine that I live a very carefree life-style, sometimes eating a lot, or eating a little if I feel like it. Sometimes I see nice things around the town, or sometimes I do not go out at all. Sometimes I wear opulent clothing, or if I'm in the mood, I'll wear something simple. I live so carefree that I never consider that one day I will have to give up this body.
Text 8
deho-geho-kalatrādi-cintā avirata
jāgiche hṛdoye mor buddhi kori' hata

deho—the body; geho—the home; kalatra—the wife; ādi—and so forth; cintā—concern; avirata—incessantly; jāgiche—awakening; hṛdoye mor—in my heart; buddhi—intelligence; kori' hata—is crushed.

 But in actuality my poor heart is plagued by constant anxieties regarding the maintenence of my body, my house, my wife, my family members, and my social obligations. All these anxieties are pinching me sharply and truly destroying my intelligence.
Text 9
hāy, hāy! nāhi bhāvi-anitya e saba
jīvana vigate kothā rohibe vaibhava?

hāy hāy—alas! alas!; nāhi bhāvi—I do not think; anitya—temporary; e saba—all of this; jīvana vigate—when the life runs out; kothā—where; rohibe—will remain; vaibhava—these opulences.

 Alas, alas! What a remorseful situation has arisen! I am engrossed with all this trouble, but I never consider that all these things are temporary and subject to perish very soon. After I'm dead and gone, what will remain of all my material opulences?
Text 10
śmaśāne śarīr mama poḍiyā rohibe
bihaṅga-pataṅga tāy bihār koribe

śmaśāne—at the crematorium; śarīr mama—my body; poḍiyā—falling flat; rohibe—will remain motionless; bihaṅga-pataṅga—birds and bugs; tāy—there; bihār koribe—will frolic.

 When my body is thrown into the pit at the cremation grounds, it will simply lie there motionless. Then many crows, vultures, ants, and worms will come and playfully sport there.
Text 11
kukkur sṛgāl sab ānandita ho'ye
mahotsava koribe āmār deho lo'ye

kukkur—dogs; sṛgāl—and jackals; sab—all; ānandita ho'ye—becoming ecstatic; mahotsava—great festival; koribe—will be; āmār deho—my body; lo'ye—taking.

All the stray dogs and jackals will become very much delighted, and in great ecstasy they will make a festival ground out of my body and have a huge feast.
Text 12
je deher ei gati, tā'r anugata
saṁsār-vaibhava ār bandhu-jana jata

je deher—of which body; ei gati—this end; tā'r anugata—its followers; saṁsār-vaibhava—opulence of the material world; ār—and; bandhu-jana—friends; jata—all.

Just see, such is the ultimate destination of this material body. And the most amazing thing is that all material opulences-my house, family and friends-have exactly the same destination.
Text 13
ataeva māyā-moha chāḍi' buddhimān
nitya-tattva kṛṣṇa-bhakti koruna sandhān

ataeva—therefore; māyā-moha—the bewilderment of illusion; chāḍi'—rejecting; buddhimān—a wise person; nitya-tattva—eternal truth; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—devotion to Kṛṣṇa; koruna sandhān—please seek.

Therefore I advise those of you who have keen intelligence: "Please give up all these temporary illusions presented by Māyā, and search after the means to get pure devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa, for this is the only eternal truth."
Song 13: Duṣṭa Mana
Vaiṣṇava Ke?-"Who is a Real Vaiṣṇava?"
13. Duṣṭa Mana
Vaiṣṇava Ke?-"Who is a Real Vaiṣṇava?"
By Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
Text 1
duṣṭa mana! tumi kiser vaiṣṇava?
pratiṣṭhār tare, nirjaner ghare,
tava 'hari nāma' kevala 'kaitava'

duṣṭa mana—O wicked mind!; tumi—you; kiser vaiṣṇava—what kind of devotee?; pratiṣṭhār—of prestige; tare—on account of; nirjaner ghare—in a solitary dwelling; tava—your; hari-nāma—chanting of the holy name of Lord Hari; kevala—only; kaitava—cheating.

 O wicked mind! What kind of Vaiṣṇava do you think you are? Your pretentious show of chanting Lord Hari's holy name in a solitary place is only for the sake of attaining the false prestige of a worldly reputation—it is nothing but pure hypocrisy.
Text 2
jaḍer pratiṣṭhā,  śukarer viṣṭhā,
jāno nā ki tāhā 'māyār vaibhava'
kanaka kāminī,  divasa-yāminī,
bhāviyā ki kāja, anitya se saba

jaḍer—of the material realm; pratiṣṭhā—fame; śukarer—of a pig; viṣṭhā—stool; jāno nā ki—do you not know?; tāhā—that; māyār—of the illusory material world; vaibhava—potency; kanaka—gold; kāminī—attractive women; divasa yāminī—all day and night; bhāviyā—thinking; ki kāja—what benefit; anitya—temporary; se saba—all those.

 Such materialistic prestige is as disgusting as the stool of a hog. Do you not know that it is only a mere illusion cast by the potency of Māyā? What is the value of contemplating day and night your plans for enjoying wealth and women? All these things are only temporary.
Text 3
tomār kanaka,  bhoger janaka,
kanaker dvāre sevaho 'mādhava'
kāminīr kāma,  nahe tava dhāma,
tāhār-mālika kevala 'yādava'

tomār—your; kanaka—gold; bhoger—of enjoyment; janaka—the producer; kanaker dvāre—by wealth; sevaho—please serve; mādhava—Lord Mādhava; kāminīr kāma—lust for beautiful women; nāhe—not; tava—your; dhāma—proper place; tāhār—its; mālika—owner; kevala—is only; yādava—Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the Yadu dynasty.

 When you claim wealth as your own, it creates in you ever-increasing desires for material enjoyment. Your riches should be used for serving Mādhava, the Lord of all wealth. Neither is it your proper place to indulge in lust for women, whose only true proprietor is Lord Yādava.
Text 4
pratiṣṭhāśā-taru,  jaḍa-māyā-maru,
nā pela 'rāvaṇa' yujhiyā 'rāghava'
vaiṣṇavī pratiṣṭhā,  tāte koro niṣṭhā,
tāhā nā bhajile labhibe raurava

pratiṣṭhā-āśā—desire for fame; taru—the tree; jaḍa-māyā—of material illusion; maru—the desert; na—not; pela—reached; rāvaṇa—the demon named Rāvaṇa; yujhiyā—fighting; rāghava—with Lord Rāmachandra; vaiṣṇavī—the position of being a vaiṣṇava; pratiṣṭhā—situation; tāte—in that; koro niṣṭhā—become fixed; tāhā—that; nā—not; bhajile—if one worships; labhibe—will obtain; raurava—hell.

 The demon Rāvaṇa (lust-incarnate) fought with Lord Rāmachandra (love-incarnate) in order to gain the tree of worldly reputation—but that oasis turned out to be but a mirage cast in the desert wasteland of the Lord's illusory material potency. Please cultivate fixed determination to attain only the steady and solid platform whereupon a Vaiṣṇava ever stands. If you neglect worshiping the Lord from this position, then you will ultimately attain a hellish existence.
Text 5
harijana-dveṣa,  pratisthāśā-kleśa,
koro keno tabe tāhār gaurava
vaiṣṇaver pāche,  pratisthāśā āche,
tā'te kabhu nāhe 'anitya-vaibhava'

hari-jana-dveṣa—hatred for the devotees of the Lord; pratiṣṭhā-āśā—desire for fame; kleśa—suffering; koro—you endeavor; keno—why?; tabe—then; tāhār—its; gaurava—glory; vaiṣṇaver pāche—following behind the devotees; pratiṣṭhā-āśā—desire for spiritual position; āche—there is; tāte—in that; kabhu nāhe—never; anitya—impermanent; vaibhava—wealth.

 Why do you needlessly suffer the torment of blaspheming the devotees of Lord Hari, attempting to achieve their eminence, thereby only proving your own fruitless foolishness? The desire for spiritual eminence is easily fulfilled when one becomes a devotee of the Lord, for eternal fame automatically follows the heels of a Vaiṣṇava. And that fame is never to be considered a temporary worldly opulence.
Text 6
se hari-sambandha,  śūnya-māyā-gandha,
tāhā kabhu noy 'jaḍer kaitava'
pratiṣṭhā-caṇḍālī,  nirjanatā-jāli,
ubhaye jāniho māyika raurava

se—that; hari-sambandha—relationship with Lord Hari; śūnya—free from; māyā-gandha—a scent of illusion; tāhā—that; kabhu noy—never; jaḍer—of materialism; kaitava—cheating; pratiṣṭhā—worldly reputation; caṇḍālī—female dog eater; nirjanatā—solitary living; jāli—the net; ubhaye—in both; jāniho—you should know; māyika—illusory; raurava—hell.

 The relationship between a devotee and Lord Hari is devoid of even a trace of worldly illusion, it has nothing to do with the materialistic cheating propensity. The prestige of so-called popularity in the material realm is compared to a treacherous dog-eating witch, and the attempt to live in solitude to supposedly engage in unalloyed bhajan is compared to an entangling network of distraction. Please know that anyone striving in either of these ways verily lives in the hell of Māyā's illusion.
Text 7
kīrtana chāḍibo,  pratiṣṭhā mākhibo,
ki kāja ḍhuḍiyā tādṛśa gaurava
mādhavendra purī,  bhāva-ghare curi,
nā korilo kabhu sadāi jānabo

kīrtana—chanting the Lord's names; chāḍibo—I will give up; pratiṣṭhā—worldly reputation; mākhibo—I will besmear myself; ki kāja—what benefit; ḍhuḍiyā—seeking; tādṛśa—that kind of; gaurava—grandeur; mādhavendra purī—the sage Mādhavendra Purī; bhāva-ghare—in the storehouse of perception; curi—stealing; nā korilo—he did not do; kabhu—ever; sadāi—always; jānabo—I will remind you.

 "I shall give up chanting the Lord's name publicly in kīrtan and retire to solitude, thus smearing myself with worldly honor." Dear mind, what is the good of seeking such so-called glory? I will always remind you that the great soul Mādhavendra Purī never deceived himself in that regard by committing theft in his own storehouse of perception the way you do.
Text 8
tomār pratiṣṭhā,-'śukarer viṣṭhā',
tār-saha sama kabhu nā mānava
matsaratā-vaśe,  tumi jaḍa-rase,
majecho chāḍiyā kīrtana-sauṣṭava

tomār—your; pratiṣṭhā—popularity; śukarer viṣṭhā—the stool of a hog; tār-saha—with that; sama—equal; kabhu nā—never; mānava—an ordinary human being; matsaratā—pride; vaśe—under the control of; tumi—you; jaḍa-rase—in the mellows of mundane sense pleasures; majecho—you are sunk; chāḍiyā—having given up; kīrtana-sauṣṭava—the excellence of the saṅkīrtan movement.

 Your cheap reputation is equal to the stool of a hog. An ordinary ambitious man like you can never be equated with a devotee of Mādhavendra Purī's eminence. Under the sway of envy, you have drowned yourself in the filthy waters of material enjoyment after having abandoned the excellent perfection of congregational kīrtan.
Text 9
tāi duṣṭa mana,  'nirjana bhajan,'
pracāricho chale 'kuyogī-vaibhava'
prabhu sanātane,  parama jatane,
śikṣā dilo yāhā, cinto sei saba

tāi—therefore; duṣṭa mana—O wicked mind!; nirjana bhajan—solitary worship; pracāricho—you are preaching; chale—by trick; ku-yogī-vaibhava—the opulence of a false yogī; prabhu—Śrī Chaitanya Mahāprabhu; sanātane—to Sanātana Goswāmī; parama jatane—with great care; śikṣā dilo—gave instructions; yāhā—which; cinto—please contemplate; sei saba—all those.

 Truly, O wicked mind, the glories of so-called solitary worship are propagated only by false yogīs using unscrupulous means to deceive others. To save yourself from these pitfalls, please contemplate the instructions that the Supreme Lord Śrī Chaitanya Mahāprabhu kindly gave us while addressing Śrīla Sanātana Goswāmī with the utmost care.
Text 10
sei du'ṭi kathā,  bhulo' nā sarvathā,
uccaiḥ-svare koro 'hari-nāma-rava'
'phalgu' ār 'yukta,'  'baddha' ār 'mukta,'
kabhu nā bhāviho, ekākār saba

sei—these; du'ṭi—two; kathā—topics; bhulo' nā—don't forget; sarvathā—in all circumstances; uccaiḥ-svare—in a loud voice; koro—perform; hari-nāma-rava—the sound of chanting the Lord's holy names; phalgu—false; ār—and; yukta—befitting (linked with Kṛṣṇa); baddha—bound in māyā; ār—and; mukta—liberated; kabhu nā—never; bhāviho—consider; ekākār—one in the same form; saba—all these.

 Do not forget for a moment the two most valuable concepts that He taught:  the principle of dry, apparent renunciation as opposed to real, appropriate renunciation, and  the principle of a soul being trapped in the bondage of matter as opposed to a soul who is liberated. Don't ever make the mistake of thinking that these conflicting concepts are on the same level. Please remember this while engaging yourself in chanting the Lord's holy names as loud as you possibly can.
Text 11
'kanaka-kāminī,'  'pratiṣṭhā-bāghinī,'
chāḍiyāche jāre, sei to' vaiṣṇava
sei 'anāsakta,'  sei 'śuddha-bhakta,'
saṁsār tathā pāy parābhava

kanaka-kāminī—enjoyment of wealth and women; pratiṣṭhā-bāghinī—the tigress of worldly reputation; chāḍiyāche—has given up; jāre—who; sei—he; to'—certainly; vaiṣṇava—a devotee; sei—he; anāsakta—unattached; sei—he alone; śuddha-bhakta—is a pure devotee; saṁsār—the material world; tathā—in this manner; pāy—gets; parābhava—defeated.

One is truly a Vaiṣṇava who has given up the habit of falling victim to the ferocious tigress of wealth, beauty, and fame. Such a soul is factually detached from material life, and is known as a pure devotee. Someone with this consciousness of detachment has thereby become victorious over the mundane world of birth and death.
Text 12
yathā-yogya bhoga,  nāhi tathā roga,
'anāsakta' sei, ki ār kahabo
'āsakti-rohita,'  'sambandha-sahita,'
viṣaya-samūha sakali 'mādhava'

yathā-yogya—whatever is appropriate for survival; bhoga—enjoyment; nāhi—is not; tathā—in that way; roga—the disease (of materialism); anāsakta—detached; sei—he; ki ār—what more; kahabo—shall I say; āsakti-rohita—devoid of attachment; sambandha-sahita—endowed with a relationship; viṣaya-samūha—the multitude of sense objects; sakali—all; mādhava—Lord Mādhava.

One is indeed detached who moderately partakes of worldly things that are deemed necessary for living in devotional service, a devotee acting in that manner does not fall prey to the disease of material infatuation. Thus devoid of selfish attachment, and endowed with the ability to see things in relation to the Lord, all sense objects are then directly perceived as being Lord Mādhava Himself.
Text 13
se 'yukta-vairāgya,'  tāhā to' saubhāgya,
tāhā-i jaḍete harir vaibhava
kīrtane jāhār,  'pratiṣṭhā-sambhār,'
tāhār sampatti kevala 'kaitava'

se—this; yukta-vairāgya—renunciation that is connected with Kṛṣṇa's enjoyment; tāhā—that; to'—indeed; saubhāgya—great fortune; tāhā-i—only that; jaḍete—in the material world; harir—of Lord Hari; vaibhava—the opulence; kīrtane—in chanting the Lord's names; jāhār—whose; pratiṣṭhā-sambhār—heaps of ambition for recognition; tāhār—its; sampatti—opulence; kevala—only; kaitava—cheating.

This is the standard of befitting renunciation, and one who realizes this is most fortunate indeed. Everything involved in such a devotee's life represents Lord Hari's personal spiritual opulence as manifest in the world of matter. On the other hand, one who engages in chanting the Lord's name with hopes of enhancing his own material reputation finds that all his activities and paraphernalia represent only the riches of hypocrisy.
Text 14
'viṣaya-mumukṣu,'  'bhoger bubhukṣu,'
du'ye tyajo mana, dui 'avaiṣṇava'
'kṛṣṇer sambandha,'  aprākṛta-skandha,
kabhu nāhe tāhā jaḍer sambhava

viṣaya-mumukṣu—one who desires liberation from the material world; bhoger bubhukṣu—one who desires to enjoy sense gratification; du'ye—both; tyajo—please reject; mana—O mind!; dui—the two; avaiṣṇava—non-devotees; kṛṣṇer—with Kṛṣṇa; sambandha—relationship; aprākṛta-skandha—things belonging to the transcendental realm; kabhu nāhe—never; tāhā—that; jaḍer sambhava—of material origin.

O mind, please reject the company of two types of persons—those desiring impersonal liberation from the material world, and those who desire to enjoy the pleasure of material sense objects. Both of these are equally non-devotees. The things that are used in relation to Lord Kṛṣṇa are objects belonging directly to the transcendental realm, and thus having nothing to do with matter they cannot be either owned or forsaken by persons interested in mundane enjoyment or renunciation.
Text 15
'māyāvādī jana,'  kṛṣṇetara mana,
mukta abhimāne se ninde vaiṣṇava
vaiṣṇaver dās,  tava bhakti-āś,
keno vā ḍākicho nirjana-āhava

māyāvādī jana—the impersonalist; kṛṣṇetara—opposed to Kṛṣṇa; mana—mentality; mukta abhimāne—proudly considering himself liberated; se—he; ninde—blasphemes; vaiṣṇava—the devotees; vaiṣṇaver dās—servant of the devotees; tava—your; bhakti-āś—devotional desire; keno vā—why then; ḍākicho—you call out; nirjana-āhava—fighting for solitude.

An impersonal philospher is opposed to thinking of Kṛṣṇa as an object of devotion, and thus being puffed up with the false pride of imaginary liberation he dares to criticize the true devotees of the Lord. O mind, you are the servant of the Vaiṣṇavas, and you should always hope for attaining devotion. Why then do you make such a loud commotion by calling to me and trying to prove the supposed supremacy of your practice of solitary worship?
Text 16
je 'phalgu-vairāgī,'  kohe nije 'tyāgī,'
se nā pāre kabhu hoite 'vaiṣṇava'
hari-pada chāḍi',  'nirjanatā bāḍi,'
labhiyā ki phala, 'phalgu' se vaibhava

je—who; phalgu-vairāgī—false renunciant; kohe nije—calls himself; tyāgī—an accomplished renunciant; se—he; nā pāre—is not able; kabhu hoite—to ever be; vaiṣṇava—a devotee; hari-pada—the lotus feet of the Lord; chāḍi'—rejecting; nirjanatā bāḍi—residence in solitude; labhiyā—obtaining; ki phala—what result?; phalgu—false; se vaibhava—that opulence.

One who falsely gives up things that could actually be used in the Lord's service proudly calls himself a 'renunciate,' but unfortunately he can never become a Vaiṣṇava by such an attitude. Abandoning his servitorship to the lotus feet of Lord Hari, and resigning himself to his solitary home-whatever is gained by that exercise can only be the worthless treasure of deception.
Text 17
rādhā-dāsye rohi',  chāḍi 'bhoga-ahi,'
'pratiṣṭhāśā' nahe 'kīrtana-gaurava'
'rādhā-nitya-jana,'  tāhā chāḍi' mana,
keno vā nirjana-bhajana-kaitava

rādhā-dāsye—in service to Śrī Rādhā; rohi'—remaining; chāḍi—giving up; bhoga-ahi—the snake of selfish enjoyment; pratiṣṭhā-āśā—ambition for recognition; nahe—is not; kīrtana-gaurava—the glory of congregational chanting; rādhā-nitya-jana—being the eternal servant of Rādhā; tāhā chāḍi'—rejecting that; mana—O mind!; keno vā—why then; nirjana-bhajana—solitary worship; kaitava—cheating.

Ever engage yourself in the service of Śrī Rādhā, and keep aloof from the vicious snake of materialistic sense gratification. The glory of participating in the Lord's kīrtan is not meant to bolster anyone's ambitions for personal recognition. O mind, why then have you abandoned the identity of being Rādhā's eternal servant in favor of retiring to a solitary place to practice the cheating process of so-called bhajan?
Text 18
vraja-vāsī-gaṇa,  pracāraka-dhana,
pratiṣṭhā-bhikṣuka tā'rā nahe 'śava'
prāṇa āche tā'r,  se-hetu pracār,
pratiṣṭhāśā-hīna-'kṛṣṇa-gāthā' saba

vraja-vāsī-gaṇa—the residents of Vraja; pracāraka—preachers; dhana—the treasure; pratiṣṭhā-bhikṣuka—beggars for worldly fame; tā'rā—they; nahe—are not; śava—a dead body; prāṇa āche—there is life; tā'r—theirs; se-hetu—for that reason; pracār—preaching; pratiṣṭhā-āśā-hīna—devoid of ambition for fame; kṛṣṇa-gāthā—songs about Kṛṣṇa; saba—all.

The most valuable treasures amongst the Lord's preachers are the eternal personalities residing in Vraja-dhām. They never occupy themselves with begging for worthless material reputation, which is cherished only by the living dead. The Vraja-vāsīs are truly infused with life, and therefore they preach in order to give life to the walking corpses of the mundane world. All the songs that the Vraja-vāsīs sing about the glories of Lord Kṛṣṇa are devoid of any tinge of desire for fame.
Text 19
śrī-dayita-dās,  kīrtanete āś,
koro uccaiḥ-svare 'hari-nāma-rava'
kīrtana-prabhāve,  smaraṇa svabhāve,
se kāle bhajana-nirjana sambhava

śrī-dayita-dās—the servant of Rādhā's beloved Kṛṣṇa (Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī); kīrtanete—for congregational chanting; āś—desirous; koro—please perform; uccaiḥ-svare—in a loud voice; hari-nāma-rava—the sound of the Lord's holy names; kīrtana-prabhāve—by the power of the chanting; smaraṇa—remembering the Lord's pastimes; svabhāve—in one's own original spiritual mood; se kāle—at that time; bhajana-nirjana—worship in solitude; sambhava—possible.

This humble servant of Rādhā and Her beloved Kṛṣṇa always hopes for kīrtan, and he begs all to loudly sing the names of Lord Hari. The transcendental power of congregational chanting automatically awakens remembrance of the Lord and His divine pastimes in relation to one's own eternal spiritual form. Only at that time does it become possible to go off to a solitary place and engage in the confidential worship of Their Lordships.ii*
Song 14: Gaurāṅga Karuṇā Koro
"Be Merciful Lord Gaurāṅga"
14. Gaurāṅga Karuṇā Koro
"Be Merciful Lord Gaurāṅga"
By Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura
Text 1
gaurāṅga karuṇā koro, dīna hīna jane
mo-samo patita prabhu, nāhi tri-bhuvane

gaurāṅga—O my dear Lord Gaurāṅga; karuṇā koro—please show Your mercy; dīna hīna jane—to this fallen and destitute soul; mo-samo—like myself; patita—fallen; prabhu—O Lord!; nāhi—there is not; tri-bhuvane—in the three worlds.

 O my dear Lord Gaurāṅga! Please show Your mercy to this lowly and destitute soul. O Lord! There is no one more fallen than myself in all the three worlds.
Text 2
dante tṛṇa dhori' gaura, ḍāki he tomār
kṛpā kori' eso āmār, hṛdoya mandire

dante—between my teeth; tṛṇa dhori'—holding grass; gaura—O Lord Gaura!; ḍāki—I am calling out; he—O!; tomār kṛpā—Your mercy; kori'—showing; eso—please come; āmār—my; hṛdoya mandire—into the temple of the heart.

 Holding grass between my teeth, O Lord Gaura, I am calling out to You now! Please be compassionate upon me and come to reside within the temple of my heart.
Text 3
jadi doyā nā koribe, patita dekhiyā
patita pāvana nāma, kisera lāgiyā

jadi—if; doyā—mercy; nā koribe—You do not give; patita—fallen; dekhiyā—seeing; patita pāvana—savior of the fallen; nāma—the name; kisera lāgiyā—why are You known.

 If You do not give Your mercy, seeing how fallen I am, then why are You known as Patita Pāvana—the merciful Savior of the fallen?
Text 4
poḍeci bhava tuphāne, nāhika nistār
śrī caraṇa taraṇī dāne, dāse koro pār

poḍeci—I have fallen; bhava tuphāne—in the hurricane of this material world; nāhika nistār—there is no escape; śrī caraṇa—divine lotus feet; taraṇī—compared to a boat; dāne—by the gift; dāse—to Your servant; koro pār—make cross over.

 I am plunged amidst the violent hurricane-stricken waves in the ocean of this material world, from which there is no escape. Kindly give me the gift of Your divine lotus feet, which are compared to a boat in which Your servant may cross over the ocean of birth and death.
Text 5
śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya prabhu, dāser anudās
prārthanā koraye sadā, narottam dās

śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya prabhu—Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu; dāser anudās—servant of the servant; prārthanā koraye—makes this prayer; sadā—always; narottam dās—Narottama Dāsa.

 Narottama Dāsa, the servant of the servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu, ceaselessly makes this prayer.
Song 15: Gaurāṅga Tumi More Doyā Nā Chāḍiho
"Don't Neglect Giving Me Your Mercy"
15. Gaurāṅga Tumi More Doyā Nā Chāḍiho
"Don't Neglect Giving Me Your Mercy"
By Vasudeva Ghosh
Text 1
gaurāṅga tumi more doyā nā chāḍiho
āpana koriyā rāṅgā caraṇe rākhiho
rāṅgā caraṇe rākhiho, caraṇe rākhiho
āpana koriyā rāṅgā caraṇe rākhiho
dāsānudās kore rāṅgā caraṇe rākhiho
ciro janamera matta rāṅgā caraṇe rākhiho
āpana koriyā rāṅgā caraṇe rākhiho

gaurāṅga—O Lord Gaurāṅga!; tumi—You; more—to me; doyā—mercy; nā chāḍiho—please do not neglect; āpana koriyā—making me Your own; rāṅgā caraṇe—at the reddish feet; rākhiho—please keep.

 O Lord Gaurāṅga! Please do not neglect to show me Your mercy! Making me Your very own property, kindly keep me situated at the reddish soles of Your feet.
(Please keep me situated at Your reddish feet, situated at Your feet. Considering me to be Your personal property, please keep me situated at Your reddish feet. Making me the humble servant of Your servant, please keep me situated at Your reddish feet. For my entire life I am simply maddened-please keep me situated at Your reddish feet.)
Text 2
tomār caraṇa lāgi sab teyāgilu
śītala caraṇa pāyā śaraṇa loilu
āmi śaraṇa je nilām, śaraṇa je nilām
tomāra rāṅgā pāye śaraṇa je nilām
ei janamera matta āmi śaraṇa je nilām
ei janamera matta āmi hā gaura hā gaura bole
ei janamera matta āmi hā gaura hā gaura bole
ei janamera matta āmi śaraṇa je nilām
śītala caraṇa pāyā śaraṇa loilu

tomār caraṇa—Your feet; lāgi—on account of; sab teyāginu—I have renounced everything; śītala—cool; caraṇa pāyā—feet; śaraṇa loinu—I have taken shelter.

 With the intention of attaining Your feet I have utterly renounced everything. Now I have taken full shelter of Your soothing lotus feet.
(I have taken shelter, I have taken shelter. Now I have taken shelter of Your reddish lotus feet. In this birth I am simply maddened, and so I have now taken shelter of You. In this birth I am simply maddened, calling out "Hā Gaura! Hā Gaura!" Now I have taken full shelter of Your soothing lotus feet.)
Text 3
e kule o kule muñi dilu tilāñjali
rākhiho caraṇe more āpanār boli
āmi añjali diyechi
rāṅgā caraṇe tilāñjali diyechi
rāṅgā caraṇe tilāñjali diyechi, sabaso beci
tomāra rātula caraṇe ei janamera matta āmi
rātula caraṇe sabaso beci
hā gaura hā gaura bole sabaso beci
doyā kore grahaṇa koro ei janame noy janamāntare
doyā kore grahaṇa koro ei janame noy janamāntare
rākhiho caraṇe more āpanār boli

e kule—to this family; o kule—or to that family; muñi—I; dinu—I have given; tilāñjali—complete abandonment (lit. ritual offering of handfuls of sesame seeds to deceased family members); rākhiho—please keep; caraṇe—at Your feet; more—me; āpanār boli—calling Your very own.

 Whether I am related to this family lineage or that family lineage-I have completely abandoned them all. I beg You to mercifully keep me by Your feet, calling me Your own.
(I have completely abandoned them all. I have abandoned everything at Your reddish feet. I have abandoned everything at Your reddish feet-I am sold to You in every way. At Your reddish feet I am intoxicated in this lifetime. I am sold to Your reddish feet in every way. Shouting "Hā Gaura! Hā Gaura!" I am sold in every way. Please show mercy and accept me either in this life or perhaps the next. I beg You to kindly keep me by Your feet, calling me Your own.)
Text 4
vāsudeva ghoṣe bole caraṇe dhoriyā
kṛpā kori rākho more pada-chāyā diyā
āmāya caraṇe rākhiho, caraṇe rākhiho
dāsānudās kore more caraṇe rākhiho
dāsānudās kore more doyā janame noy janamāntare
dāsānudās kore more caraṇe rākhiho
dāsānudās kore more caraṇe rākhiho
kṛpā kori rākho more pada-chāyā diyā

vāsudeva ghoṣa—the author; bole—says; caraṇe dhoriyā—grasping Your feet; kṛpā kori—please be merciful; rākho more—please keep me; pada-chāyā—the shade of Your feet; diyā—giving.

 Vāsudeva Ghosh says, "Since I have tightly grasped hold of Your feet, please keep me here by always bestowing their soothing shade."
(Please keep me at Your feet, keep me at Your feet. Making me the humble servant of Your servant, please keep me situated at Your feet. Making me the humble servant of Your servant, please show Your mercy either in this life or perhaps the next. Making me the humble servant of Your servant, please keep me situated at Your feet. Be merciful and keep me under the cooling shade of Your feet.)
Song 16: Gorā Pahuṅ
Ākṣepa-"Lamentation"
16. Gorā Pahuṅ
Ākṣepa-"Lamentation"
From Prārthanā by 
Narottam Dās Ṭhākura
Text 1
gorā pahuṅ nā bhajiyā mainu
prema-ratana-dhana helāya hārāinu

gorā pahuṅ—O Gaura Prabhu!; nā bhajiyā—not worshiped; mainu—by me; prema-ratana-dhana—the jewel of divine love; helāya—by negligence; hārāinu—I have been robbed.

 O Lord Gaura! I have never engaged myself in Your worship. Thus I am robbed of the jewel of divine love by my own negligence.
Text 2
adhane jatana kori dhana teyāginu
āpana karama-doṣe āpani ḍubinu

adhane—in need of wealth; jatana kori—I endeavored; dhana—riches; teyāginu—I have still rejected; āpana—myself; karama-doṣe—in the ocean of sinful reactions; āpani ḍubinu—I had submerged myself.

 Although being quite in need of wealth, I have still worked very hard to reject the great opportunity of receiving Your riches. Then I submerged myself in the ocean of sinful reactions.
Text 3
sat-saṅga chāḍi' kainu asate vilās
te-kāraṇe lāgilo je karma-bandha-phāṅs

sat-saṅga—association with saintly persons; chāḍi'—avoiding; kainu—I have done; asate vilās—sporting in the company of materialists; te-kāraṇe—for that reason; lāgilo—I have become strung up; je—which; karma-bandha-phāṅs—in the noose of fruitive activities.

 Avoiding the association of saintly persons, I sported merrily in the company of materialistic rascals. For that reason I have become strung up in the noose of my own fruitive activities.
Text 4
viṣaya-viṣama-viṣa satata khāinu
gaura-kīrtana-rase magana nā hainu

viṣaya—sense gratification; viṣama-viṣa—the horrible poison; satata—perpetually; khāinu—I drank; gaura-kīrtana-rase—the mellows of kīrtan glorifying Lord Gaura; magana—absorbed; nā hainu—I never became.

 I perpetually drank the horrible poison of mundane sense gratification, having never absorbed myself in the divine mellows of the kīrtan glorifying Lord Gaura.
Text 5
keno vā āchaye prāṇa ki sukha pāiyā
narottam dās keno nā gelo mariyā

keno vā—and why; āchaye—is; prāṇa—my heart; ki sukha—any factual happiness; pāiyā—experienced; narottam dās—Narottama Dāsa; keno nā—why not; gelo mariyā—simply gone and perished.

 Oh, why has my heart not experienced any satisfaction? And why has Narottam Dās not simply perished?
Song 17: Hari He Doyāl Mor
Dainya O Prapatti
17. Hari He Doyāl Mor
Dainya O Prapatti
"Humility and Devotional Surrender"
by an anonymous Vaiṣṇava poet
Text 1
hari he doyāl mor jaya rādhā-nāth
bāro bāro ei-bāro loho nija sāth

hari he—O Hari!; doyāl mor—O my merciful Lord!; jaya rādhā-nāth—all glories to You, the Lord of Rādhā!; bāro bāro—again and again (I have pleaded with You); ei-bāro—but this time; loho—please take me; nija sāth—as Your own.

 O Hari! O my merciful Lord! All glories to You, O Lord of Rādhā! Again and again I have pleaded with You, and now I beg You yet again to accept me as Your own.
Text 2
bahu yoni bhrami' nātha! loinu śaraṇ
nija-gue kṛpā koro' adhama-tāraṇ

bahu yoni—through many wombs; bhrami'—after wandering; nātha—O Lord!; loinu śaraṇ—I have taken refuge in You; nija-guṇe—by Your divine power; kṛpā koro'—be merciful; adhama-tāraṇ—and deliver this wretched soul.

 O Lord! Hopelessly taking birth over and over, I have now come to You for refuge. Please show Your merciful nature and deliver this wretched soul.
Text 3
jagata-kāraṇa tumi jagata-jīvan
tomā chāḍā kār nāhi he rādhā-ramaṇ

jagata-kāraṇa tumi—You are the cause of the universe; jagata-jīvan—and the life of the universe; tomā chāḍā—without You; kār nāhi—no one has anything; he rādhā-ramaṇ—O lover of Rādhā!

 You are the cause of the universe, and its very life. Other than You, O lover of Rādhā, there is no shelter.
Text 4
bhuvana-maṅgala tumi bhuvaner pati
tumi upekhile nātha, ki hoibe gati

bhuvana-maṅgala tumi—You bring about auspiciousness for the world; bhuvaner pati—and You are the master of all the worlds; tumi upekhile—if I neglect You; nātha—O Lord!; ki hoibe gati—what will be my fate?

 You bring about auspiciousness for the world, and You are the master of all the worlds as well. O Lord, what will become of me if You forsake me?
Text 5
bhāviyā dekhinu ei jagata-mājhāre
tomā binā keho nāhi e dāse uddhāre

bhāviyā—after having considered it; dekhinu—I have seen; ei jagata-mājhāre—within this world; tomā binā—except for You; keho nāhi—there is no one; e dāse uddhāre—who can deliver this fallen servant.

 I have understood, after contemplating my predicament, that within this world there is no one who can deliver this servant but You.
Song 18: He Govinda He Gopāl
"O Govinda! O Gopāl!"
18. He Govinda He Gopāl
"O Govinda! O Gopāl!"
By Jayadeva Goswāmī
Text 1
he govinda he gopāla
keśava mādhava dīna-doyāl

he govinda—O pleaser of the cows!; he gopāl—O protector of the cows!; keśava—O Lord of fine hair!; mādhava—O Lord of sweetness!; dīna-doyāl—O Lord merciful to the humble!

 O pleaser of the cows! O protector of the cows! O bearer of the finest hair! O husband of the goddess of fortune! You are very merciful to the fallen souls!
Text 2
tumi parama doyāl prabhu, parama doyāl
keśava mādhava dīna doyāl

tumi—You; parama doyāl—supremely merciful; prabhu—O Lord!; parama doyāl—supremely merciful; keśava—O Lord of fine hair!; mādhava—O Lord of sweetness!; dīna-doyāl—O Lord merciful to the humble!

 You are supremely merciful, O Lord, supremely merciful! O Keśava! O Mādhava! O Dīna Doyāl!
Text 3
pīta-basana pari mayūrera śikha dhori
mūralīr vāṇī-tule bole rādhā-nām

pīta-basana—yellow cloth; pari—wearing; mayūrera śikha—peacock feather; dhori—wearing; mūralīr—the strains of the flute; vāṇī-tule—just like words; bole—chanting; rādhā-nām—the name of Rādhā.

 Wearing bright yellow garments and a peacock feather upon Your crown, You play the flute and make it sing the name of Rādhā.
Text 4
tumi madera gopāl prabhu, madera gopāl
keśava mādhava dīna-doyāl

tumi—You; madera gopāl—the cowherd boy cupid; prabhu—O Lord!; madera gopāl—the cowherd boy cupid; keśava—O Lord of fine hair!; mādhava—O Lord of sweetness!; dīna-doyāl—O Lord merciful to the humble!

 You are the cowherd boy that gives great delight, O Lord, the cowherd boy that gives great delight! O Keśava! O Mādhava! O Dīna Doyāl!
Text 5
bhava-bhaya-bhañjana śrī madhu-sūdana
vipada-bhañjana tumi nārāyaṇa

bhava-bhaya-bhañjana—who breaks the fear of material existence; śrī madhu-sūdana—the splendrous killer of the demon Madhu; vipada-bhañjana—the vanquisher of calamities; tumi—You; nārāyaṇa—the resting place of all souls.

 You take away our fear of being trapped on the wheel of repeated birth and death in the material world, and You are the splendrous killer of the demon Madhu. The destroyer of all tribulations, You are the supreme resting place for all souls.
Song 19: Jaya Jaya Jagannātha Śacīra Nandan
"Glories to the Son of Jagannātha and Śacī"
19. Jaya Jaya Jagannātha Śacīra Nandan
"Glories to the Son of Jagannātha and Śacī"
By Vasudeva Ghosh
Text 1
jaya jaya jagannātha śacīra nandan
tribhuvane kore jār caraṇa vandan

jaya jaya—all glories, all glories; jagannātha śacīra—of Jagannātha and Śacī; nandan—the dear son; tri-bhuvane—by the three worlds; kore—does; jār—whose; caraṇa—feet; vandan—praise.

 All glories, all glories to the dear Son of Jagannātha Miśra and Śacī Devī! All the three worlds offer prayers unto His lotus feet.
Text 2
nīlācale śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-padma-dhar
nadīyā nagare daṇḍa-kamaṇḍalu-kar

nīlācale—in Jagannātha Purī; śaṅkha—conchshell; cakra—discus; gadā—club; padma—lotus; dhar—the holder; nadīyā nagare—in the town of Nadīyā; daṇḍa-sannyāsī staff; kamaṇḍalu—waterpot; kar—in the hand.

 In Nīlācala He holds the conchshell, disc, club, and lotus flower, while in the town of Nadīyā He holds a sannyāsī staff and waterpot.
Text 3
keho bole pūrabe rāvaṇa badhilā
goloker vaibhava līlā prakāśa karila

keho bole—some say; pūrabe—previously; rāvaṇa—the demon Rāvaṇa; badhilā—killed; goloker—of Goloka; vaibhava—opulence; līlā—pastimes; prakāśa karila—had revealed.

 It is said that in olden times, as Lord Rāmachandra, He killed the demon Rāvaṇa. Then later, as Lord Kṛṣṇa, He revealed the splendrously opulent pastimes of Goloka.
Text 4
śrī-rādhār bhāve ebe gorā avatār
hare kṛṣṇa nām gaura karila pracār
e-bār pracār jei karila hare kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra
pracār jei karila hare kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra
tribhuvana uddhārite hare kṛṣṇa hare rāma
tribhuvana uddhārite hare kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra
pracār jei karila

śrī-rādhār—of śrī Rādhā; bhāve—in the ecstatic mood; ebe—now; gorā—fair-complexioned; avatār—incarnation; hare kṛṣṇa nām—the names Hare Kṛṣṇa; gaura—Lord Gaurāṅga; karila pracār—preached; e-bār—now; pracār—preaching; jei—who; karila—has done; hare kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra; tribhuvana—the three worlds; uddhārite—to deliver.

 Now He has come again as Lord Gaurāṅga, the fair-skinned incarnation, endowed with the ecstatic mood of Śrī Rādhā, and has spread widely the chanting of the holy names 'Hare Kṛṣṇa.'
(Now He has distributed the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, the great chant for deliverance. He dispenses the holy names to deliver the three worlds. This is how He preached.)
Text 5
vāsudeva ghoṣa bole kori joḍa hāt
jei gaura sei kṛṣṇa sei jagannāth
sei to' eseche, sei to' eseche
oi braja ho'te nadīyāre sei to' eseche
braja ho'te nadīyāre sei to' eseche
oi braja ho'te nadīyāre
rādhā-bhāva-kānti loye braja ho'te nadīyāre
sei to' eseche
e-bār govinda gaurāṅga ho'ye sei to' eseche
govinda gaurāṅga ho'ye sei to' eseche

vāsudeva ghoṣa bole—the author says; kori joḍa hāt—with folded hands; jei gaura—He who is Gaura; sei kṛṣṇa—is He who is Kṛṣṇa; sei jagannāth—is He who is Lord Jagannātha; sei—He; to'—indeed; eseche—has come; oi—Oh!; braja ho'te—from Vraja; nadīyāre—to Nadīyā; rādhā-bhāva-kānti—the mood and luster of Rādhā; loye—accepting; e-bār—now; govinda—Lord Govinda; gaurāṅga ho'ye—becoming Lord Gaurāṅga; sei—He; to'—indeed; eseche—has come.

 Vāsudeva Ghosh says with folded hands, "He who is Gaura is He who is Kṛṣṇa is He who is Jagannātha."
(It is He who has come. He has come! Oh, from Vraja He has come to Nadīyā. Accepting the mood and luster of Śrī Rādhā, He has come from Vraja to Nadīyā. He has come! Now Lord Govinda, the cowherd boy, has come as Lord Gaurāṅga. He has come!)
Song 20: Jaya Mādhava Madana Murāri
20. Jaya Mādhava Madana Murāri
Traditional Hindi song
(refrain) jaya mādhava madana murārī rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma
jaya keśava kali-mala-hārī rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma

jaya—all glories!; mādhava—the husband of the goddess of fortune; madana—the transcendental Cupid; murārī—the killer of the demon Mura; rādhe-śyāma—the divine couple Rādha and Śyāma; śyāmā-śyāma—the youthful maiden and the dark boy; jaya—all glories!; keśava—He of fine hair; kali-mala-hārī—who removes the miseries of the Age of Kali; rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma.

(refrain) Glories to the husband of the goddess of fortune, who is the transcendental Cupid and the enemy of the demon Mura. Glories to the divine couple Rādhe-Śyāma, also known as Śyāmā-Śyāma! Glories to Lord Keśava, who has fine hair, who removes the miseries of the Age of Kali-Rādhe-Śyāma, Śyāmā-Śyāma!
Text 1
sundara kuṇḍala naina viśāla, gale sohe vaijantī-mālā
yā chavi kī balihārī rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma

sundara—beautiful; kuṇḍala—earrings; naina—eyes; viśāla—wide; gale—around His neck; sohe—shines; vaijantī-mālā—victory-garland; yā—which; chavi—aura; kī—of; balihārī—excellent.

 O Kṛṣṇa, You wear beautiful earrings, and You have lovely widened eyes. Around Your neck hangs the splendrous vaijantī flower garland. Your complexion is most excellent-Rādhe-Śyāma, Śyāmā-Śyāma!
Text 2
kabahūṅ luṭa luṭa dadhi khāyo, kabahūṅ madhu-vana rāsa racāyo
nācata vipina-vihārī rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma

kabahūṅ—sometimes; luṭa luṭa—sneaks and steals; dadhi—yogurt; khāyo—He eats; kabahūṅ—sometimes; madhu-vana—the forest of Madhuvana; rāsa—the rāsa—dance; racāyo—designs; nācata—He dances; vipina-vihārī—who sports in the woods.

 Sometimes You secretly plunder yogurt and eat it, and sometimes You design a rāsa-dance performance with the young gopīs in the forest of Madhuvana. There dances Vipina-Vihārī, You who love to sport in the forest-Rādhe-Śyāma, Śyāmā-Śyāma!
Text 3
gvāla-bāla saṅga dhenu carāi, vana-vana brahmata phire yadu-rāi
kāṅdhe kāmara kārī rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma

gvāla-bāla—cowherd boys; saṅga—along with; dhenu carāi—tends the cows; vana-vana—from forest to forest; brahmata phire—wanders around; yadu-rāi—the Lord of Yadu; kāṅdhe—on the shoulder; kāmara kārī—carrying blankets.

 You herd the cows in the company of the cowherd boys. You, the monarch of the Yadu dynasty, thus wander from forest to forest, carrying a blanket draped over Your shoulder-Rādhe-Śyāma, Śyāmā-Śyāma!
Text 4
curā curā nava-nīta jo khāyo, vraja-vanitana pai nāma dharāyo
mākhana-cora murārī rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma

curā curā—sneaking and stealing; nava-nīta—fresh butter; jo khāyo—who eats; vraja-vanitana—the women of Vraja; pai—catching; nāma dharāyo—fixing the name; mākhana-cora—the butter-thief; murārī—the enemy of Mura.

 Because You, O Murāri, repeatedly steal fresh butter from the homes of the women of Vraja and secretly eat it, they have named You 'Mākhan-Chor' (the butter thief)-Rādhe-Śyāma, Śyāmā-Śyāma!
Text 5
eka-dina māna indra ko māryo, nakha upara govardhana dhāryo
nama paḍayo giridhārī rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma

eka-dina—one day; māna—puffed up; indra—Lord Indra; ko—to; mārayo—chastised; nakha upara—upon the fingernail; govardhana—Govardhana Hill; dhārayo—held; nama paḍayo—earning the name; giridhārī—lifter of the mountain.

 One day You curbed the pride of Indra by lifting the great mountain Govardhana upon the tip of Your fingernail, thus winning for Yourself the name Giridhārī-Rādhe-Śyāma, Śyāmā-Śyāma!
Text 6
duryodhana ko bhoga na khāyo, rūkho sāga vidura ghara khāyo
aise prema pujārī rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma

duryodhana ko—to Duryodhana; bhoga—the food; na khāyo—not eating; rūkho sāga—coarse greens; vidura—offered by Vidura; ghara—in the home; khāyo—ate; aise—thus; prema pujārī—worshipped by love.

 You did not accept the sumptuous feast of the wicked Duryodhana, but took the coarse food offered by Your devotee Vidura. Therefore You are worshipped by love and not by mere rituals-Rādhe-Śyāma, Śyāmā-Śyāma!
Text 7
karuṇā kara draupadī pukārī, paṭa lipaṭa gaye vana-vārī
nirakha rahe nara nārī rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma

karuṇā kara—showing mercy; draupadī—Draupadī; pukārī—spreading; paṭa—cloth; lipaṭa gaye—was covered; vana-vārī—the monarch of the forest; nirakha rahe—stood watching; nara nārī—men and women.

 To bestow mercy upon Draupadī, You, the Lord of the forest, supplied unlimited cloth to protect her from shame, while the assembly of men and women looked on-Rādhe-Śyāma, Śyāmā-Śyāma!
Text 8
bhakta-bhakta saba tumane tāre, binā bhakti hama ṭhāḍe dvāre
lījo khabara hamārī rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma

bhakta-bhakta—the individual devotees; saba—all; tumane—by You; tāre—deliver; binā—without; bhakti—devotion; hama—we; ṭhāḍe—standing; dvāre—by the door; lījo—receive; khabara—news; hamārī—ours.

 You deliver each of Your devotees in unique ways. Alas, we who are bereft of devotion are standing here outside Your door. Please favorably receive the news of our presence-Rādhe-Śyāma, Śyāmā-Śyāma!
Text 9
arjuna ke ratha hāṅkana hāre, gītā ke upadeśa tumhāre
cakra-sudarśana-dhārī rādhe-śyāma śyāmā-śyāma

arjuna ke—Arjuna's; ratha—chariot; hāṅkana—war-cry; hāre—defeated; gītā ke—of the Bhagavad-Gītā; upadeśa—instruction; tumhāre—Yours; cakra-sudarśana-dhārī—the holder of the Sudarśana discus.

 You were the driver of Arjuna's chariot, and on the battlefield You gave Arjuna the instructions of the Bhagavad-gītā. During the fight You exhibited Your form as the wielder of the discus Sudarśana-Rādhe-Śyāma, Śyāmā-Śyāma!
Song 21: Jaya Rādhā Girivara Dhāri
21. Jaya Rādhā Girivara Dhāri
By Duḥkhī Dīna Krishnadāsa
Text 1
jaya rādhā giri-vara dhāri
śrī nanda-nandana vṛṣabhānu-dulāri
(vṛṣabhānu dulāri rādhe vṛṣabhānu-dulāri)

jaya—glory; rādhā—to Rādhā; giri-vara dhāri—and to the lifter of the best mountain; śrī nanda-nandana—named Śrī Nanda Nandana; vṛṣabhānu dulāri—and the dear daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu.

 All glories to Rādhā and Girivara-Dhāri! He is Śrī Nanda-Nandan, and She is Vṛṣabhānu-Dulāri.
Text 2
mora-mukuṭa mukha muralī jori
veṇī virāje mukhe hāsi thori

mora-mukuṭa—peacock feather crown; mukha—mouth; muralī—flute; jori—shines; veṇī—braid; virāje—glistens; mukhe—on Her mouth; hāsi—a smile; thori—slight.

 He wears a peacock feather crown, and the flute placed to His mouth shines. Her braid appears brilliant, and Her mouth displays a gentle smile.
Text 3
unaki śohe gale vana-mālā
inaki motima-māla ujālā

unaki—His; śohe—glitters; gale—around His neck; vana-mālā—forest flower garland; inaki—Her; motima-māla—pearl necklace; ujālā—iridescent gleam.

 His neck is made splendrous by a forest flower garland, while Her neck is made splendrous by the iridescent gleam of Her pearl necklace.
Text 4
pītāmbara jaga-jana-mana mohe
nīla uḍhani bani unaki śohe

pītāmbara—yellow cloth; jaga-jana-mana—the minds of all residents of the universe; mohe—enchants; nīla—blue; uḍhani—veil; bani—lower cloth; unaki—Her; śohe—glows.

 His yellow garment enchants the minds of all residents of the universe, and Her blue garments glitter effulgently.
Text 5
aruṇa caraṇe maṇi-mañjira bāoye
śrī-kṛṣṇa-dās tahiṅ mana bhāoye

aruṇa—reddish; caraṇe—on the feet; maṇi-mañjira—jewelled anklets; bāoye—resound; śrī-kṛṣṇa-dās—Śrī Krishnadās; tahiṅ—Them; mana—mind; bhāoye—radiates.

 Jeweled anklets resound upon Their reddish lotus feet, and the mind of Krishnadās is illuminated by Their splendrous presence.
Song 22: Jaya Rādhe Jaya Rādhe Rādhe
22. Jaya Rādhe Jaya Rādhe Rādhe
By Hari Vyāsa Devācārya
nava-nava raṅgi tri-bhaṅgi jaya, syāma su-aṅgi syāma
jaya rādhe jaya hari-priye, śrī-rādhe sukha dhāma

(introductory verse) "All glories to that Person who stands in a beautiful three-fold stance! He is the connoisseur of newer and newer playful sports, and His body is effulgent with the nicest dark complexion. This is Lord Śyāma. All glories to You, Rādhe! All glories to You, O Hari-priyā! O Śrī Rādhe! You are the abode and reservoir of all happiness!"
Text 1
jaya rādhe jaya rādhe rādhe jaya rādhe jaya śrī-rādhe
jaya kṛṣṇa jaya kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa jaya kṛṣṇa jaya śrī-kṛṣṇa

 Jaya Rādhe Jaya Rādhe Rādhe Jaya Rādhe Jaya Śrī-Rādhe! Jaya Kṛṣṇa Jaya Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Jaya Kṛṣṇa Jaya Śrī-Kṛṣṇa!
Text 2
syāmā gorī nitya-kisorī prītama-jorī śrī-rādhe
rasika rasīlo chaila-chabīlo guṇa-garabīlo śrī-kṛṣṇa

 O Śrī Rādhe! You are: Syāmā-a fresh young maiden with slender waist, endowed with the luster of new adolescence; Gorī-You possess the fairest golden complexion; Nitya-kisorī-You are eternally situated in the sweet blossoming of divine youth; Prītama-jorī-You are the only perfect match for Your most Beloved. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! You are: Rasika—the true relisher of transcendental mellows; Rasīlo-You are sweet and relishable in every aspect; Chaila-chabīlo-You are so effulgent that You represent the topmost superexcellence of pure enchantment; Guṇa-garabīlo-You are situated in great pride due to full awareness of Your own transcendental qualities.
Text 3
rāsa-vihārini rasa-bisatārini piya-ura-dhārini śrī-rādhe
nava-nava-raṅgī navala-tribhaṅgī syāma-su-aṅgī śrī-kṛṣṇa

 O Śrī Rādhe! You are: Rāsa-vihārini—the sportive Princess of the ecstatic rāsa-dance festival, which You organize every night; Rasa-bisatārini-You are the distributor of pure ecstatic rasa-mellows to all other living entities; Piya-ura-dhārini-You love to embrace the chest of Your Lover. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! You are: Nava-nava-raṅgī—the connoisseur of newer and newer playful sports; Navala-tribhaṅgī-You like to stand in a three-fold bending posture that always appears ever-fresh; Syāma-su-aṅgī-Your body is perfectly exquisite in both proportion and deep dark complexion.
Text 4
prāna-piyārī rūpa-ujyārī ati-sukuṅvārī śrī-rādhe
maina-manohara mahā-moda-kara suṅdara-bara-tara śrī-kṛṣṇa

 O Śrī Rādhe! You are: Prāna-piyārī—the most dear loving friend of everyone's life; Rūpa-ujyārī-You manifest a brilliant splendor of sheer beauty; Ati-sukuṅvārī-You are extremely soft and delicate due to Your fresh youth. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! You are: Maina-manohara—the enchanter of the mind of Cupid; Mahā-moda-kara-You are the giver of great transcendental bliss to all living entities; Sundara-bara-tara-Your beauty surpasses the best by far.
Text 5
sobhā-sainī mobhā-mainī kokila-bainī śrī-rādhe
kīrati-vantā kāmini-kaṅtā śrī-bhagavaṅtā śrī-kṛṣṇa

 O Śrī Rādhe! You are: Sobhā-sainī—the manifestor of wonderful beauty while You are gracefully reclining on a flower bed; Mobhā-mainī-You radiate the luster of the transcendental Cupid, Lord Kāmadeva; Kokila-bainī-Your speech sounds just like the soft, gentle cooing of the cuckoo bird. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! You are: Kīrati-vaṅtā-honored by Your own glorious fame; Kāmini-kaṅtā-You are the lover of lusty young gopīs; Śrī-bhagavaṅtā-Your position is the highest amongst all the different forms of Godhead.
Text 6
caṅdā-badanī kuṅdā-raḍanī sobhā-sadanī śrī-rādhe
parama-udārā prabhā-apārā ati-sukuṅvārā śrī-kṛṣṇa

 O Śrī Rādhe! You are: Chaṅdā-badanī—the possessor of a spotless moon-face; Kuṅdā-raḍanī-Your teeth look just like small round jasmine flowers; Sobhā-sadanī-You are the very abode of majestic beauty and splendor. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! You are: Parama-udārā—the most supremely magnanimous personality; Prabhā-apārā-Your bodily aura radiates out into unlimited eternity; Ati-sukuṅvārā-You are naturally endowed with the softness of extremely youthful charms.
Text 7
haṁsā-gavanī rājati-ravanī krīḍā-kavanī śrī-rādhe
rūpa-rasālā naina-bisālā parama-kṛpālā śrī-kṛṣṇa

 O Śrī Rādhe! You are: Haṁsā-gavanī-fond of walking like a majestic swan; Rājati-ravanī-You are the most radiant lover; Krīḍā-kavanī-You are the instigator of many fun sports and contests. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! You are: Rūpa-rasālā—the embodiment of the most relishable type of beauty; Naina-bisālā-Your lotus eyes are large and wide; Parama-kṛpālā-You are the topmost merciful personality.
Text 8
kaṅcana-belī rati-rasa-relī ati-alabelī śrī-rādhe
saba-sukha-sāgara saba-guṇa-āgara rūpa-ujāgara śrī-kṛṣṇa

 O Śrī Rādhe! You are: Kaṅcana-belī-just like a golden creeper wound around the Śyāma tamāla-tree; Rati-rasa-relī-You are completely full to the brim with the ecstatic mellows of purely divine love; Ati-alabelī-Your unique activities are conducted in complete privacy. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! You are: Saba-sukha-sāgara—the ocean of all types of happiness; Saba-guṇa-āgara-You are the mine of all good qualities; Rūpa-ujāgara-You radiate a famous aura of glorious beauty.
Text 9
ravanī-ramyā tara-tara-tamyā guṇa-agamyā śrī-rādhe
dhāma-nivāsī prabhā-prakāsī sahaja-suhāsī śrī-kṛṣṇa

 O Śrī Rādhe! You are: Ravanī-ramyā—the most charming mistress of Your beloved; Tara-tara-tamyā-You are naturally situated at the topmost level of successive greatness; Guṇa-agamyā-Your divine qualities are imperceptible to ordinary senses or minds. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! You are: Dhāma-nivāsī-a permanent resident of the holy abode of Śrī Vraja; Prabhā-prakāsī-You radiate a most influential aura; Sahaja-suhāsī-You naturally wear a pleasant smile.
Text 10
śaktyāhlādini ati-priya-vādini ura-unmādini śrī-rādhe
aṅga-aṅga-tauna sarasa-salauna subhaga-suthauna śrī-kṛṣṇa

 O Śrī Rādhe! You are: śaktyāhlādini—the very potency of divine pleasure; Ati-priya-vādini-Your speech is such that whoever hears it becomes lovingly attached to it; Ura-unmādini-Your breasts are crazed with the wildest desire to be satisfied by Your Beloved. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! You are: Aṅga-aṅga-tauna-endowed with such bodily limbs that each and every aspect of them is very captivating; Sarasa-salauna-Your beauty is indeed saturated with an all-pervading, overflowing rasa-current; Subhaga-suthauna-Your chest is beautifully endowed with majestic divine opulences.
Text 11
rādhā-nāmini guṇa-abhirāmini hari-priya-svāminī śrī-rādhe
hare-hare-hari hare-hare-hari hare-hare-hari śrī-kṛṣṇa

O Śrī Rādhe! You are: Rādhā-nāmini-celebrated with the most blessed name of "Rādhā"; Guṇa-abhirāmini-You please everyone with your good qualities; Haripriya-svāmini-You are the only worshipable Queen for Haripriya [the author, Hari Vyāsadeva]. Hare Hare Hari, Hare Hare Hari, Hare Hare Hari, Śrī Kṛṣṇaiii*
Song 23: Kabe Śrī Caitanya More Koribena Doyā
"When Will Lord Caitanya Be Merciful to Me?"
23. Kabe Śrī Caitanya More Koribena Doyā
"When Will Lord Caitanya Be Merciful to Me?"
From Kalyāṇa Kalpataru by 
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
Text 1
kabe śrī-caitanya more koribena doyā
kabe āmi paibo vaiṣṇava-pada-chāyā

kabe—when; śrī-caitanya—Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; more—to me; koribena doyā—will show His mercy; kabe—when; āmi paibo—I will attain; vaiṣṇava-pada-chāyā—the shade of the lotus feet of the Vaiṣṇavas.

 When will Śrī Chaitanya Mahāprabhu show His causeless mercy to me by allowing me to attain the shade of the lotus feet of His Vaiṣṇava devotee?
Text 2
kabe āmi chāḍibo e viṣayābhimān
kabe viṣṇu-jane āmi koribo sammān

kabe—when; āmi chāḍibo—I will give up; e—this; viṣaya-abhimān—false ego attached to sense objects; kabe—when; viṣṇu-jane—the associates of the Lord!; āmi—I; koribo sammān—will honor.

 When will I be able to give up this false ego, which is so deeply engrossed in sense gratification? And when will I be able to properly honor the associates of the Lord?
Text 3
gala-bastra kṛtāṅjali vaiṣṇava-nikaṭe
dante tṛṇa kori' dāṅḍāibo niṣkapaṭe

gala-bastra—a cloth around my neck; kṛtāṅjali—with folded hands; vaiṣṇava-nikaṭe—before the devotees; dante—in the teeth; tṛṇa kori'—holding a straw; dāṅḍāibo—I will stand; niṣkapaṭe—without duplicity.

 I will stand before a Vaiṣṇava with folded hands, a cloth binding my neck, and a straw between my teeth, sincerely awaiting his order.
Text 4
kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā jānāibo duḥkha-grām
saṁsāra-anala hoite māgibo biśrāma

kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā—weeping and weeping; jānāibo—I will inform them; duhkha-grām—multitude of miseries; saṁsāra-anala—the blazing fire of this material world; hoite—from; māgibo biśrāma—I will beg for relief.

 Weeping and weeping, I will inform him of my host of material miseries, and I will beg for relief from the blazing fire of this material world.
Text 5
śuniyā āmār duḥkha vaiṣṇava ṭhākur
āmā lāgi' kṛṣṇe āvedibena pracur

śuniyā—hearing; āmār duḥkha—about my sufferings; vaiṣṇava ṭhākur—the venerable devotee; āmā lāgi'—on my behalf; kṛṣṇe—unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; āvedibena—will submit an appeal; pracur—profuse.

 Hearing about all my miserable sufferings, the Vaiṣṇāva Ṭhākura will submit an appeal to Lord Kṛṣṇa on my behalf.
Text 6
vaiṣṇaver āvedane kṛṣṇa doyāmoy
e heno pāmara prati ha'bena sadoy

vaiṣṇaver āvedane—by the prayer of the Vaiṣṇavas; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; doyāmoy—the all merciful one; e heno—such as; pāmara—a sinner; prati—toward; ha'bena sadoy—will become compassionate.

 By the prayer of the Vaiṣṇava, the all-merciful Lord Kṛṣṇa will then become compassionate toward such a sinner as me.
Text 7
vinoder nivedana vaiṣṇava-caraṇe
kṛpā kori' saṅge loho ei akiñcane

vinoder nivedana—Bhaktivinoda's prayer; vaiṣṇava-caraṇe—unto the feet of the Vaiṣṇavas; kṛpā kori'—being merciful; saṅge loho—take into your association; ei akiñcane—this worthless person.

 Bhaktivinoda prays unto the lotus feet of the Vaiṣṇava, "Please be merciful and take this worthless person into your association."
Song 24: Śrī Jagannāthāṣṭakam
24. Śrī Jagannāthāṣṭakam
Uttered by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
Text 1
kadācit kālindī-taṭa-vipina-saṅgītaka-ravo
mudābhīrī-nārī-vadana-kamalāsvāda-madhupaḥ
ramā-śambhu-brahmāmara-pati-gaṇeśārcita-pado
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

kadācit—sometimes; kālindī-taṭa—the banks of the Yamunā river; vipina—the groves; saṅgītaka-ravaḥ—who makes the sounds of music and singing; mudā—with delight; ābhīrī-nārī—cowherd damsels; vadana-kamala—lotus-like faces; āsvāda—tasting; madhupaḥ—a bumblebee; ramā—Lakṣmī; śambhu—Śiva; brahmā—Brahmā; amara-pati—Indra, Lord of the immortals; gaṇeśa—Gaṇeśa; arcita-padaḥ—whose lotus feet are worshipped; jagannāthaḥ svāmī—Lord Jagannātha; nayana-patha—the path of the eyes; gāmī—He who travels; bhavatu—may it be; me—my.

 Lord Jagannātha sometimes makes the melodious sounds of playing music and singing throughout the groves on the banks of the Kālindī river. He is like a bumblebee experiencing great delight while tasting the nectar of the lotus-like faces of the cowherd damsels. His lotus feet are worshipped by great personalities such as Lakṣmī, Śiva, Brahmā, Indra and Gaṇeśa. May that Lord of the Universe kindly become visible unto me.
Text 2
bhuje savye veṇuṁ śirasi śikhi-picchaṁ kaṭi-taṭe
dukūlaṁ netrānte sahacari-kaṭākṣaṁ vidadhate
sadā śrīmad-vṛndāvana-vasati-līlā-paricayo
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

bhuje savye—in His left hand; veṇum—a flute; śirasi—upon His head; śikhi-piccham—a peacock feather; kaṭi-taṭe—around His hips; dukūlam—fine silken cloth; netra-ante—from the corners of His eyes; sahacari—upon His loving companions; kaṭākṣam—sidelong glances; vidadhate—casts; sadā—perpetually; śrīmat-vṛndāvana-vasati—living in Śrī Vṛndāvana; līlā paricayaḥ—fond of the pastimes; jagannāthaḥ svāmī—Lord Jagannātha; nayana-patha—the path of the eyes; gāmī—He who travels; bhavatu—may it be; me—my.

 In His left hand He holds a flute, upon His head is a peacock feather, and around His hips is a fine silken cloth. From the corners of His eyes, He casts sidelong glances upon His loving companions. He is most fond of the pastimes He conducts while living in Śrī Vṛndāvana. May that Lord of the Universe kindly become visible unto me.
Text 3
mahāmbhodes tīre kanaka-rucire nīla-śikhare
vasan prāsādāntaḥ sahaja-balabhadrena balinā
subhadrā-madhya-sthaḥ sakala-sura-sevāvasara-do
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

mahā-ambhodeḥ tīre—on the shore of the great ocean; kanaka-rucire—in that which glows with golden effulgence; nīla-śikhare—topped by a spire of blue sapphire; vasan—resides; prāsāda antaḥ—in a large palace; sahaja-balabhadrena—along with His brother Balabhadra; balinā—with the powerful one; subhadrā-madhya-sthaḥ—His sister Subhadrā in between; sakala-sura—all godly souls; sevā-avasara—opportunities to render devotional services; daḥ—the bestower; jagannāthaḥ svāmī—Lord Jagannātha; nayana-patha—the path of the eyes; gāmī—He who travels; bhavatu—may it be; me—my.

 On the shore of the great ocean is a large palace that glows with the effulgence of solid gold, and is topped by a towering temple spire that appears to be a blue sapphire mountain. Residing therein along with His mighty brother Balabhadra, and in between Them His sister Subhadrā, Lord Jagannātha bestows opportunities for all godly souls to render various devotional services. May that Lord of the Universe kindly become visible unto me.
Text 4
kṛpā-pārāvāraḥ sajala-jalada-śreṇi-ruciro
ramā-vāṇī-rāmaḥ sphurad-amala-paṅkeruha-mukhaḥ
surendrair ārādhyaḥ śruti-gaṇa-śikhā-gīta-carito
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

kṛpā-pārāvāraḥ—an ocean of mercy; sa-jala-jalada—rainclouds full of water; śreṇi—a row; ruciraḥ—beautiful complexion; ramā-vāṇī-rāmaḥ—pleased by hearing the words of goddess Lakṣmī; sphurat—fully-blown; amala—spotless; paṅkeruha-mukhaḥ—lotus face; surendraiḥ—by the best of sages; ārādhyaḥ—who is worshiped; śruti-gaṇa-śikhā—by the topmost personified Upaniṣads; gīta-caritaḥ—whose activities are glorified in song; jagannāthaḥ svāmī—Lord Jagannātha; nayana-patha—the path of the eyes; gāmī—He who travels; bhavatu—may it be; me—my.

 He is a fathomless ocean of causeless mercy, and His beautiful complexion is like a cluster of blackish rainclouds. He derives great pleasure by hearing the words of affectionate chastisement from His beloved goddess Lakṣmī. His face is like a fully-blown spotless lotus flower. He is worshipped by the best of demigods and sages, and His character and activities are glorified in song by the topmost personified Upaniṣads. May that Lord of the Universe kindly become visible unto me.
Text 5
rathārūḍho gacchan pathi milita-bhūdeva-paṭalaiḥ
stuti-prādurbhāvaṁ prati-padam upākarṇya sadayaḥ
dayā-sindhur bandhuḥ sakala-jagatāṁ sindhu-sutayā
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

ratha-ārūḍhaḥ—having mounted His cart; gacchan—parading along; pathi—by the road; milita—assembled; bhū-deva—gods on earth (the brāhmaṇas); paṭalaiḥ—by the multitudes; stuti-prādurbhāvam—presentation of prayers; prati-padam—at every step; upākarṇya—hearing; sadayaḥ—favorably disposed; dayā-sindhuḥ—an ocean of mercy; bandhuḥ sakala-jagatām—the friend of all the worlds; sindhu-sutayā—along with Lakṣmī, who was born from the ocean of nectar; jagannāthaḥ svāmī—Lord Jagannātha; nayana-patha—the path of the eyes; gāmī—He who travels; bhavatu—may it be; me—my.

 As the Lord mounts His Ratha-yātrā cart and parades along the road, there is a constant accompaniment of loud prayers and songs chanted by large assemblies of saintly brāhmaṇas. Hearing their hymns, Lord Jagannātha is favorably disposed toward them. He is an ocean of mercy, and is the true friend of all the worlds. May that Lord of the Universe, along with His consort Lakṣmī, who was born from the ocean of nectar, kindly become visible unto me.
Text 6
paraṁ-brahmāpīḍaḥ kuvalaya-dalotphulla-nayano
nivāsī nīlādrau nihita-caraṇo 'nanta-śirasi
rasānandī rādhā-sarasa-vapur āliṅgana-sukho
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

para-brahma—the supreme spiritual reality; āpīḍaḥ—the crown; kuvalaya-dala—petals of a blue lotus; utphulla—full-blown; nayanaḥ—whose eyes; nivāsī—who resides; nīla-adrau—in the Nīlācala temple that resembles a sapphire hill; nihita-caraṇaḥ—whose lotus feet are placed; ananta-śirasi—upon the heads of Lord Anantadeva; rasa-ānandī—overwhelmed by the flow of loving mellows; rādhā-sarasa-vapuḥ—the luscious body of Śrī Rādhā; āliṅgana-sukhaḥ—who becomes happy by embracing; jagannāthaḥ svāmī—Lord Jagannātha; nayana-patha—the path of the eyes; gāmī—He who travels; bhavatu—may it be; me—my.

 He is the ornament adorning the head of para-brahma (the supreme spiritual reality). His eyes are like the blossomed petals of a blue lotus flower, and He resides in the Nīlācala temple that resembles a sapphire hill. His lotus feet are placed upon the heads of Lord Anantadeva. He is overwhelmed by the flow of transcendental loving mellows, and He becomes happy only by embracing the luscious divine form of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. May that Lord of the Universe kindly become visible unto me.
Text 7
na vai yāce rājyam na ca kanaka-māṇikya-vibhavaṁ
na yāce 'haṁ ramyāṁ sakala-jana-kāmyāṁ vara-vadhūm
sadā kāle kāle pramatha-patinā gīta-carito
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

na vai—certainly not; yāce—I pray; rājyam—for a kingdom; na ca—or not; kanaka-māṇikya-vibhavam—gold, rubies, and wealth; na yāce—I do not ask; aham—I; ramyām—beautiful; sakala-jana-kāmyām—desired by all men; vara-vadhūm—an excellent wife; sadā—always; kāle kāle—from age to age; pramatha-patinā—by Lord Śiva, the Lord of the violent goblins; gīta-caritoḥ—whose glories are sung; jagannāthaḥ svāmī—Lord Jagannātha; nayana-patha—the path of the eyes; gāmī—He who travels; bhavatu—may it be; me—my.

 I certainly do not pray for a kingdom, nor for gold, rubies, and wealth. I do not ask for an excellent and beautiful wife, which is a possession desired by all ordinary men. I simply pray for that Lord of the Universe, whose glories are sung by Lord Śiva from age to age, to kindly become visible unto me.
Text 8
hara tvaṁ saṁsāraṁ drutataram asāraṁ sura-pate
hara tvaṁ pāpānāṁ vitatim aparāṁ yādava-pate
aho dine 'nāthe nihita-caraṇo niścitam idaṁ
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

hara—please remove; tvam—You; saṁsāram—material existence; drutataram—quickly; asāram—useless; sura-pate—O Lord of the demigods!; hara—please remove; tvam—You; pāpānām—sinful reactions; vitatim—the accumulation; aparām—boundless; yādava-pate—O Lord of the Yadus!; aho—O!; dine—those who feel themselves humble; anāthe—the helpless; nihita-caraṇaḥ—whose feet are bestowed; niścitam—it is certain; idam—this; jagannāthaḥ svāmī—Lord Jagannātha; nayana-patha—the path of the eyes; gāmī—He who travels; bhavatu—may it be; me—my.

 O Lord of the demigods! Please quickly take away this useless material existence that I am undergoing. O Lord of the Yadus! Please destroy the boundless accumulation of my sinful reactions. Aho! It is certain that Lord Jagannātha bestows His lotus feet upon those who feel themselves humbled and helpless. May that Lord of the Universe kindly become visible unto me.
Text 9
jagannāthāṣṭakaṁ puṇyaṁ
yaḥ paṭhet prayataḥ śuciḥ
sarva-pāpa-viśuddhātmā
viṣṇu-lokaṁ sa gacchati

jagannātha-aṣṭakam—eight verses glorifying Lord Jagannātha; puṇyam—auspicious; yaḥ paṭhet—whoever recites; prayataḥ—pure; śuciḥ—clean; sarva-pāpa—of all sins; viśuddha-ātmā—purified soul; viṣṇu-lokam—to Lord Viṣṇu's abode; saḥ—he; gacchati—goes.

 The soul of that self-retrained and virtuous person who recites these eight verses glorifying Lord Jagannātha becomes cleansed of all sins, and duly proceeds to Lord Vishnu's abode.
Song 25: Names of Lord Chaitanya
25. Names of Lord Chaitanya
From Kalyāṇa Kalpataru by 
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
Text 1
kali-kukkur-kadan jadi cāo (he)
kali-yuga-pāvana,  kali-bhoya-nāśana,
śrī-śacī-nandana gāo (he)

 If you want to be rid of the menace of the dog-like personality of Kali, then just sing the glories of the beautiful Son of Mother Śacī (Śacī-nandana). He is the savior of the Kali-yuga (Kali-yuga-pāvana), and He is the destroyer of all fear caused by the age of quarrel (Kali-bhoya-nāśana).
Text 2
gadādhar-mādana,  nitā'yer prāṇa-dhana,
advaiter prapūjita gorā
nimāñi biśvambhar,  śrīnivās-īśwar,
bhakta-samūha-cita-corā

 Lord Caitanya maddens Gadādhara Paṇḍita with His love (Gadādhar-mādana), and He is the treasure of the life of Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu (Nitā'yer Prāṇa-dhana). The fair-complexioned Lord (Gorā) is the most worshipable object of Śrī Advaita Ācārya (Advaiter Prapūjita). He is affectionately called Nimāi by His mother, due to being born under a neem tree, and He has been named Viśvambhar (the holder of the universe) by His grandfather. He is the only Lord of Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita (Śrīnivās-īśwar), and He steals the hearts of all the assembled devotees (Bhakta-samūha-cita-corā).
Text 3
nadīyā-śaśadhar,  māyāpur-īśwar,
nāma-pravartana sura
gṛhi-jana-śikṣaka,  nyāsi-kula-nāyaka,
mādhava rādhā-bhāva-pūra

 Lord Caitanya is the moon over the town of Nadīyā (Nadīyā-śaśadhar), the Lord of Śrī Māyāpur-dhām (Māyāpur-īśwar), and the propagator of His own holy name (Nāma-pravartana). He is saintly in behavior (Sura), and is the instructor of householders (Gṛhi-jana-śikṣaka). He is the hero of those who are in the renounced order (Nyāsi-kula-nāyaka). He is the husband of the Goddess of Fortune (Mādhava), and He is overflowing with the ecstatic sentiments of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī (Rādhā-bhāva-pūra).
Text 4
sārvabhauma-śodhana,  gajapati-tāraṇa,
rāmānanda-poṣaṇa vīra
rūpānanda-vardhana,  sanātana-pālana,
haridās-modana dhīra

 Lord Caitanya is the corrector and purifier of Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya (Sārvabhauma-śodhana), the deliverer of King Pratāpa Rudra (Gajapati-tāraṇa), and the source of nourishment for Śrīla Rāmānanda Rāya (Rāmānanda-pośaṇa). He is a great hero (Vīra). He increases the ecstasy of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī (Rūpānanda-vardhana), He maintains and protects Śrīla Sanātana Goswāmī (Sanātana-pālana), and He gladdens Haridāsa Ṭhākura (Haridās-modana). He is very grave (Dhīra).
Text 5
braja-rasa bhāvana,  duṣṭa-mata-śātana,
kapaṭī vighātana kāma
śuddha-bhakta-pālana,  śuṣka-jñāna tāḍana,
chala-bhakti-duṣaṇa rāma

 Lord Caitanya meditates on the transcendental mellows of Vraja-dhāma (Braja-rasa-bhāvana). He is the destroyer of all wicked mentalities (Duṣṭa-mata-śātana), and He crushes the cheating propensity of pretending devotees (Kapaṭī Vighātana). He is as beautiful as Cupid (Kāma). He maintains and protects His pure devotees (Śuddha-bhakta-pālana), and He condemns dry, speculative knowledge (Śuṣka-jñāna tāḍana). He smashes pretentious and hypocritical devotion (Chala-bhakti-dūṣaṇa), and He is the reservoir of pleasure (Rāma).
Song 26: Keno Hare Kṛṣṇa Nām
"Oh Why While Chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa...?"
26. Keno Hare Kṛṣṇa Nām
"Oh Why While Chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa...?"
By Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
(refrain) keno hare kṛṣṇa nām hari bole
mano prāṇ kāṅde nā

keno—why?; hare kṛṣṇa nām—the names Hare Kṛṣṇa; hari bole—chanting the name of Lord Hari; mano prāṇ—my inner heart; kāṅde nā—does not weep.

(refrain) Oh, why does my heart not weep from chanting the holy names Hare Kṛṣṇa?
Text 1
pakhi nā jāni kon aparādhe
mukhe hare kṛṣṇa nām bolo nā

pakhi—the bird of my heart; nā jāni—I do not know; kon aparādhe—by some offense; mukhe—with the mouth; hare kṛṣṇa nām—the names of Hare Kṛṣṇa; bolo nā—does not chant.

 The bird of my heart does not know what past sinful activities it has committed to cause this inability to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa properly.
Text 2
baner pakhi re dhare rāklām hṛdoy mandire
madhu mākhā ei hari nām
pakhi re śikhaile śikhe

baner pakhi—a bird of the forest; re—O!; dhare—holding; rāklām—I have kept; hṛdoy mandire—in the temple of my heart; madhu mākhā—smeared with honey; ei—this; hari nām—name of Lord Hari; pakhi re—O bird!; śikhaile—upon being instructed; śikhe—learns.

 O forest bird! I have kept something for you very carefully within the cottage of my heart—the holy name of Lord Hari, which is overflowing with pure sweet honey. O bird, you could learn the chanting of this name if you were taught.
Text 3
pakhi sakal nām bolte paro
keno hare kṛṣṇa nām bolo na
keno hare kṛṣṇa nām hari bole mano prāṇ kāṅde nā

pakhi—a bird; sakal nām—all names; bolte paro—is able to speak; keno—why?; hare kṛṣṇa nām—the names of Hare Kṛṣṇa; bolo na—does not chant.

 A bird is easily able to speak all names, why then does this bird of my heart refuse to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa? Oh, why does my heart not weep from chanting the holy names Hare Kṛṣṇa?
Text 4
chalo pakhi rūper deśe jāi
je deśete maner mānuś āsā jāoyā nāi

chalo—please go; pakhi—O bird!; rūper deśe—to the land of true beauty; jāi—I go; je deśete—at which place; maner mānuś—the mentally imagined man; āsā jāoyā—comes and goes (as in repeated birth and death); nāi—not.

 O bird! Come, let us go to the spiritual world, the land of true and everlasting beauty. It is the place where the imaginary man of my mind will never again come and go on the revolving cycle of birth and death.
Text 5
pakhi re tor maraṇa kālete
carabi vāser dolāte
ore cār janete kandhe kore
loye jābe smaśan ghāṭete

pakhi re—O bird!; tor—your; maraṇa kālete—at the time of death; carabi—you will be placed; vāter dolāte—on the funeral stretcher made from slips of bamboo; ore—oh!; cār janete—by four persons; kandhe kore—placing on the shoulder; loye—carrying; jābe—will proceed; smāśan ghāṭete—to the cremation landing.

 O bird! At the time of death, your body will simply be placed upon a funeral stretcher, lifted on the shoulders of four persons and carried to the cremation grounds.
Text 6
ore o tor mukhe āguna jihve tule
ki korobi tāi bolo nā

ore o—alas!; tor—your; mukhe—in the mouth; āguna—fire; jihve—the tongue; tule—obliterate; ki korobi—what can you do?; tāi—at that; bolo nā—you do not speak.

Text 6 Alas! The cremation fire will then enter your mouth and totally consume your tongue. There will be nothing you can do to save yourself, for at that time it is too late-you will be unable to speak any more.
Song 27: Kṛṣṇa Deva Bhavantam Vande
"I Praise You Lord Kṛṣṇa"
27. Kṛṣṇa Deva Bhavantam Vande
"I Praise You Lord Kṛṣṇa"
From Stava-Mālā by 
Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī
(refrain) kṛṣṇa deva bhavantaṁ vande
man-mānasa-madhukaram arpaya nija-pada-paṅkaja-makarande

kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa!; deva—O Lord!; bhavantam—to You; vande—I praise; mat—my; mānasa-madhukaram—bee like mind; arpaya—please offer; nija—Your own; pada-paṅkaja—of Your lotus feet; makarande—in the nectar.

(refrain) O Lord Kṛṣṇa! I offer my obeisances unto You. Please fix my bee-like mind in the nectar of Your lotus feet.
Text 1
yad api samādhiṣu vidhir api paśyati
na tava nakhāgra-marīcim
idam icchāmi niśamya tavācyuta
tad api kṛpādbhuta-vīcim

yadi api—although; samādhiṣu—in his trance; vidhiḥ api—even Lord Brahmā; paśyati—sees; na—not; tava—Your; nakha-agra—tips of the toenails; marīcim—rays of effulgence; idam—this very thing; icchāmi—I desire; niśamya—I have heard; tava—Your; acyuta—O Acyuta!; tat api—still; kṛpā-adbhuta-vīcim—wonderful waves of Your mercy.

 O Acyuta! Although the great Lord Brahmā, in his trance of samādhi, is unable to see even a particle of the effulgence emanating from the tips of the nails of Your lotus feet, still I desire this vision, for I have heard of the wonderful waves of Your mercy.
Text 2
bhaktir udañcati yady api mādhava
na tvayi mama tila-mātrī
parameśvaratā tad api tavādhika
durghaṭa-ghaṭana-vidhātrī

 O Mādhava! Although my devotion for You does not come forth even a tiny bit, because You are the Supreme Lord above all, You are the accomplisher of the impossible.
Text 3
ayam avilolatayādya sanātana
kalitādbhuta-rasa-bhāram
nivasatu nityam ihāmṛta nindati
vindan madhurima-sāram

ayam—this; avilolatayā—with fixed steadiness; adya—today; sanātana—O eternal Lord!; kalita—experiencing; adbhuta-rasa—wonderful mellows; bhāram—full; nivasatu—may it reside; nityam—eternally; iha—here; amṛta—nectar of the gods; nindati—defeats; vindan—enjoying; madhurima-sāram—the essence of sweetness.

 O Sanātana! Your lotus feet surpass even the nectar of the gods. Finding in this lotus flower of Your feet the essence of sweetness which is endowed with truly wonderful mellows, I pray that today the bee of my mind may eternally reside there.
Song 28: Kṛṣṇa Jinakā
28. Kṛṣṇa Jinakā
Traditional Hindi song
Text 1
kṛṣṇa jinakā nāma hai, gokula jinakā dhāma hai
aise śrī bhagavāna ko (mere) bārambāra praṇām hai

kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; jinakā nāma—whose name; hai—is; gokula—Gokula; jinakā dhāma—whose abode; hai—is; aise—such; śrī bhagavāna—Supreme Personality of Godhead; ko—unto; mere—my; bārambāra—again and again; praṇāma—obeisance; hai—is.

 He whose name is Kṛṣṇa, and whose abode is Gokula-unto such a Supreme Personality of Godhead, I offer my most humble obeisances again and again.
Text 2
yaśodā jinakī maiyā hai, nandajī bapaiyā hai
aise śrī gopāla ko (mere) bārambāra praṇām hai

yaśodā—Yaśodā; jinakī maiyā—whose mother; hai—is; nandajī bapaiyā—whose father is Nandajī; hai—is; aise—such; śrī gopāla—a cowherd boy; ko—unto; mere—my; bārambāra—again and again; praṇāma—obeisance; hai—is.

 He whose mother is Yaśodā, and whose father is Nandajī-unto such a cowherd boy named Gopāla, I offer my most humble obeisances again and again.
Text 3
rādhā jinaki jāyā hai, adbhuta jinakī māyā hai
aise śrī ghana-śyāma ko (mere) bārambāra praṇām hai

rādhā—Rādhā; jinaki jāyā—whose Beloved; hai—is; adbhuta—wonderful; jinakī māyā—whose illusory energy; hai—is; aise—such; śrī ghana-śyāma—He of raincloud complexion; ko—unto; mere—my; bārambāra—again and again; praṇāma—obeisance; hai—is.

 He whose Beloved is Rādhā, and whose illusory energy is very amazing-unto Him whose splendrous complexion is the color of a fresh raincloud, I offer my most humble obeisances again and again.
Text 4
lūṭa lūṭa dadhi mākhana khāyo, gvāla-bāla saṅga dhenu carāyo,
aise līlā-dhāma ko (mere) bārambāra praṇām hai

lūṭa lūṭa—sneaks and steals; dadhi—yogurt; mākhana—butter; khāyo—He eats; gvāla-bāla—cowherd boys; saṅga—along with; dhenu carāyo—tends the cows; aise—such; līlā-dhāma—reservoir of sportive pastimes; ko—unto; mere—my; bārambāra—again and again; praṇāma—obeisance; hai—is.

 He who sneaks around to steal yogurt and butter, then hides to eat it, and who tends the cows in the company of His cowherd boyfriends-unto Him who is the reservoir of playful pastimes, I offer my most humble obeisances again and again.
Text 5
drupada-sutā ko lāja bacāyo, grāha se gaja ko phanda chuḍāyo
aise kṛpā-dhāma ko (mere) bārambāra praṇām hai

drupada-sutā—the daughter of Drupada (Draupadī); ko—to; lāja bacāyo—prevented the dishonoring; grāha se—from the crocodile; gaja ko—to the elephant; phanda chuḍāyo—released the noose; aise—such; kṛpā-dhāma—the abode of compassion; ko—unto; mere—my; bārambāra—again and again; praṇāma—obeisance; hai—is.

 He who prevented the dishonoring of the daughter of Drupada, and who delivered the elephant Gajendra from the grasp of the alligator-unto Him who is the abode of all compassion, I offer my most humble obeisances again and again.
Text 6
kuru-pāṇḍava ko yuddha macāyo, arjuna ko upadeśa sunāyo,
aise dīnā-nātha ko (mere) bārambāra praṇām hai

kuru-pāṇḍava—the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas; ko—to; yuddha—the fight; macāyo—causing; arjuna ko—unto Arjuna; upadeśa—instructions; sunāyo—causes to hear; aise—such; dīnā-nātha—the Lord of the helpless fallen souls.

 He who caused the great war between the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas, and who spoke divine instructions to Arjuna on the battlefield-unto Him who is the Lord of all the helpless fallen souls, I offer my most humble obeisances again and again.
bhaja re! bhaja govinda gopāla hare
rādhe govinda, rādhe govinda, rādhe govinda
rādhe gopāla, rādhe gopāla, rādhe gopāla
aise śrī bhagavāna ko (mere) bārambāra praṇām hai iv*
Song 29: Kṛṣṇa Prema Mayī Rādhā
Yugalāṣṭakam
Eight Verses Glorifying the Divine Couple
29. Kṛṣṇa Prema Mayī Rādhā
Yugalāṣṭakam
Eight Verses Glorifying the Divine Couple
By Śrīla Jīva Goswāmī
Text 1
kṛṣṇa-prema-mayī rādhā
rādhā prema-mayo hariḥ
jīvane nidhane nityaṁ
rādhā-kṛṣṇau gatir mama

kṛṣṇa-prema-mayī—made of pure love for Kṛṣṇa; rādhā—Rādhā; rādhā-prema-mayaḥ—made of pure love for Rādhā; hariḥ—Hari; jīvane nidhane—in life or in death; nityam—perpetually; rādhā-kṛṣṇau—the pair; gatiḥ mama—my shelter.

 Rādhā is made of pure love for Kṛṣṇa and Hari is made of pure love for Rādhā-In life or in death, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are my eternal shelter.
Text 2
kṛṣṇasya dravinaṁ rādhā
rādhāyā dravinaṁ hariḥ
jīvane nidhane nityaṁ
rādhā-kṛṣṇau gatir mama

kṛṣṇasya dravinam—the treasure of Kṛṣṇa; rādhā—Rādhā; rādhāyā dravinam—the treasure of Rādhā; hariḥ—Hari; jīvane nidhane—in life or in death; nityam—perpetually; rādhā-kṛṣṇau—the pair; gatiḥ mama—my shelter.

 Rādha is the treasure of Kṛṣṇa and Hari is the treasure of Rādhā-In life or in death, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are my eternal shelter.
Text 3
kṛṣṇa-prāṇa-mayī rādhā
rādhā-prāṇa-mayo hariḥ
jīvane nidhane nityaṁ
rādhā-kṛṣṇau gatir mama

kṛṣṇa-prāṇa-mayī—pervades the life force of Kṛṣṇa; rādhā—Rādhā; rādhā-prāṇa-mayaḥ—pervades the life force of Rādhā; hariḥ—Hari; jīvane nidhane—in life or in death; nityam—perpetually; rādhā-kṛṣṇau—the pair; gatiḥ mama—my shelter.

 Rādhā pervades the life-force of Kṛṣṇa and Hari pervades the life-force of Rādhā-In life or in death, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are my eternal shelter.
Text 4
kṛṣṇa-drava-mayī rādhā
rādhā-drava-mayo hariḥ
jīvane nidhane nityaṁ
rādhā-kṛṣṇau gatir mama

kṛṣṇa-drava-mayī—totally melted with Kṛṣṇa; rādhā—Rādhā; rādhā-drava-mayaḥ—totally melted with Rādhā; hariḥ—Hari; jīvane nidhane—in life or in death; nityam—perpetually; rādhā-kṛṣṇau—the pair; gatiḥ mama—my shelter.

 Rādhā is totally melted with Kṛṣṇa and Hari is totally melted with Rādhā-In life or in death, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are my eternal shelter.
Text 5
kṛṣṇa-gehe sthitā rādhā
rādhā-gehe sthito hariḥ
jīvane nidhane nityaṁ
rādhā-kṛṣṇau gatir mama

kṛṣṇa-gehe sthitā—situated in the body of Kṛṣṇa; rādhā—Rādhā; rādhā-gehe sthitaḥ—situated in the body of Rādhā; hariḥ—Hari; jīvane nidhane—in life or in death; nityam—perpetually; rādhā-kṛṣṇau—the pair; gatiḥ mama—my shelter.

 Rādhā is situated in the body of Kṛṣṇa and Hari is situated in the body of Rādhā-In life or in death, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are my eternal shelter.
Text 6
kṛṣṇa-citta-sthitā rādhā
rādhā-citta-sthito hariḥ
jīvane nidhane nityaṁ
rādhā-kṛṣṇau gatir mama

kṛṣṇa-citta-sthitā—fixed in the heart of Kṛṣṇa; rādhā—Rādhā; rādhā-citta-sthitaḥ—fixed in the heart of Rādhā; hariḥ—Hari; jīvane nidhane—in life or in death; nityam—perpetually; rādhā-kṛṣṇau—the pair; gatiḥ mama—my shelter.

 Rādhā is fixed in the heart of Kṛṣṇa and Hari is fixed in the heart of Rādhā-In life or in death, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are my eternal shelter.
Text 7
nīlāmbara-dharā rādhā
pītāmbara-dharo hariḥ
jīvane nidhane nityaṁ
rādhā-kṛṣṇau gatir mama

nīla-ambara-dharā—wears cloth of blue color; rādhā—Rādhā; pīta-ambara-dharaḥ—wears cloth of yellow; hariḥ—Hari; jīvane nidhane—in life or in death; nityam—perpetually; rādhā-kṛṣṇau—the pair; gatiḥ mama—my shelter.

 Rādhā wears cloth of blue color and Hari wears cloth of yellow-In life or in death, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are my eternal shelter.
Text 8
vṛndāvaneśvarī rādhā
kṛṣṇo vṛndāvaneśvaraḥ
jīvane nidhane nityaṁ
rādhā-kṛṣṇau gatir mama

vṛndāvana-īśvarī—the Mistress of Vṛndāvana; rādhā—Rādhā; kṛṣṇaḥ—Hari; vṛndāvana-īśvaraḥ—the Master of Vṛndāvana; jīvane nidhane—in life or in death; nityam—perpetually; rādhā-kṛṣṇau—the pair; gatiḥ mama—my shelter.

 Rādhā is the Mistress of Vṛndāvana and Kṛṣṇa is the Master of Vṛndāvana-In life or in death, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are my eternal shelter.
Song 30: Kuṅkumākta Kāñcanābja
Śrī Rādhikāṣṭaka
30. Kuṅkumākta Kāñcanābja
Śrī Rādhikāṣṭaka
From Govinda Līlāmṛta by 
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Goswāmī
   [Midday Pastimes, chapter 17.59-67, as 
Chanted by the female parrot śārī]
Please see accompanying song 
Ambudāñjanendra-Nīla
Text 1
kuṅkumākta-kāñcanābja-garva-hāri-gaurabhā
pītanāñcitābja-gandha-kīrti-nindi-saurabhā
ballaveśa-sūnu-sarva-vāñcitārtha-sādhikā
mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā

kuṅkuma—with red scented powder; akta—covered; kāñcana—golden; abja—lotus flower; garva—pride; hāri—removing; gaura—golden; bhā—She who is splendrous; pītana—with saffron; añcita—marked; abja—of the lotus flower; gandha—sweet aroma; kīrti—fame; nindi—belittling; saurabhā—She who has the pleasant fragrance; ballava—of the cowherd men; īśa—of the king (Nanda); sūnu—of the Son (Kṛṣṇa); sarva—all; vāñcita—that which is desired; artha—for the purpose; sādhikā—She who fulfills; mahyam—to me; ātma—Her own; pāda-padma—of the lotus feet; dāsya-dā—the giver of service; astu—may become; rādhikā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

 Her splendrous golden complexion steals the pride of a golden lotus flower anointed with a tinge of red kuṅkum powder. Her sweet fragrance mocks the fame of the aroma of a lotus flower sprinkled with saffron powder. She is fully qualified to fulfill all the desires of the son of the king of cowherd men. May Śrī Rādhikā bestow upon me the service of Her own lotus feet.
Text 2
kauravinda-kānti-nindi-citra-paṭṭa-śāṭikā
kṛṣṇa-matta-bhṛṅga-keli-phulla-puṣpa-vāṭikā
kṛṣṇa-nitya-saṅgamārtha-padma-bandhu-rādhikā
mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā

kauravinda—of coral; kānti—the splendor; nindi—chastising; citra—amazing and colorful; paṭṭa-śāṭikā—She who wears silken garments; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; matta—maddened; bhṛṅga—bumblebee; keli—amorous pastimes; phulla—blossomed; puṣpa—flower; vāṭikā—She who is a garden; kṛṣṇa—with Kṛṣṇa; nitya—daily; saṅgama—union; artha—for the purpose; padma-bandhu—the friend of the lotus flowers (the sun god); rādhikā—She who is the worshipper; mahyam—to me; ātma—Her own; pāda-padma—of the lotus feet; dāsya-dā—the giver of service; astu—may become; rādhikā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

 Her amazing and colorful silken garments make the splendor of coral feel ashamed. She is a garden of blossoming flowers where the maddened bumble-bee named Kṛṣṇa performs amorous pastimes. She worships the Sun-god daily in order to attain the continual association of Her beloved Kṛṣṇa. May Śrī Rādhikā bestow upon me the service of Her own lotus feet.
Text 3
saukumārya-sṛṣṭa-pallavāli-kīrti-nigrahā
candra-candanotpalendu-sevya-śīta-vigrahā
svābhimarśa-ballavīśa-kāma-tāpa-bādhikā
mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā

saukumārya—with youthful delicacy; sṛṣṭa—provided; pallava—of newly blossoming leaves; āli—of the multitude; kīrti—the fame; nigrahā—She who negates; candra—the moon; candana—sandalwood paste; utpala—lotus flowers; indu—and camphor; sevya—worshipable by; śīta—cool; vigrahā—She whose form; sva—Her own; abhimarśa—by the touch; ballavī—of the cowherd girls; īśa-of the Lord (Kṛṣṇa); kāma—of the desires; tāpa—the heat and distress; bādhikā—She who removes; mahyam—to me; ātma—Her own; pāda-padma—of the lotus feet; dāsya-dā—the giver of service; astu—may become; rādhikā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

 Her charming youthful delicacy negates the fame of freshly-sprouted leaves. Her refreshing form is worthy of being served by the cooling moon, sandalwood paste, lotus flowers, and camphor. When She touches the master of the gopīs, She dispels the burning heat of His lusty desires. May Śrī Rādhikā bestow upon me the service of Her own lotus feet.
Text 4
viśva-vandya-yauvatābhivanditāpi yā ramā
rūpa-navya-yauvanādi-saṁpadā na yat-samā
śīla-hārda-līlayā ca sā yato 'sti nādhikā
mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā

viśva—by the universe; vandya—adored; yauvatā—by the multitude of young gopīs; abhivanditā—She who is reverentially worshipped; api—even; yā—She who; ramā—of the goddess of fortune; rūpa—beauty; navya-yauvana—praiseworthy youthfulness; ādi—and so forth; sampadā—with the opulences; na—not; yat—to whom; samā—She who is equal; śīla—of nature; hārda—of pure love; līlayā—by the pastimes; ca—and; sā—She; yataḥ—from whom; asti—there is; na—not; adhikā—anyone greater; mahyam—to me; ātma—Her own; pāda-padma—of the lotus feet; dāsya-dā—the giver of service; astu—may become; rādhikā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

 Although the goddess of fortune Lakṣmī Devī is adored by other youthful goddesses, who are themselves glorified throughout all the universe, still she is nowhere near Śrī Rādhikā in the matter of beauty, praiseworthy youthfulness, or other divine feminine opulences. There is no one in the material or spiritual worlds superior to Rādhikā in the expression of naturally loving pastimes. May Śrī Rādhikā bestow upon me the service of Her own lotus feet.
Text 5
rāsa-lāsya-gīta-narma-sat-kalāli-paṇḍitā
prema-ramya-rūpa-veśa-sad-guṇāli-maṇḍitā
viśva-navya-gopa-yoṣid-ālito 'pi yādhikā
mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā

rāsa-lāsya—in the rāsa dance; gīta—singing; narma—joking; sat—transcendental; kalā—in the arts; āli—the multitude; paṇḍitā—She who is very learned; prema—love; ramya—beautiful; rūpa—form; veśa—dress and ornaments; sat—transcendental; guṇa—of qualities; āli—by the multitudes; maṇḍitā—She who is decorated; viśva—by the universe; navya—to be praised; gopa-yoṣit—of cowherd women; ālitaḥ—than the multitude; api—even; yā—who; adhikā—She who is the best; mahyam—to me; ātma—Her own; pāda-padma—of the lotus feet; dāsya-dā—the giver of service; astu—may become; rādhikā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

 She is very learned in many transcendental arts, such as performing in the rāsa dance, singing, and joking. She is decorated with many divine qualities, such as loving nature, exquisite beauty, and wonderful garments and ornaments. Even among the cowherd damsels of Vraja, who are praised by the entire universe, She is the best in every way. May Śrī Rādhikā bestow upon me the service of Her own lotus feet.
Text 6
nitya-navya-rūpa-keli-kṛṣṇa-bhāva-sampadā
kṛṣṇa-rāga-bandha-gopa-yauvateṣu kampadā
kṛṣṇa-rūpa-veśa-keli-lagna-sat-samādhikā
mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā

nitya—eternal; navya—youthful; rūpa—beauty; keli—pastimes; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; bhāva—love; sampadā—She who is endowed with the opulences; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; rāga—by love; bandha—with bonds; gopa-yauvateṣu—to the young gopīs; kampadā—She who causes trembling; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; rūpa—beautiful form; veśa—garments and ornaments; keli—pastimes; lagna—attached; sat—transcendental; samādhikā—She who is engaged in meditation; mahyam—to me; ātma—Her own; pāda-padma—of the lotus feet; dāsya-dā—the giver of service; astu—may become; rādhikā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

 She possesses the opulences of eternal youthful beauty, eternal pastimes, and eternal love for Kṛṣṇa. Her ecstatic feelings of love for Kṛṣṇa cause the gopīs, who are also in love with Kṛṣṇa, to tremble. She is always attached to meditating on Śrī Kṛṣṇa's beautiful form, ornaments, garments, and pastimes. May Śrī Rādhikā bestow upon me the service of Her own lotus feet.
Text 7
sveda-kampa-kaṇṭakāśru-gadgadādi-sañcitā
marṣa-harṣa-vāmatādi-bhāva-bhuṣaṇāñcitā
kṛṣṇa-netra-toṣi-ratna-maṇḍanāli-dādhikā
mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā

sveda—perspiring; kampa—trembling; kaṇṭaka—standing up of hairs on the body; aśru—tears; gadgada—choking up of the voice; ādi—and other symptoms of ecstasy; sañcitā—She who has accumulated; amarṣa—impatience; harṣa—joy; vāmatā—crookedness; ādi—and others; bhāva—of ecstatic moods; bhuṣaṇā—with the ornaments; añcitā—She who is marked; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; netra—the eyes; toṣi—delighting; ratna—jewels; maṇḍana—ornaments; āli—with the multitudes; dādhikā—She who wears; mahyam—to me; ātma—Her own; pāda-padma—of the lotus feet; dāsya-dā—the giver of service; astu—may become; rādhikā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

 She is graced with the eight ecstatic symptoms (sāttvika-bhāva), such as trembling, perspiring, standing up of bodily hairs, tears, faltering of the voice, and so forth. She is adorned with different ecstatic emotional ornaments, such as impatience, joy, contrariness, and so forth. She is decorated with beautiful jewels that give total delight to the eyes of Kṛṣṇa. May Śrī Rādhikā bestow upon me the service of Her own lotus feet.
Text 8
yā kṣaṇārdha-kṛṣṇa-viprayoga-santatoditā-
neka-dainya-cāpalādi-bhāva-vṛnda-moditā
yatna-labdha-kṛṣṇa-saṅga-nirgatākhilādhikā
mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā

yā—She who; kṣaṇa-ardha—half a moment; kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; viprayoga—by separation; santata—extended; udita—arisen; aneka—many; dainya—of suffering; cāpala—restlessness; ādi—and more; bhāva—ecstasies; vṛnda—multitudes; moditā—She who is excited; yatna—with great endeavor; labdha—attained; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; saṅga—association; nirgata—gone; akhila—all; ādhikā—mental anguish; mahyam—to me; ātma—Her own; pāda-padma—of the lotus feet; dāsya-dā—the giver of service; astu—may become; rādhikā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

 If She is apart from Kṛṣṇa for even half a moment, She becomes stricken with wretched suffering, restlessness, and a multitude of other ecstatic symptoms of separation. When She regains the association of Kṛṣṇa after some effort, then all Her anguish immediately vanishes. May Śrī Rādhikā bestow upon me the service of Her own lotus feet.
Text 9
aṣṭakena yas tv anena nauti kṛṣṇa-vallabhāṁ
darśane 'pi śailajādi-yoṣidāli-durlabhām
kṛṣṇa-saṅga-nanditātma-dāsya-sīdhu-bhājanaṁ
taṁ karoti nanditāli-sañcayāśu sā janam

aṣṭakena—by these eight verses; yaḥ—whoever; tu—indeed; anena—with these; nauti—glorifies; kṛṣṇa-vallabhām—She who is dear to Kṛṣṇa; darśane—in sight; api—even; śaila-jā—She who was born from the mountain (Pārvatī); ādi—and others; yoṣit—of women; āli—for multitudes; durlabhām—very difficult to attain; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; saṅga—by the association; nandita—delighted; ātma—Her own; dāsya—service; sīdhu—of the nectar; bhājanam—the recipient; tam—to him; karoti—She makes; nandita—jubilant; āli—gopī friends; sañcayā—in the assembly; āśu—quickly; sā—She; janam—that person; mahyam—to me; ātma—Her own; pāda-padma—of the lotus feet; dāsya-dā—the giver of service; astu—may become; rādhikā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

 It is very difficult for Pārvatī and other exalted goddesses to attain even a glimpse of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who is dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa. But if someone glorifies Her by reciting these eight verses, then She who is delighted by Kṛṣṇa's continuous association will grant the sweet nectar of Her personal service to that person, who thereby enters the assembly of Her similarly delighted girlfriends.
Song 31: Kusumita Vṛndāvane Nācato Śikhi Gaṇe
"Peacocks Dance in Flowering Vṛndāvana"
31. Kusumita Vṛndāvane Nācato Śikhi Gaṇe
"Peacocks Dance in Flowering Vṛndāvana"
From Prārthanā by 
Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura
Text 1
kusumita vṛndāvane,  nācato śikhi-gaṇe,
pika-kula bhramara-jhaṅkāre
priya sahacarī saṅge,  gāiyā jāibo raṅge,
manohara nikuñja-kuṭīre

kusumita—blossoming; vṛndāvane—in Vṛndāvana; nācato—dances; śikhi-gaṇe—groups of peacocks; pika-kula—flocks of cuckoos; bhramara-jhaṅkāre—resounding with the buzzing of bees; priya sahacarī—dear maidservants; saṅge—in the company; gāiyā—singing; jāibo—I will proceed; raṅge—playfully; manohara—enchanting; nikuñja-kuṭīre—to the grove-cottage.

 In the freshly blossoming forest of Vṛndāvana, peacocks are dancing, cuckoos are cooing, and honeybees are buzzing. In the company of my dear fellow maidservants, I will proceed to the charming bower-cottage while singing and walking along playfully.
Text 2
hari hari! manoratha phalibe āmāre
duṅhuka manthara gati,  kautuke herabo ati,
aṅga bhori pulaka aṅkure

hari hari!—oh!; manoratha—inner desire; phalibe—will be fulfilled; āmāre—to me; duṅhuka—both; manthara gati—slow mode of walking; kautuke—in curiosity; herabo—I will behold; ati—very much; aṅge—on the limbs; bhori—full; pulaka aṅkure—thrill bumps like buds.

 Oh! My most cherished desires will be fulfilled! With great curiosity, I will behold the Divine Couple as They arrive with a very slow and majestic gait, Their limbs full of thrill-bumps that look just like flowerbuds.
Text 3
caudige sakhīr mājhe,  rādhikār īṅgite,
ciruṇī loiyā kare kori
kuṭila kuntala saba,  bithāriyā āṅcaḍibo,
banāibo vicitra kabarī

caudige—in four directions; sakhīr madhye—between the girlfriends; rādhikār īṅgite—on the gesture of Rādhikā; ciraṇi loiyā—taking a comb; kare—in the hand; kori—doing; kuṭila kuntala—curling locks; saba—all; bithāriyā—combing out; āṅcaḍibo—I will arrange; banāibo—I will tie together; vicitra kabarī—a variegated hair style.

 Rādhikā is surrounded by Her confidential girlfriends, and upon receiving the hint of Her glancing eyes, I will take up a comb in my hand and come near. Combing out Her long and curling locks, I will tie them up in a fascinating and variegated hairstyle.
Text 4
mṛgamada, malayaja,  saba aṅge lepabo,
parāibo manohara hār
candana kuṅkume,  tilaka basāibo,
herabo mukha-sudhākar

mṛgamada—musk; malayaja—sandalwood; saba aṅge—on all the limbs; lepabo—I will smear; parāibo—I will place; manohara hār—an enchanting necklace; candana kuṅkume—made of sandalwood and red powder; tilaka basāibo—I will apply tilaka; herabo—I will behold; mukha—the face; sudhākar—the nectar producing moon.

 I will anoint all Her limbs with musk and sandalwood, and fit enchanting necklaces in place. I will paint tilak designs on Her forehead with sandalwood paste mixed with kuṅkum powder, and then gaze upon Her nectar-bestowing moonlike face.
Text 5
nīla paṭṭāmbara,  jatane parāibo,
pāye dibo ratana mañjīre
bhṛṅgārer jale rāṅgā,  caraṇa dhoyāibo,
muchabo āpana cikure

nīla—blue; paṭṭa-ambara—silken cloth; jatane—carefully; parāibo—I will put on; pāye—on the feet; dibo—I will put; ratana mañjīre—jewelled jingling anklets; bhṛṅgārer—from a pitcher; jale—with the water; rāṅgā caraṇa—reddish feet; dhoyāibo—I will wash; muchabo—I will dry; āpana cikure—with my own hair.

 With great care I will wrap Her form in fine blue silken cloth, and place jingling jewelled anklets upon Her feet. Pouring water from a pitcher, I will wash Her reddish feet, then dry them with my own hair.
Text 6
kusumaka nava-dale,  śeja bichāibo,
śayana karābo doṅhākāre
dhavala cāmara āni,  mṛdu mṛdu bījabo,
charamita duṅhuka śarīre

kusumaka—flowers; nava-dale—with new petals; śeja—a bed; bichāyabo—I will spread; śayana karābo—I will make lie down; doṅhākāre—the pair; dhavala cāmara—white whisk; āni—picking up; mṛdu mṛdu—soft and gentle; bījabo—I will fan; charamita—fatigued; duṅhuka śarīre—both their bodies.

 I will spread out fresh flower petals to make a nice couch, and I will lay the Couple down to rest. Taking a white chāmara whisk, I will fan Them with soft gentle breezes to relieve Their fatigued limbs.
Text 7
kanaka sampuṭa kori,  karpūra tāmbula bhari,
jogāibo doṅhār badane
adhara sudhā-rase,  tāmbula suvāse,
bhuñjabo adhika jatane

kanaka sampuṭa—golden jewel box; kori—taking; karpūra—camphor; tāmbula—betel; bhari—filled; jogāibo—I will place; doṅhār badane—in both their mouths; adhara sudhā-rase—with the nectar mellows of their lips; tāmbula suvāse—the nicely flavored betel; bhuñjabo—I will eat; adhika jatane—with extra care.

 Going to the jewelled storage box filled with betel nuts scented with camphor, I will take some out and lift them to Their mouths. Afterwards, receiving some of the nuts that are further scented with the nectar of Their lips, I will chew with greatly captivated attention.
Text 8
śrī-guru karuṇā-sindhu,  lokanāth dīna-bandhu,
mui dīne koro avadhān
rādhā-kṛṣṇa vṛndāvana,  priya-narma-sakhī-gaṇa,
narottam māge ei dān

śrī-guru—O my spiritual master!; karuṇā-sindhu—O ocean of mercy!; lokanātha—O Lokanātha Goswāmī!; dīna-bandhu—O friend of the fallen!; mui dīne—unto me, the humble soul; koro avadhān—please take consideration; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; vṛndāvana—the forest of Vṛndā; priya-narma-sakhī-gaṇa—the assembly of most confidential girlfriends; narottam—Narottama Dāsa; māge—begs; ei dān—this gift.

 O my beloved spiritual master! O ocean of mercy! O Lokanāth Goswāmī, friend of the poor! Please heed your fallen servant! Narottama Dāsa now begs for the gift of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Vṛndāvana, and the confidential priya-narma-sakhīs.
Song 32: Madhuram Madhurebhyo
Śrī Kevalāṣṭakam
32. Madhuram Madhurebhyo
Śrī Kevalāṣṭakam
An Anonymous Sanskrit Poem
Text 1
madhuraṁ madhurebhyo 'pi
maṅgalebhyo 'pi maṅgalam
pāvanaṁ pāvanebhyo 'pi
harer nāmaiva kevalam

madhuram—more sweet; madhurebhyaḥ—than other sweet things; api—even; maṅgalebhyaḥ—more auspicious; api—even; maṅgalam—than other auspicious things; pāvanam—the greatest purifier; pāvanebhyaḥ—than all purifying things; api—even; hareḥ nāma—the holy name of Hari; eva—indeed; kevalam—is the only thing.

 More sweet than all other sweet things, more auspicious than all other auspicious things, the greatest purifier of all purifying things—The holy name of Śrī Hari alone is everything.
Text 2
ābrahmā-stamba-paryantaṁ
sarvaṁ māyā-mayaṁ jagat
satyaṁ satyaṁ punaḥ satyaṁ
harer nāmaiva kevalam

ā-brahmā—from Lord Brahmā; stamba-paryantam—down to the clump of grass; sarvam—all; māyā-mayam—full of illusion; jagat—the entire universe; satyam satyam—it is true, it is true; punaḥ satyam—again I say it is true.

 The entire universe, from exalted Brahmā down to the lowly clump of grass, is a product of the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord. The only thing that is reality, reality, again I say reality—The holy name of Śrī Hari alone is everything.
Text 3
sa guruḥ sa pitā cāpi
sā mātā bandhavo 'pi saḥ
śikṣayec cet sadā smartuṁ
harer nāmaiva kevalam

sa—he; guruḥ—is the spiritual master; sa—he; pitā—is the father; ca api—and also; sā—he; mātā—is the mother; bandhavaḥ—is the friend; api—even; saḥ—he; śikṣayet—may give instructions; cet—if; sadā—always; smartum—to be remembered.

 That person is a true preceptor, or a true father, a true mother, and a true friend also only if they teach one to always remember—The holy name of Śrī Hari alone is everything.
Text 4
niḥśvāse nāhi viśvāsaḥ
kadā ruddho bhaviṣyati
kīrtanīya mato bālyād
harer nāmaiva kevalam

niḥśvāse—when the breath stops; nāhi—there is not; viśvāsaḥ—certainty; kadā—when; ruddhaḥ—stopped; bhaviṣyati—will be; kīrtanīya—to be chanted; mataḥ—the mentality; bālyāt—from childhood.

 There is no certainty when the last breath will come and put an abrupt halt to all one's material plans, therefore it is wise to always practice chanting from very childhood—The holy name of Śrī Hari alone is everything.
Text 5
hariḥ sadā vaset tatra
yatra bhāgavatā janāḥ
gāyanti bhakti-bhāvena
harer nāmaiva kevalam

hariḥ—Lord Hari; sadā—always; vaset—lives; tatra—there; yatra—where; bhāgavatā janāḥ—the exalted devotees; gāyanti—are singing; bhakti-bhāvena—with devotional feelings.

 Lord Hari eternally dwells in that place where truly exalted, spiritually advanced souls sing in the mood of pure devotion—The holy name of Śrī Hari alone is everything.
Text 6
aho duḥkhaṁ mahā-duḥkhaṁ
duḥkhād duḥkhataraṁ yataḥ
kācārthaṁ vismṛtam ratna-
harer nāmaiva kevalam

aho—oh!; duḥkham—what a sorrow; mahā-duḥkham—what a great sorrow; duḥkhāt—than any other misery; duḥkhataram—much more painful; yataḥ—where; kāca-artham—the value of mere glass fragments; vismṛtam—forgotten; ratna-hari-nāma—the jewel of the Lord's name.

 Aho! What a sorrow, what a great sorrow! More painful than any other misery in the world! Mistaking it as a mere piece of glass, the people have forgotten this jewel—The holy name of Śrī Hari alone is everything.
Text 7
dīyatāṁ dīyatāṁ karṇo
nīyatāṁ nīyatāṁ vacaḥ
gīyatāṁ gīyatāṁ nityaṁ
harer nāmaiva kevalam

dīyatām dīyatām—should be given (heard) again and again; karṇaḥ—to the ears; nīyatām nīyatām—should be uttered over and over; vacaḥ—with the words; gīyatām gīyatām—should be sung and sung; nityam—perpetually.

 It should be heard again and again with one's ears, It should be uttered over and over with one's voice, It should be perpetually sung and sung anew—The holy name of Śrī Hari alone is everything.
Text 8
tṛṇī-kṛtya jagat sarvaṁ
rājate sakalopari
cid-ānanda-mayaṁ śuddhaṁ
harer-nāmaiva kevalam

tṛṇī-kṛtya—as a blade of grass; jagat sarvam—the entire universe; rājate sakala-upari—reigns supreme over all; cit-ānanda-mayam—full of eternally conscious divine ecstasy; śuddham—supremely pure.

 It makes the entire universe seem insignificant as a blade of grass, it splendrously reigns supreme over all, it is full of eternally conscious divine ecstasy, it is supremely pure—The holy name of Śrī Hari alone is everything.
Song 33: Maine Raṭanā Lagāi Rādhā Nāmakī
"I Practice the Repetition of Rādhā's Name"
33. Maine Raṭanā Lagāi Rādhā Nāmakī
"I Practice the Repetition of Rādhā's Name"
Traditional Brijbhāshā song (Rasiyā) 
From the Vraja Mandala area
(refrain) maine raṭanā lagāi rādhā nāmakī
maine raṭanā lagāi rādhā nāmakī

maine—by me; raṭanā—to repeat; lagāi—engaged; rādhā nāmakī—of the name of Rādhā.

(refrain) I am ever engaged in repeating the sweet name of Rādhā.
Text 1
merī palakoṅ meṅ rādhā, merī alakoṅ meṅ rādhā
maine māṅga bharāi rādha nāmakī

merī—my; palakoṅ meṅ—in the blinking of an eye; rādhā—Rādhā is there; merī—my; alakoṅ meṅ—in the ringlets of hair; rādhā—Rādhā is there; maine—by me; māṅga—part of the hair; bharāi—filled up; rādhā nāmakī—with the name of Rādhā.

Rādhā is there in the blinking of my eyes. Rādhā is there in the curls of my hair. I have filled up the very part of my hair. Oh! With the sweet name of Rādhā.
Text 2
mere nainoṅ meṅ rādhā, mere bainoṅ meṅ rādhā
maine bainī guthāi rādha nāmakī

mere—my; nainoṅ meṅ—in the eyes; rādhā—Rādhā is there; mere—my; bainoṅ meṅ—in the words; rādhā—Rādhā is there; maine—by me; bainī—speech; guthāi—interwoven; rādhā nāmakī—with the name of Rādhā.

Rādhā is there within my vision. Rādhā is there within my speech. I interweave my every word. Oh! With the sweet name of Rādhā.
Text 3
merī dularī meṅ rādhā, merī cunarī meṅ rādhā
maine nathanī sajāi rādha nāmakī

merī—my; dularī meṅ—in the necklace of two strands; rādhā—Rādhā is there; merī—my; cunarī meṅ—in the colored cloths with white spots; rādhā—Rādhā is there; maine—by me; nathanī—nose ring; sajāi—adorned; rādhā nāmakī—with the name of Rādhā.

Rādhā is there in my necklace. Rādhā is there in my sārī. I have adorned my nose-ring. Oh! With the sweet name of Rādhā.
Text 4
mere calane meṅ rādhā, mere halane meṅ rādhā
kaṭi kiṅkinī bajāi rādha nāmakī

mere—my; calane meṅ—in the walking; rādhā—Rādhā is there; mere—my; halane meṅ—in the movements; rādhā—Rādhā is there; kaṭi kiṅkinī—waist bell ornament; bajāi—resounds; rādhā nāmakī—with the name of Rādhā.

Rādhā is there in my walking. Rādhā is there in my gestures. My sash of waist-bells resounds. Oh! With the sweet name of Rādhā.
Text 5
mere dāye bāye rādhā, mere āge pīche rādhā
roma roma rasa chāi rādha nāmakī

mere—my; dāye—on the right side; bāye—on the left side; rādhā—Rādhā is there; mere—my; āge—in the front; pīche—in the rear; rādhā—Rādhā is there; roma roma—each and every hair (every part of the body); rasa—mellows; chāi—reflected; rādhā nāmakī—with the name of Rādhā.

Rādhā is there on my right and on my left. Rādhā is there in front of me and behind. My every fiber reflects the rasa flowing. Oh! With the sweet name of Rādhā.
Text 6
mere aṅga aṅga rādhā, mere saṅga saṅga rādhā
gopāl baṁśī bajāi rādha nāmakī

mere—my; aṅga aṅga—limb to limb; rādhā—Rādhā is there; mere—my; saṅga saṅga—accompaniment; rādhā—Rādhā is there; gopāl—Lord Gopāl; baṁśī bajāi—plays on His flute; rādhā nāmakī—with the name of Rādhā.

Rādhā is there on my each and every limb. Rādhā is there accompanying me always. Lord Gopāl plays His flute which calls out. Oh! With the sweet name of Rādhā.

Song 34: Mama Mana Mandire
"In the Temple of My Heart"
34. Mama Mana Mandire
"In the Temple of My Heart"
By Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
(refrain) mama mana mandire raha niśi-din
kṛṣṇa murāri śrī kṛṣṇa murāri

mama mana—my mind; mandire—in the temple; raha—please stay; niśi-din—night and day; kṛṣṇa murāri śrī kṛṣṇa murāri.

(refrain) Please abide in the temple of my heart both day and night, O Kṛṣṇa Murāri, O Śrī Kṛṣṇa Murāri!
Text 1
bhakti prīti mālā candan
tumi nio he nio cita-nandan

bhakti—devotion; prīti—affection; mālā—flower garland; candan—sandalwood; tumi—You; nio—please accept; he—O!; nio—please accept; cita-nandan—O delighter of the heart!

 Devotion, love, flower garlands, and sandalwood-please accept, O please accept them, Delighter of the Heart!
Text 2
jīvana maraṇa tava pūjā nivedan
sundara he mana-hārī

jīvana maraṇa—in life or death; tava pūjā—Your worship; nivedan—prayers; sundara—O beautiful one!; he—O!; mana-hārī—O thief of the mind!

 In life or in death I worship You with these offerings, Beautiful One, O Enchanter of the Heart!
Text 3
eso nanda-kumār ār nanda-kumār
habe prema-pradīpe ārati tomār

eso—please come; nanda-kumār—O son of Nanda!; ār—furthermore; nanda-kumār—O son of Nanda!; habe—there will be; prema-pradīpe—with the lamp of love; āroti tomār—Your worship ceremony.

 Come, Son of Nanda, and then O Son of Nanda I will offer Your ārati ceremony with the lamplight of my love.
Text 4
nayana jamunā jhare anibār
tomāra virahe giridhārī

nayana—my eyes; jamunā—the river; jhare—flows; anibār—incessantly; tomār virahe—in Your separation; giridhārī—O lifter of the hill!

 The waters of the Yamunā river cascade incessantly from my eyes in Your separation, O Holder of Govardhana Hill!
Text 5
bandana gāne tava bajuk jīvana
kṛṣṇa murāri śrī kṛṣṇa murāri

bandana gāne—in songs of praise; tava—Your; bajuk jīvana—may I pass my life; kṛṣṇa murāri śrī kṛṣṇa murāri.

 May I pass my life absorbed only in songs of Your praise, O Krishna Murāri, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Murāri!
Song 35: Nava Gaura Varam
Śrī Śacī-Sutāṣṭakam
Eight Prayers Glorifying the Son of Śrīmatī Śacī Devī
35. Nava Gaura Varam
Śrī Śacī-Sutāṣṭakam
Eight Prayers Glorifying the 
Son of Śrīmatī Śacī Devī
By Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya
Text 1
nava gaura-varaṁ nava-puṣpa-śaraṁ
nava-bhāva-dharaṁ nava-lāsya-param
nava-hāsya-karaṁ nava-hema-varaṁ
praṇamāmi śacī-suta-gaura-varam

nava-gaura-varam—fresh excellent gold; nava-puṣpa-śaram—arrows of newly blossomed flowers; nava-bhāva-dharam—sustaining ever-new ecstatic moods; nava-lāsya-param—absorbed in novel dances; nava-hāsya-karam—causing new laughter; nava-hema-varam—beautiful new gold; praṇamāmi—I bow down; śacī-suta—the son of Mother Śacī; gaura-varam—excellent gold.

 His complexion is the hue of fresh cream tinged with kuṅkum. He is the ever-fresh Cupid who shoots arrows of newly blossoming flowers. He bears newer and newer moods of emotional ecstasies. He is fond of performing novel dances. He makes ever-new jokes that cause much laughter. His brilliant luster is like freshly cast gold.-I bow down to Gaura, the beautiful Son of Mother Śacī.
Text 2
nava-prema-yutaṁ nava-nīta-śucaṁ
nava-veśa-kṛtaṁ nava-prema-rasam
navadhā vilasat śubha-prema-mayaṁ
praṇamāmi śacī-suta-gaura-varam

nava-prema-yutam—endowed with ever fresh divine love; nava-nīta-śucam—luminous like fresh butter; nava-veśa-kṛtam—wears fresh attire in novel fashions; nava-prema-rasam—tastes ever new mellows of love for Kṛṣṇa; navadhā vilasat—whose shines in ninefold newer and newer ways [while executing the nine fold processes of devotionsal service]; śubha-prema-mayam—auspicious loving nature.

 He is endowed with ever-fresh love of Godhead. His radiant luster is like the color of fresh butter. His fresh attire is arranged in ever-new fashions. He relishes ever-new mellows of love for Kṛṣṇa. He shines in nine-fold new ways while executing the nine-fold processes of devotion. He is permeated with a most auspicious loving nature.-I bow down to Gaura, the beautiful Son of Mother Śacī.
Text 3
hari-bhakti-paraṁ hari-nāma-dharaṁ
kara-japya-karaṁ hari-nāma-param
nayane satataṁ praṇayāśru-dharaṁ
praṇamāmi śacī-suta-gaura-varam

hari-bhakti-param—absorbed in devotion to Śrī Hari; hari-nāma-dharam—who holds the names of Hari; kara-japya-karam—who uses His hands for chanting japa meditation; hari-nāma-param—who is addicted to the names of Hari; nayane—in His eyes; satatam—always; praṇaya-aśru—tears of love; dharam—bears.

 He is absorbed in devotion to Śrī Hari. He maintains the chanting of the names of Hari. While chanting He counts the holy names on the fingers of His hands. He is addicted to the name of Hari. He always has tears of love welling in His eyes.-I bow down to Gaura, the beautiful Son of Mother Śacī.
Text 4
satataṁ janatā-bhava-tāpa-haraṁ
paramārtha-parāyaṇa-loka-gatim
nava-leha-karaṁ jagat-tāpa-haraṁ
praṇamāmi śacī-suta-gaura-varam

satatam—always; janatā—mankind; bhava—material existence; tāpa-haram—who takes away suffering; parama-artha—the supreme purpose; parāyaṇa—dedicated; loka—people; gatim—goal; nava-leha-karam—who renders men like bees anew; jagat-tāpa-haram—who takes away the suffering of the material world.

 He is always removing the suffering of material existence for mankind. He is the goal of life for persons who are dedicated to their supreme interest. He inspires men to become like honeybees (eager for the honey of Kṛṣṇa-prema). He removes the burning fever of the material world.-I bow down to Gaura, the beautiful Son of Mother Śacī.
Text 5
nija-bhakti-karaṁ priya-cārutaraṁ
naṭa-nartana-nāgara-rāja-kulam
kula-kāmini-mānasa-lāsya-karaṁ
praṇamāmi śacī-suta-gaura-varam

nija-bhakti-karam—who causes devotional service to Himself; priya-cārutaram—who is most attractive to His beloved servitors; naṭa-nartana—who dances with a greatly dramatic mood; nāgara-rāja-kulam—He promotes the family of Kṛṣṇa, the king of paramours; kula kāmini—attractive young women; mānasa—mind; lāsya—dancing; karam—causes.

 He motivates pure devotion unto Himself. He is most attractive to His beloved servitors. By His dramatic dancing He exhibits the characteristics of the King of paramours. He causes the minds of beautiful young village women to dance.-I bow down to Gaura, the beautiful Son of Mother Śacī.
Text 6
karatāla-valaṁ kala-kaṇṭha-ravaṁ
mṛdu-vādya-suvīṇikayā madhuram
nija-bhakti-guṇāvṛta-nātya-karaṁ
praṇamāmi śacī-suta-gaura-varam

kara-tāla-valam—together with hand cymbals; kala—soft; kaṇṭha—throat; ravam—sound; mṛdu—soft; vādya—played; suvīṇakayā—with the pleasing stringed vīṇā; madhuram—sweet; nija-bhakti—His own devotion; guṇa—qualities; āvṛta—covered; nātya-karam—causing dancing.

 He plays karatāls as His throat emits sweet melodious sounds and the vibrant notes of the vīṇā are softly played. He thus inspires the devotees to perform dramatic dancing that is infused with aspects of His own devotional service.-I bow down to Gaura, the beautiful Son of Mother Śacī.
Text 7
yuga-dharma-yutaṁ punar nanda-sutaṁ
dharaṇī-sucitraṁ bhava-bhāvocitam
tanu-dhyāna-citaṁ nija-vāsa-yutaṁ
praṇamāmi śacī-suta-gaura-varam

yuga-dharma—the religious practice for the Age of Kali; yutam—embued; punaḥ—again; nanda-sutam—the son of Nanda; dharaṇī—the earth; su-citram—very wonderful; bhava—birth and death; bhāva—the mood; ucitam—suitable; tanu—body; dhyāna—meditation; citam—consciousness; nija-vāsa—His own abode; yutam—accompanied.

 He is accompanied by the saṅkīrtan movement, which is the religious practice for the Age of Kali. He is the son of Nanda Mahārāja come again. He is the extraordinarily brilliant ornament of the earth. His preaching mood is suitably adapted to the cycle of birth and death. His consciousness is fixed in meditation on His own form of Kṛṣṇa. He is always accompanied by His transcendental abode.-I bow to Gaura, the beautiful Son of Mother Śacī.
Text 8
aruṇaṁ nayanaṁ caraṇaṁ vasanaṁ
vadane skhalitaṁ svaka-nāma-dharam
kurute su-rasaṁ jagataḥ jīvanaṁ
praṇamāmi śacī-suta-gaura-varam

aruṇam—red as the rising sun; nayanam—eyes; caraṇam—feet; vasanam—clothing; vadane—in His mouth; skhalitam—faltering; svaka-nāma—His own names; dharam—taking; kurute—He influences; su-rasam—a sweet flavor; jagataḥ—of the cosmic manifestation; jīvanam—life.

 His eyes, the soles of His feet, and His clothing are reddish like the color that heralds the rising sun. As He utters His own names, His voice falters. He awakens a sweet flavor to life throughout the universe.-I bow down to Gaura, the beautiful son of Mother Śacī.
Song 36: Nava Nīrada Nindita
Śrī Vraja-Rāja-Sutāṣṭakam
Eight Prayers Glorifying the Son of the King of Vraja
36. Nava Nīrada Nindita
Śrī Vraja-Rāja-Sutāṣṭakam
Eight Prayers Glorifying the 
Son of the King of Vraja
An Anonymous Poem in Sanskrit
Text 1
nava-nīrada-nindita-kānti-dharaṁ
rasa-sāgara-nāgara-bhūpa-varam
śubha-vaṅkima-cāru-śikhaṇḍa-śikhaṁ
bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam

nava-nīrada—fresh raincloud; nindita—defeating; kānti-dharam—holder of the effulgence; rasa-sāgara—ocean of mellows; nāgara—paramour; bhūpa-varam—the superexcellent king; śubha—auspicious; vaṅkima—crooked; cāru—lovely; śikhaṇḍa-śikham—peacock feather; bhaja—just worship; kṛṣṇa-nidhim—the dark jewel; vraja-rāja-sutam—the son of the king of Vraja.

 He Whose complexion conquers that of a fresh new raincloud Who is the best King of Paramours, the ocean of ecstatic mellows Whose crown is adorned with a lovely peacock feather and is auspiciously tilted to one side-Just worship Kṛṣṇa, the Dark Jewel, the son of the King of Vraja
Text 2
bhru-viśaṅkita-vaṅkima-śakru-dhanuṁ
mukha-candra-vinindita-koṭi-vidhum
mṛdu-manda-suhāsya-subhāṣya-yutaṁ 
bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam

bhru—eyebrows; viśaṅkita—made frightened; vaṅkima—crooked; śakru-dhanum—the bow of Indra (a rainbow); mukha-candra—moon face; vinindita—insulted; koṭi-vidhum—millions of moons; mṛdu-manda—soft and gentle; su-hāsya—nice smile; su-bhāṣya—nice words; yutam—endowed.

 He Whose broadly-bending eyebrows appear like arched rainbows Whose pure moonlike face belittles millions of ordinary moons Who is endowed with sweet gentle smiles and pleasant speech-Just worship Kṛṣṇa, the Dark Jewel, the son of the King of Vraja
Text 3
suvikampad-anaṅga-sad-aṅga-dharaṁ
vraja-vāsī-manohara-veśa-karam
bhṛśa-lāñchita-nīla-saroja-dṛśaṁ
bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam

su-vikampat—profuse trembling; anaṅga—cupid; sad-aṅga—divine limbs; dharam—who bears; vraja-vāsī—residents of Vraja; manohara-veśa—enchanting dress; karam—who wears; bhṛśa—exceedingly; lāñchita—decorated; nīla-saroja—blue lotus; dṛśam—eyes.

 He Whose divine bodily limbs tremble profusely with Cupid's agitations Who dresses enchantingly just to fascinate the Vraja-vāsīs Who is decorated with extraordinary eyes like blue lotus blossoms-Just worship Kṛṣṇa, the Dark Jewel, the son of the King of Vraja
Text 4
alakāvali-maṇḍita-bhāla-taṭaṁ
śruti-dolita-mākara-kuṇḍalakam
kaṭi-veṣṭita-pīta-paṭaṁ sudhaṭaṁ
bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam

alaka-āvali—folds of hair; maṇḍita—surrounded; bhāla-taṭam—forehead; śruti—from the ears; dolita—swinging; mākara-kuṇḍalakam-makara—shaped earrings; kaṭi—hips; veṣṭita—girdling; pīta-paṭam—yellow cloth; su-dhaṭam—nice dhoṭī.

 He Whose forehead is surrounded by a fringe of wavy locks Whose earlobes are embellished with swaying shark-shaped earrings Who is adorned with yellow silk embracing His charming hips-Just worship Kṛṣṇa, the Dark Jewel, the son of the King of Vraja
Text 5
kala-nūpura-rājita-cāru-padaṁ
maṇi-rañjita-gañjita-bhṛṅga-madam
dhvaja-vajra-jhaṣāṅkita-pāda-yugaṁ
bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam

kala—soft sound; nūpura—anklets; rājita—decorated; cāru-padam—lovely feet; maṇi-rañjita—colored with gems; gañjita—resounding; bhṛṅga-madam—maddening the bees; dhvaja—flag; vajra—thunderbolt; jhaṣa—fish; aṅkita—marked; pāda-yugam—pair of feet.

 He Whose beautiful feet resound with softly tinkling ankle bells that madden all the bees with their vibration of swinging gemstones Whose soles are marked with the flag, thunderbolt, fish, and more-Just worship Kṛṣṇa, the Dark Jewel,  the son of the King of Vraja
Text 6
bhṛśa-candana-carcita-cāru-tanuṁ
maṇi-kaustubha-garhita-bhānu-tanum
vrāja-bāla-śiromaṇi-rūpa-dhṛtaṁ
bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam

bhṛśa—profuse; candana—sandalwood; carcita—besmeared; cāru-tanum—graceful body; maṇi-kaustubha—by the Kaustubha gem; garhita—eclipsing; bhānu—the sun; tanum—body; vrāja-bāla—youths of Vraja; śiromaṇi-rūpa—representing the crest jewel; dhṛtam—bearing.

 He Whose graceful form is smeared with profuse sandalwood paste Whose body glows with the Kaustubha gem, eclipsing the sun Whose personal beauty represents the topmost zenith of Vraja-youths-Just worship Kṛṣṇa, the Dark Jewel,  the son of the King of Vraja
Text 7
sura-vṛnda-suvandya-mukunda-hariṁ
sura-nātha-śiromaṇi-sarva-gurum
giridhāri-murāri-purāri-paraṁ
bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam

sura-vṛnda—assembly of the godly ones; su-vandya—very fit for adoring; mukunda-harim—Lord Mukunda Hari; sura-nātha-śiromaṇi—the crest jewel of the masters of saintly persons; sarva-gurum—the spiritual master of all; giridhāri—the holder of the hill; murāri—the enemy of Mura; purāri-param—greater than Lord Śiva.

 He Who is Mukunda and Hari, worshipable for all the demigods and sages Who is the guru of all created beings, the crest jewel of all Lords Who is known as Giridhāri and Murāri, more exalted even than Lord Śiva-Just worship Kṛṣṇa, the Dark Jewel,  the son of the King of Vraja
Text 8
vṛṣabhānu-sutā-vara-keli paraṁ
rasa-rāja-śiromaṇi-veśa-dharam
jagadīśvaram-īśvaram-īḍya-varaṁ
bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam

vṛṣabhānu-sutā—the daughter of Vrishabhānu; vara-keli param—fond of the best amorous games; rasa-rāja-śiromaṇi—the pinnacle of mellow kings; veśa-dharam—wearing the garments; jagat-īśvaram-īśvaram—of the lords of the lords of the universe; īḍya-varam—the absolutely most worshipable.

 He Who is most fond of sporting with the Daughter of Vrishabhānu Who dresses impeccably as the Crown Prince of Mellow-Relishers Who is the most praiseworthy Lord of Lords in the entire universe-Just worship Kṛṣṇa, the Dark Jewel,  the son of the King of Vraja
Song 37: Nitāi Guṇa Maṇi
"Nityānanda My Treasure"
37. Nitāi Guṇa Maṇi
"Nityānanda My Treasure"
From Caitanya Maṅgala by 
Locana Dāsa Ṭhākura
Text 1
nitāi guṇa-maṇi āmār nitāi guṇa-maṇi
āniyā premer vanyā bhāsāilo avanī

nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; guṇa-maṇi—the jewel of all good qualities; āmār—my; nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; guṇa-maṇi—the jewel of all good qualities; āniyā—bringing; premer vanyā—the flood of divine ecstatic love; bhāsāilo—has drowned; avanī—the world.

 My Lord Nityānanda, the jewel of all good qualities, my Lord Nityānanda, the jewel of all good qualities, has brought the flood of ecstatic love of God that drowned the entire world.
Text 2
premer vanyā loiyā nitāi āilā gauḍa-deśe
ḍubilo bhakata-gaṇa dīna hīna bhāse

premer vanyā—the flood of divine ecstatic love; loiyā—having brought; nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; āilā—having returned; gauḍa-deśe—to Bengal; ḍubilo—has drowned; bhakata-gaṇa—the assembly of devotees; dīna hīna—the fallen non devotees; bhāse—remained floating.

 Bringing this overwhelming deluge of prema when He returned to Bengal from Jagannātha Purī on Lord Chaitanya's order, Nitāi has inundated the assembly of devotees. The fallen non-devotees did not drown, however, but remained floating on that ecstatic ocean.
Text 3
dīna hīna patita pāmara nāhi bāche
brahmār durlabha prema sabākāre jāce

dīna hīna—those who are sinful and destitute; patita—fallen; pāmara—wretched; nāhi—not; bāche—desiring; brahmār durlabha—unattainable even for Lord Brahmā; prema—ecstatic love; sabākāre—unto everyone; jāce—He (Lord Nityānanda) offers.

 Lord Nityānanda freely offered this exalted prema, which is difficult for Lord Brahmā to attain, even to the fallen and wretched souls who were not desirous of receiving it.
Text 4
ābaddha karuṇā-sindhu nitāi kāṭiyā muhān
ghare ghare bule prema-amiyār bān

ābaddha—sealed; karuṇā-sindhu—the ocean of mercy; nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; kāṭiyā—cutting a channel; muhān—great; ghare ghare—from house to house; bule—He splashes; prema-amiyār bān—the flood of nectarlike divine love.

 The ocean of mercy had formerly been sealed tightly, but Nitāi cut a channel in its boundary to allow the great flooding waves of nectarean prema to splash from house to house.
Text 5
locan bole mor nitāi jebā nā bhajilo
jāniyā śuniyā sei ātma-ghātī hoilo

locan bole—the author Locana Dāsa says; mor—my; nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; jebā—whoever; nā bhajilo—has not worshiped; jāniyā—even knowing better; śuniyā—or hearing about it; sei—that person; ātma-ghātī—the killer of the soul; hoilo—becomes.

 Locana Dāsa says, "Whoever has not worshipped my Nitāi or taken advantage of this excellent opportunity offered by Him, knowingly commits suicide."
Song 38: Nitāi Nām Hāṭe
Nām Haṭṭa Bhajan
38. Nitāi Nām Hāṭe
Nām Haṭṭa Bhajan
From Śrī Godruma Kalpatavi by 
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
Text 1
nitāi nām hāṭe, o ke jābire bhāi, āy chuṭe
ese pāṣaṇḍa jagāi mādhāi du-jan sakal hāṭer māl nile juṭe

nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; nām hāṭe—is in the Marketplace of the Holy Name; o—there; ke jābire—whoever is going; bhāi—O brothers!; āy chuṭe—come running quickly; ese pāṣaṇḍa—these sinners; jagāi mādhāi—Jagāi and Mādhāi; du-jan—two persons; sakal—all; hāṭer māl—the Market's goods; nile juṭe—have looted and taken away.

 O brothers! Lord Nityānanda is present in the Marketplace of the Holy Name! Whoever is coming to see Him, run quickly! These two greatly sinful rascals named Jagāi and Mādhāi have looted the Marketplace and taken all the goods!
Text 2
hāṭer aṁśī mahājan, śrī advaita, sanātan
bhāṇḍāri śrī gadādhar paṇḍit vicakṣaṇ

hāṭer—of the Marketplace; aṁśī mahājan—the partners in ownership; śrī advaita—Advaita Ācārya; sanātan—and Sanātan Goswāmī; bhāṇḍāri—storekeeper; śrī gadādhara paṇḍita—Gadādhara Paṇḍita; vicakṣaṇ—expert.

 There you will find the partners in ownership, Śrī Advaita Ācārya and Sanātana Goswāmī. The storekeeper is the expert Gadādhara Paṇḍita.
Text 3
āchen caukidār haridās ādi holen śrī sañjay
śrī śrīdhar māte dālāl keśava bhāratī, śrī vidyā vācaspati
paricāraka āchen kṛṣṇa dās prabhṛti
hon koṣādhyakṣa śrīvās paṇḍit, jhāḍudār kedār jute

āchen—there is; caukidār—watchman; haridās—Haridāsa Ṭhākura; ādi—and others; holen—are; śrī sañjay—Sañjay; śrī śrīdhar—Śrīdhara; māte—managers; dālāl—brokers; keśava bhāratī—Keśava Bhāratī; śrī vidyā vācaspati—Vidyā Vācaspati; paricāraka—servants; āchen—are; kṛṣṇa dās—Kṛṣṇa Dāsa; prabhṛti—and others; hon—are; koṣādhyakṣa—treasurer; śrīvās paṇḍit—Śrīvās Paṇḍit; jhāḍudār—sweeper; kedār—Kedārnātha Bhaktivinoda; jute—appropriately.

 The watchmen are Haridāsa Ṭhākura and others. Sañjaya and Śrīdhara are managers, while Keśava Bhāratī and Vidyā Vācaspati are brokers. Kṛṣṇadāsa and others are the servants, Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita is the treasurer, and Kedārnātha Bhaktivinoda is appropriately the sweeper.
Text 4
hāṭer mūlya nirupaṇ, naya-bhakti prakāśan
prema heno mudrā sarva-sār, saṁyamana nāi kamī beśī samān

hāṭer—of the Marketplace; mūlya—cost; nirupaṇ—ascertained; naya-bhakti—the nine processes of devotion; prakāśan—revealed; prema—ecstatic love of God; heno—such; mudrā—money; sarva-sār—the essence of all; saṁyamana—restraining; nāi—not; kamī beśī—those who have less, and those who have more; samān—are the same.

 The cost of the goods in the Marketplace is the nine processes of devotional service, and the currency to be traded is divine love, the topmost essence of all. There is no restriction for purchasing these goods, for customers who have only a little wealth as well as those who have much wealth are considered equal here.
Text 5
o jan re, saba eto mane bojhay uthe
ei premer uddeśa, eka sādhu upadeśa
sudhā-moy hari-nām rūpa su-sandeśa,
ete baro nāi re dveśādveśa
khāy eka pāte kānu-kuṭhe

o jan re—Oh people!; saba—all; eto—to such a great extent; mane—according to your heart's content; bojhay—loading up to the top; uthe—raising; ei premer—of this divine love; uddeśa—indication; eka—one; sādhu upadeśa—good advice; sudhā-moy—full of nectar; hari-nām—the holy name of Lord Hari; rūpa—the form; su-sandeśa—good news; ete—in this; baro—benediction; nāi—not; re—Oh!; dveśādveśa—malice and favoritism; khāy—eating; eka pāte—from one plate; kānu-kuṭhe—Kṛṣṇa and a leper (meaning: everyone).

Text 5 O people! All of you just load up with as much goods as you like—there is no shortage. This is good advice for attaining love of God. The auspicious news of this Marketplace comes in the form of the holy name of Lord Hari, which is luscious with transcendental nectar. While availing yourselves of this benediction, oh let there be no malice or favoritism. Let everyone, whoever they may be, eat from the same plate.
Song 39: Ore Vṛndāvaner Nanda Dulāl
"Nanda's Boy From Vṛndāvana"
39. Ore Vṛndāvaner Nanda Dulāl
"Nanda's Boy From Vṛndāvana"
Traditional Bangladesh Bhajan
Text 1
 ore, vṛndāvaner nanda dulāl
rākhāl rājā re
rākhāliyār śure śure
vaṁśī bājā re (ore, vṛndāvaner)

ore—Oh!; vṛndāvaner—of Vṛndāvana; nanda dulāl—the darling of Nanda; rākhāl rājā—the prince of cowherd boys; re—Oh!; rākhāliyār—of the cowherds; śure śure—by the tunes and melodies; vaṁśī bājā—plays the flute; re—Oh!

 O dear one who belongs to Vṛndāvana! O darling son of Nanda Mahārāj! O prince of the cowherd boys, kindly play again on Your flute so we may hear the melodies dear to all Your friends.
Text 2
ore, gopāl tor bihone
phute nā phul vṛndāvane
abhisārer ei madhuvan
emni sājā re

ore gopāl—O Gopāl; tor bihone—in Your separation; phute nā—does not bloom; phul vṛndāvane—the flowers in Vṛndāvana; abhisārer—of the rendezvous; ei madhuvan—this Madhuvan; emni—such; sājā—decorations; re—Oh!

 O Gopāl, since You've left Vṛndāvana, the flowers have lost their desire to bloom. Still we decorate the moonlit groves of Madhuvan, hoping You will return for Your amorous rendezvous.
Text 3
śrīdām sudām bhāi balarām
ḍākche āi kānāi
chorāi dhenu bājāi veṇu
āi re o bhāi āi

śrīdām sudām—Śrīdāma and Sudāmā; bhāi balarām—Your brother Balarāma; ḍākche—are calling; āi kānāi—come, Kānāi!; chorāi dhenu—tending the calves; bājāi veṇu—playing on their flutes; āi—please come; re—Oh!; o bhāi—O brother!; āi—please come home!

 Śrīdāma, Sudāmā, and Your brother Balarāma are calling, "O Kānāi! Please come back!" While tending the calves and playing on their flutes they entreat, "O brother! Please come home!"
Text 4
mā yaśodā ḍākche tore (gopāl re, prāṇer gopāl re)
nanī churā āi nā, ore
boyche rādhār prema jamunā
hṛdoy mājā re

mā yaśodā—Mother Yaśodā; ḍākche—is crying out; tore—for You; gopāl re—O Gopāl!; prāṇer gopāl—O Gopāl, my life and soul!; re—Oh!; nanī churā—O butter thief!; āi nā—won't you come; ore—Oh!; boyche—is flowing; rādhār—of Rādhā; prema jamunā—the river of love; hṛdoy mājā—in Her heart; re—Oh!

 Mother Yaśodā is crying out, "O Gopāl! You are my life and soul! Please come home, O butter thief!" Within the heart of Śrī Rādhā, divine love for You flows like the Yamunā river.
Song 40: Praṇām Tomāi Ghana-śyām
"Bowing Unto You, O Cloudlike Beauty"
40. Praṇām Tomāi Ghana-śyām
"Bowing Unto You, O Cloudlike Beauty"
Traditional Bangladesh Bhajan
(refrain) praṇām tomāi ghana-śyām

praṇām—obeisance; tomāi—unto You; ghana-śyām—O dark raincloud like boy!

(refrain) All obeisances unto You, O Ghana-śyām!
Text 1
tomār caraṇa śaraṇa kori
abhoy ei bār dāo he hari
duḥkha sāgor jābo tori
tori kori tava nām
praṇām tomāi ghana-śyām

tomār caraṇa—Your feet; śaraṇa kori—I take shelter; abhoy—fearless; ei bār—this time; dāo—please give; he hari—O Lord Hari!; duḥkha sāgor—the ocean of misery; jābo—I shall go; tori—the boat; tori kori—I ride across; tava nām—Your name.

 Taking refuge at Your lotus feet, I fearlessly implore You—this time, O Hari, give me Your mercy! I shall cross the ocean of sorrow by the boat of Your holy name.
Text 2
āmarā kori gumāi prabhu
tomār nitya jāgaraṇ
kṣaṇe kṣaṇe ghaṭāo jei bhul
choke moher āvaraṇ

āmarā—we; kori gumāi—are sleeping; prabhu—O Lord!; tomār—You; nitya jāgaraṇ—perpetually awake; kṣaṇe kṣaṇe—at every moment; ghaṭāo jei—whatever happens; bhul—mistake; choke—on the eyes; moher āvaraṇ—the covering of bewilderment.

O Lord, we are always asleep, while You are ever awake. Every moment we can only make errors, our eyes being covered by illusion.
Text 3
sei āvaraṇ guchāo hari
dārāo jugal mūrti dhori
dekhbo tomāi nayana bhori
pūrṇa kori manuśkām
praṇām tomāi ghana-śyām

sei āvaraṇ—that covering; guchāo—please remove; hari—O Lord Hari!; dārāo—please give; jugal mūrti—form of the divine couple; dhori—assuming; dekhbo—I will see; tomāi—You; nayana bhori—filling my eyes; pūrṇa kori—fulfilling; manuśkām—my desires.

 Please remove this covering, my Lord, so I may behold Your form as the Divine Couple, with Śrī Rādhā by Your side. I will gaze at You until my hankering eyes are pacified, thus fulfilling my soul's desire.
Song 41: Rāj-Rāṇī Mīrā
41. Rāj-Rāṇī Mīrā
By Mīrā Bhāi
(refrain) rāj-rāṇī mīrā bhikhāriṇī
giridhārī tomāro lāgiyā

rāj-rāṇī mīrā—queen Mīrā; bhikhāriṇī—the beggar-woman; giridhārī—O holder of Govardhan Hill!; tomāro lāgiyā—for Your sake.

(refrain) The queen Mīrā is simply a beggar-woman, but only for Your sake, O Giridhārī!
Text 1
(āmi) pathe pathe ghuri bhikhāriṇī
hari nām bhikhā māgiyā go
giridhārī tomāro lāgiyā

āmi—I; pathe pathe—from path to path; ghuri—wandering; bhikhāriṇī—the beggar-woman; hari nām—the name of Hari; bhikhā māgiyā—begging alms; go—Oh!

 I wander here and there like a mendicant, but I seek only the alms of Your holy name.
Text 2
loke bole mīrā pāgalinī
rāṇā kohe kula-kalāṅkinī
mīrā kohe prabhu giridhārī
(mīrā) āśā pathe royeche chāhiyā go
giridhārī tomāro lāgiyā

loke bole—the people say; mīrā pāgalinī—Mīrā is mad; rāṇā kohe—the King says; kula-kalāṅkinī—she is a disgrace to her family; mīrā kohe—Mīrā says; prabhu giridhārī—O Lord Giridhārī!; āśā—the desire; pathe royeche—remaining on the footpath; chāhiyā—I wish; go—Oh!

 People say, "Mīrā has become a madwoman." The king says, "She has disgraced her family." But Mīrā says, "O Lord Giridhārī, my only desire is to remain at Your lotus feet."
Text 3
dekhā dāo prabhujī prabhujī
mīrā kāṅde tomāro lāgiyā
kāṅdāiyo nā abhāgire
rākho more aṅge miśāya go
giridhārī tomāro lāgiyā

dekhā dāo—show Your vision; prabhujī prabhujī—O Lord, O Lord!; mīrā kāṅde—Mīrā cries; tomāro lāgiyā—for Your sake; kāṅdāiyo nā—not causing me to weep; abhāgire—to this unfortunate person; rākho more—please keep me; aṅge miśāya—as if united with Your body; go—Oh!

 O Prabhujī! Kindly reveal Yourself to me! Mīrā simply weeps for You, my Lord. Please don't make this most unfortunate person cry any more. Please keep me tightly embraced, as if united with Your own body.
giridhārī tomāro prāṇ mīrār
giridhārī tomāro lāgiyā

giridhārī—O Lord; tomāro—You; prāṇ mīrār—the life of Mīrā.

O Giridhārī, You are the life and soul of Mīrā!v*
Song 42: Śrī Guru Caraṇ Kamal
42. Śrī Guru Caraṇ Kamal
"The Preceptor's Lotus Feet"
Traditional Hindi song
(refrain) śrī guru caraṇ kamal bhaja mana,
guru kṛpā binā nahiṁ koi sādhana-bala,
bhaja mana bhaja anukṣaṇa

śrī guru—of the bonafide spiritual master; caraṇ kamal—the lotus feet; bhaja—please worship; mana—O mind!; guru kṛpā—the mercy of the spiritual master; binā—without; nahiṁ—there is not; koi—any; sādhana-bala—strength to practice devotion; bhaja—please worship; mana—O mind!; bhaja—please worship; anukṣaṇa—incessantly.

(refrain) O mind, just worship the lotus feet of the bonafide spiritual master. Without receiving the mercy of the pure devotee, one will not have the potency to execute regulative spiritual practices. Therefore, O my dear mind, I urge you to worship him, please worship him at every moment.
Text 1
milata nahiṁ aisā durlabha janma,
bhramata hī caudaha bhuvana
kisī ko milate hai aho bhāgya se,
hari bhaktoṅ ke darśana

milata—met; nahiṁ—not; aisā—such; durlabha janma—rare human birth; bhramata—wandering; hī—certainly; caudaha bhuvana—fourteen worlds; kisī ko—to someone; milate—gets; hai—is; aho bhāgya—oh what a great fortune; se—he; hari bhaktoṅ—the devotees of Hari; ke—of; darśana—audience.

 O mind, just worship the lotus feet of the bonafide spiritual master. While the fallen soul wanders throughout the fourteen worlds, it rarely gets an opportunity to receive a human birth. Aho! And out of so many human beings, only a few receive the great fortune of meeting the devotees of Lord Hari.
Text 2
kṛṣṇa kṛpā kī ānanda mūrti,
dīnana karuṇā-nidhāna
jñāna-bhakti-prema tīno prakāśata,
śrī guru patita pāvana

kṛṣṇa kṛpā kī—of Kṛṣṇa's mercy; ānanda mūrti—the embodiment of bliss; dīnana—fallen souls; karuṇā-nidhāna—reservoir of mercy; jñāna-bhakti-prema—knowledge, devotion and love; tīno—three; prakāśata—reveals; śrī guru—divine spiritual master; patita pāvana—deliverer of the fallen.

 O mind, just worship the lotus feet of the bonafide spiritual master. Śrī Guru is the personification of the bliss inherent in Kṛṣṇa's causeless mercy, and he is therefore the abode of mercy for souls who are suffering in the material world. He is the revealer of transcendental knowledge, pure devotion, and divine love. Śrī Guru is the savior of fallen conditioned souls.
Text 3
śruti-smṛti iti bhāṣya sabhī mile,
dekhata spaṣṭa pramāṇa
tana-mana-jīvana guru-pade arpaṇa,
sadā śrī hari-nāma raṭana

śruti-smṛti—the Upaniṣads and Purāṇas; iti—thus; bhāṣya—explanation; sabhī mile—all together; dekhata—is seen; spaṣṭa pramāṇa—clear evidence; tana-mana-jīvana—body, mind and life; guru-pade—to the feet of the guru; arpaṇa—offering; sadā—always; śrī hari-nāma—the holy names of the Lord; raṭana—repetition.

 O mind, just worship the lotus feet of the bonafide spiritual master. His glories are clearly confirmed by the assembly of śruti-śāstras, smṛti-śāstras, as well as in the commentaries of the great ācāryas. Just offer your body, mind, and life itself at the lotus feet of Śrī Guru and always remain engaged in the chanting of Śrī Hari-nām.
Song 43: Śrī Rādhe Govinda
43. Śrī Rādhe Govinda
Traditional Brijbhāshā song (Rasiyā) 
From the Vraja Mandala area
(refrain) śrī rādhe govinda, gopāla terā pyārā nām hai

śrī rādhe govinda—O pleaser of the senses of Rādhā!; gopāla—O protector of the cows!; terā—Your; pyārā—very precious; nām—name; hai—is.

(refrain) O pleaser of the senses of Rādhā! O protector of the cows! Your name is very precious to us!
Text 1
 mor mukuṭa pītāmbara sohai gala vaijantī mālā
koi kahe vasudeva ko nandana koi kahe nanda-lālā

mor mukuṭa—peacock-feather-adorned crown; pītāmbara—yellow garments; sohai—beautiful; gala—neck; vaijantī mālā—many-colored flower garland; koi kahe—some people say; vasudeva ko nandana—the son of Vasudeva; koi kahe—some people say; nanda-lālā—the son of Nanda.

 You are beautified by a peacock-feather crown, yellow garments, and multi-colored flower garland. Some people call You the son of Vasudeva, while others call You the son of Nanda.
Text 2
jamunā kināre kṛṣṇa kanhaiyā muralī madhura bajāwe
gwāla-bāla ke saṅga kānhā mākhana miśrī khāwe

jamunā kināre—on the bank of the Jamunā river; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; kanhaiyā—darling Kanhaiyā; muralī—bass flute; madhura—sweet; bajāwe—plays; gwāla-bāla ke saṅga—in the company of the cowherd boys; kānhā—Kṛṣṇa; mākhana miśrī—butter-and-sugar-candy sweets; khāwe—eats.

 You, darling Kṛṣṇa Kanhaiyā, play sweet melodies on Your low-pitched muralī flute while standing on the bank of the Jamunā river. O Kānhā, You eat butter-and-sugar-candy sweets in the company of Your cowherd boyfriends.
Text 3
arjuna kā ratha tumne hāṅkā bhārata bhai laḍāi
nām ko lekara biṣa bhī pīgai dekho mīrābāi

arjuna kā ratha—Arjuna's chariot; tumne—by You; hāṅkā—driving; bhārata—India; bhai—happened; laḍāi—battle; nām ko lekara—accepting Your name; biṣa—poison; bhī—also; pīgai—drank; dekho—it is seen; mīrābāi—of the lady saint Mīrābāi.

 You drove Arjuna's chariot and thus brought about the great battle of ancient India. When the lady saint Mīrābāi chanted Your name and drank the poison sent by her envious husband to kill her, the poison was thereby turned into nectar.
Text 4
jala meṅ gaja ko grāha ne gherā jala meṅ cakra calāyā
jab jab bhīra paḍī bhaktana pai naṅge pāṅvana dhāyā

jala meṅ—in the water; gaja ko—to the elephant; grāha ne—by the crocodile; gherā—surrounded; jala meṅ—in the water; cakra calāyā—threw His Sudarshana Chakra; jab jab—whenever; bhīra paḍī—becoming fearful; bhaktana—the devotees; pai naṅge—becoming naked; pāṅvana—spread cloth; dhāyā—He comes running.

 When the elephant Gajendra was trapped by the crocodile in the lake, You threw Your Sudarśana Cakra into the water to save him. Whenever the devotees [like Draupadī] are afraid of becoming naked, then You come running and spread Your cloth to cover them.
Text 5
ajāmila ke anta samaya meṅ terā nām jab āyā
jama-dūtoṅ se mukta karāke apane dhām paṭhāyā

ajāmila ke—Ajāmila's; anta samaya meṅ—at his final moment; terā nām—Your name; jab āyā—when it came; jama-dūtoṅ se—from the Yamadūtas; mukta karāke—causing to be freed; apane dhām—to Your own abode; paṭhāyā—sent.

 When Ajāmila was approaching his final moment, he remembered to utter Your name. Thus he was freed from the grasp of the Yamadūtas and dispatched in the company of the Viṣṇudūtas to Your own transcendental abode.
Text 6
narasī ke saba kāja sudhāre mujhako mata bisarāwe
janama janama kā terā sāraṅga terā hī guṇa gāwe

narasī ke—of the saint named Narasī of western India; saba kāja—all work; sudhāre—fulfilled; mujhako—to me; mata—do not; bisarāwe—forget; janama janama kā—of birth after birth; terā—Your; sāraṅga—affection; terā—Your; hī—certainly; guṇa gāwe—singing of the glorious attributes.

 You also fulfilled all the tasks undertaken by the saint Narasī. You are taking care of all these devotees-please do not forget me! May I remain absorbed birth after birth in Your affection while confidently singing Your glories.
Song 44: Śrita Kamalā
Maṅgala Gītam
44. Śrita Kamalā
Maṅgala Gītam
From Gīta Govinda by 
Śrī Jayadeva Goswāmī
Text 1
śrita-kamalā-kuca-maṇḍala (he)
dhṛta-kuṇḍala (e)
kalita-lalita-vana-mālā
jaya jaya deva hare

śrita—who rests; kamalā—of the goddess of fortune; kuca-maṇḍala—upon the globe like breasts; (he)—oh!; dhṛta-kuṇḍala—decorated with earrings; (e)—oh!; kalita—wearing; lalita-vana-mālā—a charming garland of forest flowers; jaya—all glories to You!; jayadeva—O Lord Jayadeva (who defeats all the demigods)!; hare—O Lord Hari!

 O Lord who rests upon the breasts of the goddess of fortune! O Lord decorated with swinging earrings! O Lord who wears a charming garland of forest flowers!-O Lord Jayadeva (who defeats all the demigods)! O Lord Hari, all glories to You!
Text 2
dina-maṇi-maṇḍala-maṇḍana (he)
bhava-khaṇḍana (e)
muni-jana-mānasa-haṁsa
jaya jaya deva hare

dinamaṇi-maṇḍala—as the orb of the sun; maṇḍana—whose ornaments are as splendid; (he)—oh!; bhava-khaṇḍana—O Lord who breaks the cycle of repeated birth and death; (e)—oh!; muni-jana-mānasa-haṁsa—O swan in the lake of the sages' hearts!; jaya jayadeva hare...

 O Lord whose ornaments are as splendid as the orb of the sun! O Lord who breaks the cycle of repeated birth and death! O swan who swims in the peaceful lake of the sages' hearts!-O Lord Jayadeva, O Lord Hari! All glories unto You!
Text 3
kāliya-viṣadhara-gañjana (he)
jana-rañjana (e)
yadu-kula-nalina-dineśa
jaya jaya deva hare

kāliya-viṣadhara—the poisonous Kāliya serpent; gañjana—who defeated; (he)—oh!; jana-rañjana—O delight of the people!; (e)—oh!; yadu-kula-nalina—the lotus flower of the Yadu dynasty; dina-īśa—O sun who causes them to bloom!; jaya jayadeva hare...

 O Lord who defeated the poisonous Kāliya serpent! O delight of the people! O brilliantly shining sun that causes the lotus flower of the Yadu dynasty to bloom!-O Jayadeva, O Lord Hari! All glories unto You!
Text 4
madhu-mura-naraka-vināśana (he)
garuḍāsana (e)
sura-kula-keli-nidāna
jaya jaya deva hare

madhu-mura-naraka-vināśana—O killer of the demons Madhu, Mura, and Naraka!; (he)—oh!; garuḍa-āsana—O Lord who sits on Garuda!; (e)—oh!; sura-kula-keli-nidāna—O Lord who enjoys pastimes among the dynasties of demigods!; jaya jayadeva hare...

 O killer of the demons Madhu, Mura, and Naraka! O Lord who rides upon the back of Garuḍa! O Lord who enjoys pastimes among the dynasties of demigods!-O Lord Jayadeva, O Lord Hari! All glories unto You!
Text 5
amala-kamala-dala-locana (he)
bhava-mocana (e)
tribhuvana-bhuvana-nidhāna
jaya jaya deva hare

amala-kamala-dala-locana—O Lord whose eyes are like immaculate lotus petals!; (he)—oh!; bhava-mocana—O liberator from the cycle of repeated birth and death!; (e)—oh!; tribhuvana-bhuvana-nidhāna—O treasure of the three worlds!; jaya jayadeva hare...

 O Lord whose eyes are immaculate lotus petals! O giver of liberation from the cycles of repeated birth and death! O priceless treasure of the three worlds!-O Lord Jayadeva, O Lord Hari! All glories unto You!
Text 6
janaka-sutā-kṛta-bhūṣaṇa (he)
jita-dūṣaṇa (e)
samara-śamita-daśa-kaṇṭha
jaya jaya deva hare

janaka-sutā-kṛta-bhūṣaṇa—O Lord who has become the ornament of Sītā Devī, the daughter of Mahārāja Janaka!; (he)—oh!; jita-dūṣaṇa—O Lord who is victorious over all wicked demons; (e)—oh!; samara-śamita-daśa-kaṇṭha—O Lord who defeated the ten headed Rāvaṇa in battle!; jaya jayadeva hare...

 O Lord who has become the ornament of the daughter of Mahārāja Janaka! O Lord who is victorious over all wicked demons! O Lord who defeated the ten-headed Rāvaṇa in battle!-O Lord Jayadeva, O Lord Hari! All glories unto You!
Text 7
abhinava-jaladhara-sundara (he)
dhṛta-mandara (e)
śrī-mukha-candra-cakora
jaya jaya deva hare

abhinava-jaladhara-sundara—O Lord as handsome as a fresh raincloud!; (he)—oh!; dhṛta-mandara—O lifter of Govardhana Hill!; (e)—oh!; śrī-mukha-candra-cakora—O cakora bird who drinks the moonlight of Rādhārāṇī's face!; jaya jayadeva hare...

 O Lord as handsome as a fresh raincloud! O lifter of Govardhana Hill! O chakora bird who drinks the moonlight of Rādhārāṇī's face!-O Lord Jayadeva, O Lord Hari! All glories unto You!
Text 8
tava caraṇaṁ praṇata vayam (he)
iti bhāvaya (e)
kuru kuśalam praṇateṣu
jaya jaya deva hare

tava caraṇam—before Your lotus feet; praṇata vayam—we are bowing down; (he)—oh!; iti bhāvaya—thus thinking of us; (e)—oh!; kuru kuśalam—please grant auspiciousness; praṇateṣu—to us who bow down before You; jaya jayadeva hare...

 O Lord! We are bowing down before Your lotus feet! O please think of us in this way, and kindly grant auspiciousness to us who bow down before You!-O Lord Jayadeva, O Lord Hari! All glories unto You!
Text 9
śrī-jayadeva-kaver idaṁ (he)
kurute mudam (e)
maṅgalam ujjvala-gītaṁ
jaya jaya deva hare

śrī-jayadeva-kaveḥ—of the poet Jayadeva; idam—this; (he)—oh!; kurute mudam—which gives transcendental happiness; (e)—oh!; maṅgalam—auspicious; ujjvala-gītam—brilliantly effulgent song; jaya jayadeva hare...

 O! This song of the poet Jayadeva brings transcendental happiness! O! It is an auspicious, brilliantly effulgent song!-O Lord Jayadeva, O Lord Hari! All glories unto You!
Song 45: Sundara Bālā
"Beautiful Boy"
45. Sundara Bālā
"Beautiful Boy"
Anonymous Hindi song
Text 1
sundara-bālā śacī-dulālā
nācata śrī-hari-kīrtana meṅ
bhāle candana tilaka manohara
alakā śobhe kapolana meṅ

sundara-bālā—gorgeous boy; śacī-dulālā—the darling child of Mother Śacī; nācata—is dancing; śrī-hari-kīrtana meṅ—in the kīrtana of chanting Lord Hari's names; bhāle—on His forehead; candana tilaka—drawings of sandalwood; manohara alakā—enchanting locks of hair; śobhe—shine splendrously; kapolana meṅ—upon His cheeks.

 This gorgeous boy is the darling child of Mother Śacī, dancing in the kīrtan of chanting Lord Hari's names. His forehead is adorned with drawings of sandalwood paste, and His enchanting locks of hair are shining splendrously as they bounce upon His cheeks.
Text 2
śire cūḍā daraśi bāle
vana-phula-mālā hiyāpara dole
pahirana pīta-paṭāmbara śobhe
nūpura ruṇu-jhunu caraṇo meṅ

śire—upon His head; cūḍā—a topknot; daraśi—displays; bāle—with the hair; vana-phula-mālā—garland of forest flowers; hiyā-para—upon His chest; dole—sways; pahirana—wearing; pīta-paṭāmbara—yellow silken garments; śobhe—radiant; nūpura—ankle bells; ruṇu-jhunu—tinkling; caraṇo meṅ—upon His feet.

 His hair is wrapped in a topknot, and a garland of forest flowers sways upon His chest. Wearing brilliant yellow silken garments, He dances with ankle bells tinkling upon His feet.
Text 3
rādhā-kṛṣṇa eka tanu hai
nidhuvana-mājhe baṁśī bājāy
viśvarūpa ki prabhujī sahi
āota prakaṭahi nadīyā meṅ

rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; eka tanu—one body; hai—have become; nidhuvana-mājhe—within the grove of Nidhuvana; baṁśī bājāy—playing the flute; viśvarūpa—Viśvarūpa; ki—of; prabhujī—the revered Lord; sahi—with; āota—coming; prakaṭahi—manifested; nadīyā meṅ—in the town of Nadīyā.

 Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have become joined in one body, and together They play a flute within the grove of Nidhuvana. In this mood, the Lord of Viśvarūpa has come and manifested Himself in the town of Nadīyā.
Text 4
koi gāyata hai rādhā-kṛṣṇa nām
koi gāyata hai hari-guṇa gān
maṅgala-tāna mṛdaṅga rasāla
bājata hai koi raṅgaṇa meṅ

koi—someone; gāyata hai—is singing; rādhā-kṛṣṇa nām—the names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; koi—someone; gāyata hai—is singing; hari-guṇa gān—Lord Hari's qualities; maṅgala-tāna—the auspicious sounds; mṛdaṅga-mṛdaṅga drums; rasāla—relishable; bājata hai—is playing; koi—someone; raṅgaṇa meṅ—in that spectacular performance.

 Someone in that kīrtan sings the names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, someone else sings songs of Lord Hari's transcendental qualities, while others play the auspicious rhythms of the sweet and relishable mṛdaṅga drums. All this takes place in that spectacular performance.

Song 46: Sundara Mor
"My Beautiful One"
46. Sundara Mor
"My Beautiful One"
Traditional Bangladesh bhajan
(refrain) sundara mor mana-kiśor
eso he śyāmal nayanābhirām

sundara—O beautiful one!; mor—my; mana-kiśor—youthful boy in my heart; eso—please come; he śyāmal—O dark boy!; nayana-abhirām—O giver of satisfaction to my eyes!

(refrain) O beautiful one! O youthful boy who lives in my heart! Please come to me, O dark Śyāmal, O delighter of my eyes!
Text 1
bhajibo tomāi mor mana chāi
caraṇer rākhi ekṭi praṇām
eso he śyāmal nayanābhirām

bhajibo tomāi—I will worship You; mor mana—my heart; chāi—desires; caraṇer—of Your feet; rākhi—keeping; ekṭi praṇām—an obeisance; eso—please come; he śyāmal—O dark boy!; nayana-abhirām—O giver of satisfaction to my eyes!.

 The desire of my heart is to worship You intimately. In this hope, I humbly bow unto Your lotus feet.
Text 2
nayaner prema more loye jāi
milaner sur virohe sukhāi
prāṇer devatā kabe nāhi kathā
nayaner dhārā mane nābhirām
eso he śyāmal nayanābhirām

nayaner prema—O love of my eyes!; more loye jāi—taking me with You; milaner sur—the melody of our meeting; virohe—in Your separation; sukhāi—gives me joy; prāṇer devatā—O Lord of my heart!; kabe—why; nāhi kothā—You do not speak; nayaner—of my eyes; dhārā—the flow of tears; mane—in my heart; nābhirām—there is no pleasure; eso—please come; he śyāmal—O dark boy!; nayana-abhirām—O giver of satisfaction to my eyes!.

 O love of my eyes! Please take me with You! While I am suffering in Your separation, the melody of our impending meeting is the only thing that gives me any happiness. O monarch of my life! Why do You remain silent and never speak to me? Tears are flowing from my eyes, and nothing in this world gives me any satisfaction.
Text 3
emni kore ār koto kāl
kāṅdale āmāi giridhārī-lāl
ei jīvane hāi jadi nāhi pāi
maraṇer upare śaraṇa nilām
eso he śyāmal nayanābhirām

emni—like that; kore—going along; ār koto—how much more; kāl—time; kāṅdale āmāi—I am crying; giridhārī-lāl—O youthful holder of Govardhan Hill!; ei jīvane—in this life; hāi—alas!; jadi—if; nāhi pāi—I do not attain You; maraṇer upare—upon death; śaraṇa nilām—I have taken shelter; eso—please come; he śyāmal—O dark boy!; nayana-abhirām—O giver of satisfaction to my eyes!.

Text 3 How much longer must I continue living in this condition? You are making me weep and cry out for You, O darling Girdhārī-lāl! If I cannot attain You in this lifetime, then I shall just give up and surrender myself unto death.
Song 47: Tātala Saikate
"Scorched on the Sandy Beach"
47. Tātala Saikate
"Scorched on the Sandy Beach"
A song in the Maithilī language by 
Śrīla Vidyāpativi*
Text 1
tātala saikate,  bāri-bindu-sama,
suta-mita-ramaṇī-samāje
tohe visari mana,  tāhe samarpala,
ab majhu habo kon kāje

tātala—burned; saikate—on the sandy beach; bāri-bindu-sama—like a drop of water; suta-mita-ramaṇī—children, friends, and women; samāje—in the society; tohe visari—forgetting You; mana—my mind; tāhe—unto them; samarpala—I have offered; ab—now; majhu—my; hobo—will be; kon kāje—by what action (to remedy the situation).

 O Lord, completely forgetting You, I have offered my mind unto the society of women, children, and friends—but this experience has been just like offering a drop of water unto the burning hot sands of the beach. How can I possibly be relieved of this great misery?
Text 2
mādhava! hāma pariṇām nirāśā
tuhuṅ jaga-tāraṇa,  dīna doyā-moy,
ataye tohāri viśoyāsā

mādhava—O Lord Mādhava!; hāma—I; pariṇām—in consequence; nirāśā—despondent; tuhuṅ—You; jaga-tāraṇa—savior of the universe; dīna doyā-moy—merciful to the helpless; ataye—therefore; tohāri—in You; viśoyāsā—my only hope.

 O Mādhava! As a consequence, I am rendered totally despondent. You are the savior of the universe, and are merciful to the helpless souls. Therefore I place my hope only in You.
Text 3
ādha janama hāma,  ninde goyāyaluṅ,
jarā śiśu koto-dina gelā
nidhuvane ramaṇī,  rasa-raṅge mātala,
tohe bhajabo kon belā

ādha janama—half alive; hāma—I; ninde—in disrepute; goyāyaluṅ—I have spent; jarā—in old age; śiśu—as a child; koto dina—so many days; gelā—have passed; nidhuvane—in romantic adventures; ramaṇī rasa-raṅge—in the pleasure of sporting with women; mātala—I have been intoxicated; tohe bhajabo—I will worship You; kon belā—at what opportunity.

 Wandering about in a half-alive condition, I spent my life in utter disgrace. Uncountable days passed as a frivolous child and a useless old man. I have been intoxicated by the pleasure of sharing romantic adventures with beautiful young women. When will I ever get a chance to worship You?
Text 4
koto caturānana,  mari mari jāota,
na tuyā ādi avasānā
tohe janami puna,  tohe samāota,
sāgara-laharī samānā

koto—how many; catura-ānana—four faced Brahmās; mari mari jāota—have died one after another; na—not; tuyā—Your; ādi avasānā—beginning or end; tohe—in You; janami—they take birth; puna—and then; tohe—in You; samāota—they are absorbed; sāgara-laharī—the waves of the ocean; samānā—like.

 Numberless Brahmās have died one after another, whereas You are without beginning or end. All of them take birth from You and are again absorbed into You, just like waves in the ocean.
Text 5
bhaṇaye vidyāpati,  śeṣa śamana-bhoy,
tuyā vinā gati nāhi ārā
ādi-anādika,  nātha kahāyasi,
bhava-tāraṇa bhāra tohārā

bhaṇaye vidyāpati—Vidyāpati narrates; śeṣa—at the end of his life; śamana-bhoy—fear of Yamarāj; tuyā vinā—other than You; gati—shelter; nāhi ārā—there is no other; ādi-anādika—beginning and beginningless; nātha—Lord; kahāyasi—You are called; bhava-tāraṇa bhār—the responsibility of deliverance from the material world; tohārā—is Yours.

 Vidyāpati confesses that now, at the end of his life, he is fearful of death. O Lord! There is no shelter other than You. You will always remain celebrated as being the Lord of both the beginning and the beginningless. Now the responsibility for my deliverance from the material world is entirely Yours.
Song 48: Ujjvala Varaṇa
Śrī-Śacī-Tanayāshtakam
Eight Prayers Glorifying the Son of Śrīmatī Śacīdevī
48. Ujjvala Varaṇa
Śrī-Śacī-Tanayāshtakam
Eight Prayers Glorifying 
The Son of Śrīmatī Śacīdevī
By Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya
Text 1
ujjvala-varaṇa-gaura-vara-dehaṁ
vilasita-niravadhi-bhāva-videham
tri-bhuvana-pāvana-kṛpāyāḥ leśaṁ
taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

ujjvala—brilliant; varaṇa—complexion; gaura-vara-deham—beautiful golden body; vilasita—sported; niravadhi—incessantly; bhāva—ecstasy; videham—transcendental body; tri-bhuvana—the three worlds; pāvana—purifying; kṛpāyāḥ—by His mercy; leśam—atomic particle; tam—to Him; praṇamāmi—I bow down; ca—also; śrī-śacī-tanayam—to the son of Mother Śacī.

 His superexcellent spiritual body is a brilliant golden color. He is incessantly churned by sublime transcendental ecstasies. A fraction of His mercy is able to deliver all the three worlds.-Unto that son of Śrī Śacīdevī I bow.
Text 2
gadgadāntara-bhāva-vikāraṁ
durjana-tarjana-nāda-viśālam
bhava-bhaya-bhañjana-kāraṇa-karuṇaṁ
taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

gadgada—choked up; antara—internally; bhāva-vikāram—ecstatic transformations; durjana—wicked men; tarjana—threatening; nāda—sounds; viśālam—immense; bhava-bhaya—fear of the repeating cycle of birth and death; bhañjana—smashing; kāraṇa—cause; karuṇam—mercy; tam—to Him; praṇamāmi—I bow down; ca—also; śrī-śacī-tanayam—to the son of Mother Śacī.

 Within Himself there are transformations of ecstasy such as faltering of the voice. The mighty sound of His voice chastises wicked men. His mercy dispels all fears caused by worldly existence.-Unto that son of Śrī Śacīdevī I bow.
Text 3
aruṇāmbara-dhara cāru-kapolaṁ
indu-vinindita-nakha-caya-ruciram
jalpita-nija-guṇa-nāma-vinodaṁ
taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

aruṇa—saffron; ambara—garments; dhara—wearing; cāru—beautiful; kapolam—forehead; indu—moon; vinindita—mocking; nakha—fingernails; caya—rows; ruciram—radiance; jalpita—uttered; nija-guṇa—His own qualities; nāma—His name; vinodam—the enjoyer; tam—to Him; praṇamāmi—I bow down; ca—also; śrī-śacī-tanayam—to the son of Mother Śacī.

 He wears garments the color of the rising sun. His cheeks are very captivating. His brilliant fingernails surpass the beauty and radiance of the moon. He takes delight in uttering the glories of His own transcendental qualities and holy name.-Unto that son of Śrī Śacīdevī I bow.
Text 4
vigalita-nayana-kamala-jala-dhāraṁ
bhūṣaṇa-nava-rasa-bhāva-vikāram
gati-atimanthara-nṛtya-vilāsaṁ
taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

vigalita—flowing; nayana-kamala—lotus eyes; jala-dhāram—streams of water; bhūṣaṇa—ornament; nava-rasa—of fresh mellows; bhāva-vikāram—ecstatic transformations; gati—the movements; ati-manthara—very slow; nṛtya-vilāsam—pastimes of dancing; tam—to Him; praṇamāmi—I bow down; ca—also; śrī-śacī-tanayam—to the son of Mother Śacī.

 Streams of ecstatic tears flow from His lotus eyes. He is ornamented with transformations of ecstasy caused by ever-new loving mellows. His pastimes of dancing exhibit very slow and graceful movements.-Unto that son of Śrī Śacīdevī I bow.
Text 5
cañcala-cāru-caraṇa-gati-ruciraṁ
mañjīra-rañjita-pada-yuga-madhuram
candra-vinindita-śītala-vadanaṁ
taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

cañcala—restless; cāru-caraṇa—lovely feet; gati—the movements; ruciram—pleasing; mañjīra-rañjita—adorned by anklets; pada-yuga—the two feet; madhuram—sweet; candra-vinindita—surpassing the moon; śītala-vadanam—cooling face; tam—to Him; praṇamāmi—I bow down; ca—also; śrī-śacī-tanayam—to the son of Mother Śacī.

 The nimble movements of His beautiful dancing feet are very pleasing. Those two feet are sweetened by tinkling ankle bells. His soothing face surpasses the cooling rays of the moon.-Unto that son of Śrī Śacīdevī I bow.
Text 6
dhṛta-kaṭi-ḍora-kamaṇḍalu-daṇḍaṁ
divya-kalevara-muṇḍita-muṇḍam
durjana-kalmaṣa-khaṇḍana-daṇḍaṁ
taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

dhṛta—wearing; kaṭi-ḍora—loincloth; kamaṇḍalu—waterpot; daṇḍam—staff; divya-kalevara—divine body; muṇḍita—shaven; muṇḍam—head; durjana—wicked souls; kalmaṣa—sins; khaṇḍana—destroying; daṇḍam—chastisement; tam—to Him; praṇamāmi—I bow down; ca—also; śrī-śacī-tanayam—to the son of Mother Śacī.

 He sometimes wears the loincloth of a mendicant and takes up the staff and waterpot of a sannyāsī monk. His transcendental body is then graced by a shaven head. His chastisement breaks apart and destroys the sins of wicked souls.-Unto that son of Śrī Śacīdevī I bow.
Text 7
bhūṣaṇa-bhū-raja-alakā-valitaṁ
kampita-bimbādhara-vara-ruciram
malayaja-viracita-ujjvala-tilakaṁ
taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

bhūṣaṇa—ornament; bhū-raja—dust of the earth; alakā—hair; valitam—endowed; kampita—trembling; bimba-adhara—lips like red berries; vara-ruciram—excellent and pleasing; malaya-ja—sandalwood; viracita—drawn; ujjvala-tilakam—brilliant forehead markings; tam—to Him; praṇamāmi—I bow down; ca—also; śrī-śacī-tanayam—to the son of Mother Śacī.

As a householder, His face is surrounded by locks of dark hair, decorated with the dust of the earth. His excellent lips, which are red like the bimba fruit, are beautified by their trembling in ecstasy. Upon His forehead He wears brilliant tilak made of sandalwood paste.-Unto that son of Śrī Śacīdevī I bow.
Text 8
nindita-aruṇa-kamala-dala-nayanaṁ
ājānu-lambita-śrī-bhuja-yugalam
kalevara-kaiśora-nartaka-veśaṁ
taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

nindita—surpassing; āruṇa—reddish; kamala-dala—lotus petal; nayanam—eyes; ā-jānu—down to the knees; lambita—extending; śrī—splendrous; bhuja-yugalam—two arms; kalevara—divine body; kaiśora—adolescent; nartaka-veśam—dress of a dramatic dancing actor; tam—to Him; praṇamāmi—I bow down; ca—also; śrī-śacī-tanayam—to the son of Mother Śacī.

 The glowing beauty of His lotus-petal eyes exceeds that of the rising sun. His two beautiful arms extend down to His knees. His divine body is dressed in the fashion of an adolescent dramatic dancer.-Unto that son of Śrī Śacīdevī I bow.
Song 49: Vaṁśī-dhārī Kṛṣṇa Murāri
49. Vaṁśī-dhārī Kṛṣṇa Murāri
Traditional Hindi Bhajan
Text 1
vaṁśī-dhārī kṛṣṇa murāri
tomā vinā duḥkha hari
kṛpā koro nāth, me hu mana
rākho lāj hāmāre

vaṁśī-dhārī—O holder of the flute!; kṛṣṇa murāri—O all attractive killer of the Mura demon!; tomā vinā—without You; duḥkha—misery; hari—O remover of distress!; kṛpā koro—please be merciful; nāth—O Lord!; me—my; hu—is; mana—mind; rākho—keep; lāj—modesty; hāmāre—mine.

 O Vaṁśī-dhārī! O Kṛṣṇa-Murāri! Without You, all is misery, O remover of distress! Please be merciful to me, O Lord, and protect my modesty.
Text 2
abhoy caraṇa koro to smaraṇa
japa nām tere
āp mujhe hi, swāmī bhaja
āp giridhārī

abhoy caraṇa—feet that bestow fearlessness; koro—please cause; to—indeed; smaraṇa—remembrance; japa—chanting; nām tere—Your holy name; āp—You; mujhe—to me; hi—certainly; swāmī—O Lord!; bhaja—worship; āp—You; giridhārī—O holder of the hill!

 Kindly cause me to remember Your feet that bestow fearlessness, and allow me to chant Your holy name. O Lord! I worship You, O Giridhārī!
Song 50: Vande Kṛṣṇa Nanda Kumāra
50. Vande Kṛṣṇa Nanda Kumāra
Traditional Bengali Bhajan
Text 1
govinda hari gopāla hari
govinda hari gopāla hari
jaya jaya deva hari
jaya jaya deva hari

All glories to Govinda Hari, and to Gopāla Hari! All glories, all glories to the Supreme Lord Hari!
Text 2
vande kṛṣṇa nanda-kumāra
nanda-kumāra madana-gopāla
madana-gopāla mohana-rūpa
mohana-rūpa nanda-kumāra

I praise the all-attractive Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is the youthful son of Nanda Mahārāja. The youthful son of Nanda Mahārāja is the cupid among the cowherdesses. The cupid among the cowherdesses possesses an enchantingly beautiful form. He of enchantingly beautiful form is the youthful son of Nanda Mahārāja.
Text 3
jaya jaya deva hari
jaya jaya deva hari
jaya prabhu dīna-dayāla hari

I praise Lord Hari, who is most compassionate to the fallen souls.
Text 4
govinda hari gopāla hari
govinda hari gopāla hari
jaya jaya deva hari
jaya jaya deva hari

All glories, all glories to the Supreme Lord Hari! Glory to Govinda Hari who pleases the cows, to Gopāla Hari who tends the cows!
Text 5
jaya rāma hari jaya kṛṣṇa hari
jaya jaya-śacī-nandana gaura-hari

All glories to Rāma Hari, and to Kṛṣṇa Hari! All glories, all glories to the son of Mother Śacī, who is the fair Gaura Hari!
Text 6
govinda hari gopāla hari
govinda hari gopāla hari
jaya jaya deva hari
jaya jaya deva hari

All glories to Govinda Hari, and to Gopāla Hari! All glories, all glories to the Supreme Lord Hari!
Song 51: Vṛndāvana Ramya Sthāna
Vāsantī-Rāsa
"Amorous Pastimes in the Spring"
51. Vṛndāvana Ramya Sthāna
Vāsantī-Rāsa
"Amorous Pastimes in the Spring"
From Prārthanā by 
Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura
Text 1
vṛndāvana ramya-sthāna,  divya-cintāmaṇi-dhāma,
ratana-mandira manohara
āvṛta kālindī-nīre,  rāja-haṁsa keli kore,
tāhe śobhe kanaka-kamala

vṛndābana—the forest of Vṛndāvana; ramya-sthāna—is a transcendental beautiful place; divya—in the spiritual sky; cintāmaṇi-dhāma—and is made entirely of touchstone, which fulfills all desires; ratana-mandira—temples bedecked with costly jewels; manohara—enchanting; āvṛta—surrounded; kālindī-nīre—by the waters of the river Yamunā; rāja-haṁsa—royal swans; keli kore—frolick; tāhe—in the midst of that water; śobhe—splendrously shines; kanaka-kamala—a golden lotus.

 The beautiful place known as Vṛndāvana is a transcendental abode in the spiritual world, and is composed entirely of divine touch-stones. There are many enchanting temples bedecked with costly jewels. The royal swans known as rāja-haṁsa frolic in the waters of the river Yamunā, which surrounds that transcendental island. In the midst of that divine river is a beautiful golden lotus of a hundred petals.
Text 2
tār madhye hema-pīṭha,  aṣṭa-dale beṣṭita,
aṣṭa-dale pradhānā nāyikā
tār madhye ratnāsane,  bosi' āchen dui jane,
śyāma-saṅge sundarī rādhikā

tār madhye—in the midst of that lotus; hema-pīṭha—a golden platform; aṣṭa-dale veṣṭita—surrounded by eight petals; aṣṭa-dale—situated upon those eight petals; pradhānā nāyikā—are the eight chief gopīs; tār madhye—in the center of the surrounding petals; ratna-āsane—upon a jeweled throne; bosi' āchen—are seated; dui jane—the two transcendental lovers; śyāma-saṅge—in the company of the dark Lord śyāma; sundarī rādhikā—sits the beautiful Rādhikā.

 In the center of that lotus is a golden platform surrounded by eight petals. Situated upon those eight petals are the eight principal sakhīs, headed by Lalitā and Viśākhā. In the center of the surrounding petals the Divine Couple presides, seated upon a jeweled throne. In the company of Lord Śyāma sits the beautiful Rādhikā.
Text 3
o-rūpa-lāvaṇya-rāśi,  amiyā poḍiche khasi',
hāsya-parihāsa-sambhāṣaṇe
narottam dās koy,  nitya-līlā sukha-moy,
sadāi sphuruka mora mane

o-rūpa-lāvaṇya-rāśi—the waves of that beauty and sweetness; amiyā poḍiche khasi'—are falling like showers of nectar; hāsya-parihāsa—a flood of laughing and joking; sambhāṣaṇe—as they address one another; narottam dās koy—Narottama Dāsa says; nitya-līlā—these eternal pastimes from day to day; sukha-moy—are full of transcendental pleasure; sadāi sphuruka—may they be ever manifest; mora mane—in my heart.

 The waves of their beauty and sweetness are emanating showers of nectar in the form of Their talks, which are filled with a flood of laughing and joking as they address one another. Narottama Dāsa says, "May these eternal pastimes overflowing with transcendental joy be ever manifest in my heart."
Song 52: Yadi Gaura Nā Hoito
"If Lord Gaura Had Not Incarnated"
52. Yadi Gaura Nā Hoito
"If Lord Gaura Had Not Incarnated"
By Vasu Ghosh
Text 1
yadi gaura nā hoito,  tabe ki hoito,
kemone dharitām de
rādhār mahimā,  prema-rasa-sīmā,
jagate jānāto ke

yadi—if; gaura—Lord Gaura; nā hoito—had not incarnated; tabe—then; ki hoito—what would have happened?; kemone—how?; dharitām de—we maintained these bodies; rādhār mahimā—the glories of Rādhā; prema-rasa-sīmā—the topmost limit of divine love; jagate—in the universe; jānāto—cause to know; ke—who?

 If Lord Gaura had not appeared as the yuga-avatāra in this Age of Kali, then what would have become of us? How could we have tolerated living? Who in this universe would have ever learned about the topmost limits of loving mellows that comprise the glory of Śrī Rādhā?
Text 2
madhura vṛndā,  vipina-mādhurī,
praveśa cāturī sār
baraja-yuvati,  bhāver bhakati,
śakati hoito kār

madhura—sweet; vṛndā vipina-mādhurī—the sweetness of the forest of Vṛndā Devī; praveśa—entrance; cāturī—cleverness; sār—the essence; baraja-yuvati—the damsels of Vraja; bhāver bhakati—devotion in their mood; śakati—potency; hoito—to become; kār—whose?

 Who would have had the power to render ecstatic devotional service that follows in the footsteps of the damsels of Vraja? Indeed, the clever expertise of the Vraja-gopīs is a prerequisite for entering the supremely sweet forest of Vṛndā Devī.
Text 3
gāo gāo punaḥ,  gaurāṅger guṇa,
sarala koriyā mana
e bhava-sāgare,  emona doyāl,
nā dekhiye eka-jana

gāo gāo—sing and sing; punaḥ—repeatedly; gaurāṅger guṇa—the qualities of Lord Gaura; sarala—simple; koriyā—making; mana—the mind; e bhava-sāgare—in the ocean of this material world; emona doyāl—such a merciful one; nā dekhiye—is not seen; eka-jana—not even one person.

 Oh, please sing again and again of the glorious qualities of Lord Gaurāṅga! Just try to keep your heart simple. Not even one person within this ocean of nescience has ever seen such a magnanimous personality as He.
Text 4
(āmi) gaurāṅga boliyā,  nā genu galiyā,
kemone dhorinu de
vāsur hiyā,  pāṣāṇa diyā,
kemone gaḍiyāche

āmi—I; gaurāṅga boliyā—chanting the name of Gaurāṅga; nā—not; genu—passed; galiyā—melting; kemone—how?; dhorinu—have I held; de—this body; vāsur hiyā—the heart of Vasu Ghosh; pāṣāṇa—stone; diyā—giving; kemone—how?; gaḍiyāche—is created.

 Even though I chant the holy name of Lord Gaurāṅga, somehow I still have not melted in ecstasy-how then have I maintained the burden of this body? How has the Creator fashioned this body with a stone in place of Vasu Ghosh's heart?
