Folio Archives
Prarthana-Prayers

Part 1 Lalasamayi-Longings

Song 1

Text 1
gaurāṅga’ balite habe pulaka-śarīra
‘hari hari’ balite nayane ba’he nīra

gauranga--Gauranga; bolite--saying; habe--will; pulaka—with shivering; sarira--body; hari--O Hari; hari--O Hari; bolita--saying; nayane--on the eyes; ba'be--flows; nira--tears.

     When will that opportune moment come to us when there will be shivering of the body as soon as we chant Lord Gauranga's name?  While chanting Hare Krsna, when will there be tears in the eyes?

Text 2

āra kabe nitāi-cāṅdera karuṇā ha-ibe
saṁsāra-vāsanā mora kabe tuccha ha’be

ara--and; kabe--will be; nitai--of Lord Nityananda; cander--of the moon; koruna--mercy; hoibe--will be; samsara--of material existence; basana--the desire; mora--my; kabe--when?; tuccha--insignificant; habe--will be.

When will I obtain the mercy of Lord Nityanandacandra? When, by His mercy, will the desire for material enjoyment become very insignificant?

Text 3

viṣaya chāḍiya kabe śuddha ha’be mana
kabe hāma heraba śrī vṛndāvana

     bisaya--from material desires; chariya--giving up; kabe--when?; suddha--purified; ha'be--will be; mana--the mind; kabe--when?; hama--I; herabo--I will see; sri-brndabana--Sri Vrndavana.

     When the mind is completely purified, being freed from material anxieties and desires, then I shall be able to understand Vrndavana and the conjugal of Radha and Krsna, and then my spiritual life will be successful.

Text 4

rūpa-raghunātha-pade haibe ākuti
kabe hāma būjhāba se jugala periti

     rupa--of Rupa Gosvami; raghunatha--of Raghunatha Gosvami; pade--the books; hoibe--will be; akuti--eagerness; kabe--When?;hama--I; bujhabo--I will understand; se--this; jugala--of the divine couple; piriti--love.

     When shall I be very much eager to study the books left by the Six Gosvamis, headed by Srila Rupa Gosvami and Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami?  By their instruction I shall be able to properly understand the loving affairs of Radha and Krsna.

Text 5

rūpa-raghunātha-pade rahu mora āśa
prārthanā karaye sadā narottama dāsa

     rupa of Rupa Gosvami; raghunatha--of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; pade--at the lotus feet; rahu--is; mora--my; asa--aspiration; prarthana--prayer; koroye--does; sada--continually; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa. 
     My only aspiration is to attain the lotus feet of the Six Gosvamis headed by Srila Rupa Gosvami and Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.  Narottama dasa constantly prays to attain their lotus feet.


Part 2 Samprarthanatmika-Appeal

Song 2


Text 1

rādhā-kṛṣṇa! nivedana ei jana kare
doṅha ati rasamaya sa karuṇa-hṛdaya
avadhāna kara nātha more

     radha-krsna--O Radha and Krsna; nibedana--an appeal ei--this; jana--person; kore--does; donhe--both; ati--very; rasamaya--full of nectar; sa--with; karuna--of mercy; hrdaya--in the heart; abadahana--attention; kara--please give; natha--O Lords; more--to me.

     O Radha and Krsna, this person presents an appeal before you.  You are both very chamring and full of nectar, and Your hearts are full of compassion.  My Lords, please listen to my request.

Text 2
he kṛṣṇa gokulacandra he gopī prāṇa-vallabha
he kṛṣṇa-priyā –śiromaṇi
hema-gaurī śyāma-gāya śravaṇe paraśa pāya
guṇa śuni juḍāya parāṇī

          he--O; krsna--Krsna; gokula-of Gokula; candra--O moon; gopijana--of the gopis; siromani--O crest--jewel; hema--of gold; gauri--with a golden complexion; syama-gaya--with a dark complexion; sravane--on the ear; parasa paya--may touch; guna--quaalities; suni--hearing; judaya--accepting; parani--life.
	
     O dark-complexioned Krsna, O moon of Gokula, O lover of the gopis, O golden-complexioned Radha, O crest-jewel of the gopis who are so dear to Krsna, please hear my glorification of Your transcendental virtues, and please accept the offering of my entire life that I place before You.  Please let my appeal touch Your ears.

Text 3

adhama-durgati-jane kevala karuṇā mane
tribhuvana e jaśa-kheyāti
śuniya sādhura mukhe śaraṇa lainū sukhe
upekṣile nāhi mora gati

     adhama--degraded; durgati--misdirected; jane--person; kevala--sole; karuna--mercy; mane--mind; tri-bhuvana--the three words; e--this; jasah--fame; kheyati--ferry; suniya--hearing; sadhura--of the saintly devotees; mukhe--in the mouth; sravana--hearing; lai nu--accepted; sukhe--in happiness; upekhile--neglect; nahi--not; mara--my; gati--direction.

     O My Lords, the narration of Your transcendental glories is like a ferryboat which enables the devotees to cross beyond the three material worlds.  O my Lords, You are very merciful to this fallen and misdirected person.  Please listen to this appeal from the mouth of Your devotee.  Let his words touch Your ears.  Please do not neglect me.

Text 4
jaya rādhe jaya kṛṣṇa jaya jaya rādhe kṛṣṇa
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa jaya jaya rādhe
aṅjali mastake dhari narottama bhūme paḍi
kahe doṅhe purāo mana-sādhe

     jaya--all glories; radhe--O Radha; jaya--all glories; krsna--O Krsna; jaya--all glories;jaya--all glories;radhe--O Radha; krsna--O Krsna; krsna--O Krsna; krsna--O Krsna; jaya--all glories;jaya--all glories;radhe--O Radha; anjali--folded hands; mastake--on my head; kori--placing; narottama--Narottama; bhume--on the ground; padi'--falling; kahe-donhe--You two; purao--please fulfill; manah--of my heart; sadhe--the desire.

     O Radha, all glories to You. O Krsna all glories to You. O Radha and Krsna, all glories, all glories to You. O Krsna, O Krsna, all glories to You, O Radha, all glories to You.  Narottama dasa places His folded hands upon his head, and falls to the ground before You.  Please fulfill the desires of his heart.

Part 3 Dainya bodhika-The Author Describes His Fallen Condition

Song 3

Text 1

hari hari! ki mora karama gati manda
braje rādhā-kṛṣṇa pada nā sevinu tila-ādha
nā bhūjhinū rāgera sambandha

hari--O Hari; hari--O Hari; ki--how; mora--my; karama-gati--
actions; manda--are slow; braje--in Vraja; radha--of Radha; krsna--and Krsna; pada--the lotus feet; na--not; bhajinu--I worshiped; tila-ardha--half a moment; na--not; bujhinu--I understood; ragera--of divine love; sambandha--the relationship.

     O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, how slow I am!  I refuse to worship the lotus feet of Radha and Krsna in Vrajabhumi even for half a moment, and I am completely unable to understand the mellows of transcendental love.

Text 2

svarūpa sanātana rūpa raghūnātha bhaṭṭa-yūgau
bhūgarbha śrī-jīva lokanātha
ihāṅ sabāra pāda-padma nā sevinū tila-ādha
kise āra puribeka sādha
     swarupa--Svarupa Damodara Gosvami; sanata--Sanatana Gosvami; rupa--rupa Gosvami; raghunatha--Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; bhatta-yuga--Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami and Gopala Bhatta Gosvami; bhugarbha--Bhugarbha Gosvami; sri-jivga-- Srila Jiva Gosvami; lokanatha--Lokanatha Gosvami; inha--this; sabhara--of the company; pada-padma--lotus feet; na--not; sevinu--I serve; tila-ardha--for half a moment; ara--and; kise--by which; puribeka--are fulfilled; sadha--desire.

     Even for half a moment I will not worship the lotus feet of Srila Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, Srila Sanatana Gosvami, Srila Rupa Gosvami, Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, Srila Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami, Srila Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, Srila Bhugarbha Gosvami, Srila Jiva Srila, and Srila Lokanatha Gosvami.  How will it be possible for me to attain my desire?

Text 3

kṛṣṇadāsa kavirāja rasika bhakata-mājha
je racila caitanya-carita
gaura-govinda-līlā śunile galaye śilā
nā ḍūvila tāhe mora cita
     krsnadasa kaviraja--Krsnadasa Kaviraja; rasika--expert at reslishing transcendental mectar; bhakata--of the devotees; majha--in the midst; jenho--by whom; kaila--narrated; caitanya-of Lord Caitanya; carita--the pastimes; gaura--of Lord Gaurasundara; govinda--and of Lord Govinda; lila--the pastimes; sunite--hearing; galaye--melt; sila--stones; tahate--in him; na--not; haila--is; mora--my; cite--in the heart.

     Among the devotees Krsnadasa Kaviraja is extremely expert at relishing the transcendental nectar of the mellows of love of God.  When the stones hear his Caitanya-caritamrta and Govinda-lilamrta, they begin to melt in ecstasy.  In spite of this, I cannot appreciate him within my heart.

Text 4

tāṅhāra bhaktera-saṅga tāṅra saṅge yāṅra saṅga
tāra saṅge kena nāila bāsa
ki mora dūḥkhera kathā janama goṅāinū vṛthā
dhik dhik narottama dāsa

     se--this; saba--all; bhakata--of the devotees; sanga--association; je--who; karila--does; tara--of them; sanga--the association; tara--of him; sange--in association; kene--take; nahila--not; basa--residence; ki--how; mora--my; duhkhera--of suffering; katha--narration; janama--life; gonainu--spent; vrtha--uselessly; dhik--fie; dhik--fie; narrottama dasa--on Narottama dasa.

     Furthermore, I refuse even to associate with the friends and companions of these great souls.  How sad is my tale.  I have spent my life uselessly.  Fie, fie on this Narottama dasa.

Song 4

Text 1
hari hari! biphale janama goñāinu
manuṣya-janama pāiya rādhā-kṛṣṇa nā bhajiyā
jāniyā śuniyā biṣa khāinu

hari hari!—O Lord Hari!; biphale—uselessly; janama goṅāinu—I have spent my life; manuṣya-janama pāiyā—having obtained a human birth; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; nā bhajiyā—having not worshiped; jāniyā śuniyā—even after knowing and hearing about it; viṣa khāinu—I have drunk poison.


     O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, I have spent my life uselessly.  Although I have obtained a human birth, I have refused to worship Radha and Krsna, and in this way I have knowingly drunk poison.

Text 2

golokera prema-dhana hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana
rati nā janmila kena tāya
saṁsāra-biṣānale dibā-niśi hiyā jvale
juḍāite nā kainu upāya

     golokera--of Goloka Vrndavana; prema--of love of God; dhana--the treasure; hari-- of Lord Hari; nama--of the name; sankirtana--the glorification; rati--attraction; na--not; janmilo--manifest; kena--why?; taya-somsara--of material existance; bisa--of poison; anale--in the fire; diba--day; nisi--and night; hiya jwale--burns; juraite--spreads; na--
not; koinu--I will accept; upaya--the remedy.

     The treasure of love of God has descended from the spiritual world of goloka Vrndavana, appearing in this world as the sankirtana movement of the chanting of Lord Hari's holy names.  Why am I not attracted to it?  Day and night I burn from the poison of material existance, but still I refuse to take the antidote.

Text 3

brajendra-nandana jei śacī-suta haila sei
balarāma haila nitāi
dīna-hīna jata chila hari-nāme uddhārila
tāra sākṣi jagāi mādhāi

     braja--of Vraja; indra--of the king; nandana--the son; jei--who is; saci--of Saci-devi; suta--the son; sei--He is; balarama--Balarama; hoilo--has become; nitai--Nityananda; dina--poor; hina--and fallen; jata--who; chilo--were; hari--of Lord Hari; name--by the name; uddharilo--were delivered; tara--of this; saksi--the testimony; jagai-Jagai; madhai--and Madhai.

     Lord Krsna, the prince of Vraja has appeared as Lord Caitanya, the son of Saci-devi, and Lord Balarama appeared as Lord Nityananda.  Those who were most fallen and degraded have become lifted from their fallen condition by the chanting of the holy Name of Lord Hari. The story of Jagai and Madhai testifies to the truth of this.

Text 4

hā hā prabhu nanda-suta bṛṣabhanū-sutā-juta
karunā karaha ei-bāra
narottama-dāsa kaya nā ṭheliha rāṅgā pāya
tomā bine ke āche āmāra
     ha--O; ha--O; nanda--of Nanda Maharaja; suta--son; vrsabhanu--of Maharaja Vrsabhanu; suta--by the daughter; juta--accompanied; koruna--mercy; karoho--please give; ei-baro--this time;narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; koy--says; na--do not; theliho--push away; ranga--reddish lotus feet; pay--having attained; toma--for You; bine--except; he--who?; ache--is; amara--mine.

     O Lord Krsna, O son of Maharaja Nanda, O companion of Srimati Radharani, the daughter of Maharaja Vrsabhanu, please be merciful to me.  Now that I have finally attained Your reddish lotus feet, please do not push me away.  Except for You, who is my shelter?

Song 5

Text 1

     prāṇeśvara! nivedana ei jana kare
govinda gokulacandra parama ānanda-kanda
gopī-kūla priya dekha more

     prana--of life; iswara--O Lord; nibedana--appeal; ei--
this; jana--person; kore--does; govinda--O Govinda; gokual--of Gokula; candra--O moon; parama--supreme; ananda--of bliss; kanda--root; gopi-kula--of the gopis; priya--the dear beloved; dekha--please glance; more--on me.

     O master of my life, this person places an appeal before You. O Govinda, O moon of Gokula, O source of all transcendental bliss, O beloved of the gopis, please cast Your glance upon me.

Text 2

tuyā priya pada-seva ei dhana more dibā
tumi prabhu karuṇāra nidhi
parama maṅgala yaśa śravaṇe parama rasa
kāra kibā kārjya nahe siddhi

     tuya--Your; pada--feet; padma--of the lotus; seba--service; ei--this; dhana--wealth; more--my; diba--by day; tumi--you; natha--O Lord; karunara--of mercy; nidhi--an ocean; parama--supremely; mangala--auspicious; jasa--fame; sravSri Krsnane--on the ear; parama--the greatest; rasa--nectar; kara--difficulty; kiba--what; karya--activity; nahe--not; siddhi--completed.

     O my Lord, You are an ocean of mercy, and the service of Your lotus feet are my constant treasure.  Hearing Your supremely auspicious glories is the greatest nectar for the ears.  If You bestow Your mercy, then what difficult task cannot be accomplished?

Text 3

dāruṇa-saṁsāra-gati viṣayete lubdha-mati
tuyā vismaraṇa-śela buke
jara jara tanū-mana acetana anukṣaṇa
jīyante marana bhela duḥkhe   

daruna--harsh; samsara--of material life; gati--movements; bisama--unbearable; bisaya--field of perception; mati--consciousness; tuya--of You; bismarana--of forgetfulness; sela--the dart; buke--in my chest; jarajara--shattered; tanu--my body; mana--and mind; acetana--unconscious; anuksana--from moment to moment; jiyante--in life; mstsns--with death; bhela--mixed; duhkhe--in suffering.

     I wander through this world of suffering, my mind fixed on the objects of the senses which bring only pain, and my chest pierced by the javelin of forgetfulness of You.  My body and mind are withered and shattered, and from moment I become unconscious.  Immersed in pain, I am like a living corpse.

Text 4

mo-baḍa adhama jane kara kṛpā nirīkṣaṇe
dāsa kari rākha vṛndābane
śri-kṛṣṇa caitanya nāma prabhu mora gaura-dhāma
narottama laila śaraṇe
     mo-hena--like me; adhama--fallen; jane--person; kara--please give; krpa--of mercy; niriksane--glance; dasa--a servant; kari--making; rakha--please place; brndabane--in  Vrndavana; sri--krsna-caitanya--Sri Krsna Caitanya; nama--named; prabhu--master; mora--my; gaura-dhama--with a golden complexion; narottama--Narottama; laila--takes; sarane--shelter.

     Please give me Your merciful glance.  Make me Your servant, and allow me to stay in Vrndavana.  That goledn-complexioned person who bears the name Sri Krsna Caitanya is my master, Narottama dasa takes shelter of Him.

Song 6

Text 1

hari hari! kṛpā kari rākha nija-pade
kāma krodha chaya jane lañā phire nānā sthāne
viṣaya-bhuṅjāya nānā-mate

hari--O Hari; hari--O Hari; krpa--mercy; kari'--giving; rakha--place me; nija-pade--at Your feet; kama--lust; krodha--anger; chaya--six; jane--person; lana--accetp; phire--wander; nana--various; sthane--in places; bisaya--the objects of the senses; bhunjaya--enjoying; sana-mate--in various ways.

     O Lord Hari, O Lord Hari, please give me shelter at Your feet.  Lust and anger are the leaders of the group of six men who impell me to wander here and there in the attempt to enjoy varieties of sense-gratification.

Text 2

haiyā māyāra dāsa kari nānā abhilāṣa
tomāra smaraṇa gela dūre
artha-lābha ei āśe kapaṭa-vaiṣṇava-veśe
bhramiyā bulaye ghare ghare

haiya--having become; mayara--of illusion; dasa--the servant; kari'--having done; nana--various; abhilasa--desires; tomara--of You; smarana--rememberance; gela--has gone; dure--far away; artha--of wealth; labha--the aquisition; ase--aspiration; kapata--cheating; baisnaba--of a Vaisnava; bese--in the dress; bhramiya bulaya--wandering; ghara ghare--from home to home.

     I am full of material desires and I have become the servant of material illusion.  My memory of You has fled far asay.  Disguised as a Vaisnava I wander from house to house, motivated by the desire to accumulate wealth.

Text 3

aneka duḥkhera pare layechile braja-pūre
kṛpā-ḍora galāya baṅdhiyā
daiva-māyā balāt kāre khasāiya sei ḍore
bhava kūpe dileka ḍariya

aneka--many; duhkhera--sufferings; pare--beyond; layechile--is; braja-pure--Vrajabhumi; krpa--of mercy; dora--the rope; galaya--about the neck; bandhiya--binding; daiba--maya--the illusory energy; balat kare--at this outrage; khas-iya--lossening; sei--these; dore--ropes; bhaba--of material existance; kupe in the well; dileka-dhariya--throwing.

     In this town of Vraja, which is situated beyond all these sufferings, You have tied me about the neck with your rope of mercy.  Seeing this outrage, the illusory energy loosened those ropes and again threw my into the well of material existence.

Text 4

 unaḥ yadi kṛpā-kari e janāre keśa dhari
tāniyā tulaha braja-dhāme
tabe se dekhiya bhāla natubā parāṇa gela
kahe dīna dāsa narottama


punah--again; yadi--if; krpa--mercy; kari'--having done; e--this; janare--person; kese--by the hair; dhari--holding; taniya--pulling; braja--of Vraja; dhame--in the abode; tave--then; se--he; dekhiya--having seen; bhala--in an auspicious condition; natuba--otherwise; parana--life; gela--would have gone; kahe--speaks; dina--the poor; dasa narottama--Narottama dasa.

     If You are again merciful You will grasp this person by the hair, rescue him from illusion's well, and place him in the abode of Vraja.   Seeing that the Lord placed him in an auspicious condition of life, whereas otherwise his life would have perished, the poor and fallen Narottama dasa sings this song.

Song 7

Text 1

hari hari! baḍa śela marame rahila
pāiyā dūrlabha tanu śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhajana vinū
janma mora biphala haila

     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; bada--great; sela--javelin; marame--in the quick; rahila--dispatched; paiya--having attained; durlabha--difficult to get; tanu--body; sri--krsna--of Sri Krsna; bhajana--the devotional service; binu--without; janma--birth; mora--my; biphala--useless; haila--has become.   

     O Lord Hari, O Lord Hari, a great javelin has pierced me in the core of the heart.
     Having attained this difficult to get human body, I have neglected the worship of Sri Krsna, and in this way my life has become useless.

Text 2

brajendranandana hari nabadvīpe avatāri
jagata bhariyā prema dila
muñi se pāmara-mati biśeṣe kaṭhina ati
teṅhi more karuṇā nahila

     braja--of Vraja; indra--of the king; nandana--the son; hari--Lord Hari; nabadwipe--in Navadvipa; abatari'--having incarnated; jagat--the universe; bhariya--filling; prema--pure love of God; dila--the heart; muni--I; se--he; pamara--sinful; mati--minded; bisese--specifically; kathina--hard and cruel; ati--very; teni--that; more--in me; daruna--mercy; nahila--ther is not.

     Although Lord Hari, the prince of Vraja, has descended in Navadvipa and filled the universe with pure love of God, I remain very sinful at heart, cruel, and merciless.

Text 3

svarūpa sanātana rūpa raghunātha bhaṭṭa-yuga
tāhāte nā haila mora mati
divya cintāmaṇi dhāma vṛndāvana hena sthāna
sei dhāme nā kainū vasati

     swarupa--Svarupa Damodara Gosvami; sanata--Sanatana Gosvami; rupa--rupa Gosvami; raghunatha--Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; bhatta-yuga--Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami and Gopala Bhatta Gosvami; tahate--in them; na--not; haila--is; mora--my; mati--thought; dibya--transcendental; cintamani--of cintamani gems; dhama--the abode; brndavana--Vrndavana; hena--such; sthana--place; sei--this; dhame--in the abode; na--not; kainu vasati--I reside.

     My mind refuses to think of Srila Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, Srila Sanatana Gosvami, Srila Rupa Gosvami, Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, Srila Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami, Srila Gopala Bhatta Gosvami.  I decline to make my residence in Vrndavana-dhama, the abode full of transcendental cintamani gems.

Text 4

viśeṣa viṣaye mati nahila vaiṣṇave rati
nirantara kheda uṭhe mane
narottama dāsa kahe jīvera ucita nahe
śrī-guru-vaiṣṇava-sevā vine

     bisesa--specifically; bisaye--in the objects of sense-gratification; mati--the mind; nahila--not; baisnabe--in the association of devotees; rati--delight; nirantara--constant; kheda--pain and regret; uthe--arises; mane--in the heart; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; kahe--says; jibara--of the life; ucita--suitable; nahe--not; sri-guru--of the spiritual master; baisnaba--and the Vaisnavas; seba--service; bine--without.       

     My mind is absorbed in sense-gratification, and I do not take pleasure in the association of devotees.  For this reason pain and regret arise within my heart.  Narottama dasa says: It is not good to live without serving the spiritual master and the Vaisnavas.

Part 4 Dainya bodhika prarthana-Prayer Wherein the Author Describes His Fallen Condition

Song 8

Text 1

hari hari! ki mora karama abhāga
biphale jīvana gela hṛdaye rahila śela
nāhi bhela hari-anurāga

     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; ki--how; karama--activities; abhaga--unfortunate; biphale--useless; jibana--the life is passed hrdaye--in the heart; rahile--placed; sela--a javelin; nahi--not; bhela--mixed; hari--for Lord Hari; anuraga--love.

     O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, everything that I do is inauspicious.  I have uselessly wasted my life, and I have no love for You.  It is as if my heart were pierced by a sharp javelin.

Text 2

yajña dāna tīrtha-sthāna puṇya-karma japa dhyāna
akāraṇe saba gela mohe
bujhilāma mane hena upahāsa haya jena
vastra hīna alaṅkāra dehe

     yajna--Vedic sacrifices; dhana--charity; tirtha--in pilgrimage places; snana--bathing; punya--pious; karma--activities; japa--chanting of mantras; dhyana--meditation; akarane--useless;  saba--all; gela--were; mohe--in illusion; bujhilama--I knew; mane--in the mind; hena--like this; upahasa--laughter; haya--was; jena--by which; bastra--elegant clothing; hina--without; alankara--ornaments; dehe--on the body.

     Vedic sacrifices, charity, bathing in holy places of pilgrimage, pious deeds, mantra-chanting, and meditation, are all useless and illusory.  When I think of these things laughter arises within my mind.  Engaging in these activities without performing devotional service is like placing valuable ornaments on a body colthed in rags.

Text 3

sādhu-mukhe kathāmṛta śuniyā bimala citta
nāhi bhela aparādha-karāṇa
satata asat-saṅga sakali haila bhaṅga
ki kariba āile śamana

     sadhu--of the saintly devotees; mukhe--on the mouth; katha--topics; amrta--nectar; suniya--hearing; bimala--cita--purified; nahi--not; bhela--mixed; aparadha--of offenses; karana--the cause; satata--constantly; asat--of the non-devotees; sanga--association; sakali--everything; haila--has become; bhanga--broken; ki--how; kariba--will appear; aile--on the horizen; samana--death.

     Although I sometimes hear the nectarean message of Godhead from the mouths of the devotees, because I commit so many offenses, I do not become purified.  I continually associate with non-devotees, and in this way all my spiritual advancement is broken apart.  Furthermore, death will soon appear on my horizon.

Text 4

śruti smṛti sadā rabe śuniyāchi ei sabe
hari-pada abhaya śaraṇa
janama laiyā sūkhe kṛṣṇa nā balinū mūkhe
nā karinū se rūpa-bhāvana

     sruti--of the Sruti; smrti--of the Smrti; sada--always; rabe--in the statements; suniyachi--I have heard; ei--this; sabe--all; hari--of Lord Hari; pada--the lotus feet; abhaya--fearless; sarana--the shelter; janama--this life; laiya--having passed; sukhe--happy; krsna--the sound Krsna; na--not; balinu--I chanted; mukhe--on the mouth; na--not; karinu--I do; se-rupa--of His transcendental form; bhabana--the meditation.

     Although I have repeatedly heard the Sruti and Smrti scriptures' declaration that one should take shelter of the Lord Hari's lotus feet in order to become fearless, nevertheless I refuse to happily chant the holy name of Lord Krsna, and I decline to meditate on His transcendental form.

Text 5

rādhā-kṛṣṇa dūṅha-pāya tanū mana rahu tāya
āra dūre jāuka bāsanā
narottama dāse kaya āra mora nāhi bhaya
tanū mana saṁpinū āpanā

     radha--Radha; krsna--Krsna; dunhu--both; paya--lotus feet; tanu--body; mana--mind; rahu--may stay; taya--that; ara--and; dure--far away; jauka--go; basana--material desires; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; kaya--saying; ara--and; mora--of me; nahi--there is no; bhaya--fear; tanu--body; mana--and mind; sampinu--I place; apana--spontaneously.

     I shall now concentrate my mind on the lotus feet of Sri Sri Radha and Krsna, and all my material desires will flee far away.  Narottama dasa says---Now that I have fixed my mind on Sri Sri Radha and Krsna, I am no longer afraid of my future.

Part 5 Swabhista lalasa-Longings

Song 9

Text 1

     hari hari! hena dina haibe āmāra
duṅhū aṅga paraśiba duṅhu aṅga nirakhiba
sevana kariba doṅhākāra

     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; hena--such; dina--a day; haibe--will be; amara--mine; dunhu--both; anga--of limbs; parasiba--I will touch; dunhu--both; anga--limbs; mirakhiba--I will see; sebana--service; kariba--I will do; donhakara--to both.

     O Lord Hari, O Lord Hari, when will this day be mine?  When will I see Your lotus feet? When will I drectly serve Your lotus feet?  When will I touch Your lotus feet?

Text 2

lalitā-viśākhā-saṅge sevana kariba raṅge
mālā gaṅthi' diba nānā phūle
kanaka-sampūṭa kari karpūra tāmbūla bhari
yogaiba adhara-jugale

lalita--of Lalita; visakha--and Visakha; sange--in the association; sebana--service; kariba--I will perform; range--in the arena; mala--a garland; granthi'--having strung; diba--by day; nana--with various; phule--flowers; kanaka--golden; samputa--box; kari'--making karpura--with camphor; tambula--and betel nuts; puri'--filling; yogaiba--I will place; adhara--of lips; jugale--in the pair.

     When, in the association of Lalita and Visakha, will I be able to directly serve You; When will I be albe to spend my days making garlands for You? When will I be able to fill a golden casket with camphor and betel-nuts, and then place these betel-nuts directly in Your mouth?

Text 3

rādhā-kṛṣṇa śri-caraṇa sei mora prāṇa-dhana
sei mora jīvana-upāya
jaya patita-pāvana deha more ei dhana
tūyā-vine anya nāhi bhāya

     radha--Radha; krsna--and krsna; brndabana--Vrndavana; ei--these; mora--my; prana--of life; dhana--the treasure; ei--these; mora--myu; jibana--of live; upaya--means of maintaining; jaya--all glories; patita--of the fallen; pabana--the deliverer; deha--please give; more--to me; ei--this; dhana--treasue; toma--You; bine--without; anya--another; nahi--there is not; bhaya--manifested.

     Sri Sri Radha-Krsna, and Their abode of Vrndavana are the valuable treasure of my life.  It is they who sustain me.  O deliverer of the fallen, please give this treasure to me, for I have no one to turn to, except for You.

Text 4

śrī-guru karuṇā-sindhu adhama-janāra bandhu
lokanātha lokera jīvana
hā hā prabhū! kara daya deha more pada-chāyā
narottama laila śaraṇa

     sri-guru--the spiritual master; karuna--of mercy; sindhu--ocean; adhama--of the fallen; janera--people; bandhu--the friend; lokanatha--Lokanatha Gosvami; lokera--of the people jivana--life; ha--O ha--O; prabhu--Lord; kara--please give; your lotus feet; chaya--the shade; narottama--Narottama dasa; laila--takes; sarana--shelter.

     O my spiritual master, O ocean of mercy, O friend of the fallen , O Lokanatha Gosvami, O life of the people, O master, please be merciful to me.  Please give me the shade of your lotus feet. Narottama dasa takes shelter of you.

Song 10

Text 1

     hari hari! kabe mora haibe sudine
keli-kautūka-raṅge kariba sevane

hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; kabe--will say; mora--my; haibe--will be; su-dine--auspicious day. keli--of pastimes; kautuka--happiness; range--in the arena; kariba--I will act; sebane--in service.

     O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, when will I directly serve You as You engage in blissful transcendental pastimes?  When will that auspicious day be mine?

Text 2

lalitā-viśākhā sane jateka sakhīra gaṇe
maṇḍalī kariba doṅhā mele
rāi kānu kare dhari nṛtya kare phirī phirī
nirakhi ' goṅāba kutūhalī

     lalita--of Lalita; bisakha--and Visakha; asane--at the place; jateka--all; sangira--of their friends; gane--in the company; mandali--company; kariba--will do; donha--the divine couple; meli'--meeting; rai--Radha; kanu--and Krsna; kare--do; dhari'--holding; nrtya--dancing; kare--do; phiri'--going; phiri' and going; nirakhi'--seeing; gona'be--voice will become choked up; kutuhali--in ecstasy.

     When in the company of Lalita, Visakha, and their friends, will I directly meet Sri Sri Radha and Krsna?  When, seeing Them dancing in Their transcendental pastimes, will my voice become choked up with ecstatic love?

Text 3

lalitā-viśākhā sane jateka sakhīra gaṇe
maṇḍalī kariba doṅhā mele
rāi kānu kare dhari nṛtya kare phirī phirī
nirakhi ' goṅāba kutūhalī

     alasa--from dancing; visrama--for rest; in the cottage; gobardhana--on Govardhana; giri--of hills; bare--the best; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; daya--says; ei jena--like this; mora--of me; haya--is; anuksana--at everymoment; carana--of the lotus feet; sevana--service.

     After the dancing pastimes are concluded, Sri Sri Radha and Krsna will take rest in a cottage on Govardhana Hill, the best of mountains.  Narottama dasa says:  I pray that I shall be able to continually serve the lotus feet of the Divine couple.

Song 11

Text 1

govardhana girivara kevala nirjana sthala
rāi kānu karibe śayane
lalitā-viśākhā-saṅge sevana kariba raṅge
sukhamaya rātūla caraṇe

     gobardhana--Govardhana; giri-bare--on the best of hills; kebala nirjana sthale--in a solitary place; rai kanu-- Radha and Krsna; karibe--will take; sayane--rest; lalita--of Lalita; bisakha--and visakha; sange--in the association; sebana--service; kariba--I will perform range--in the arena; sukhamaya--full of happiness; ratula--the reddish; carane--lotus feet.

     In a solitary place on Govardhana Hill, the best of mountains, Sri Sri Radha and Krsna sit on a couch, when, accompanied by Lalita and Visakha, will I jubilantly serve Their reddish lotus feet?

Text 2

kanaka sampūṭa kari karpūra tāmbula bhari
yogāiba badana-kamale
maṇimaya kiṇkiṇī ratna nupūra āni'
parāiba caraṇa-jūgale

     kanaka--golden; samputa--casket; kari'--making; karpura--with camphor; tambula--and betel-nuts; bhari'--holding; jogaiba--I will place; badana-kamale--in His lotus mouth; mani-maya--made of jewels; kinkini--waist- bells; ratana--with jewels; nupura--ankle-bells; ani'--bringing; paraiba--I will place; caran-jugale--on the lotus feet.

     When will I take camphor and betel-nuts from a golden box, and place it in Their lotus mouths?  When will I give them sashes made with jewelled bells, and when will I place jewelled ankle-bells on Their lotus feet?

Text 3 
kanaka kaṭorā pūri sūgandhi candana bhari
doṅhākāra śrī-aṅge ḍāliba
guru-rūpā sakhībāme tribhaṅga bhaṅgimā ṭhāme
camarera bātāsa Kariba

     kanaka--golden; katora-goblet; puri'--filling; sugandhi--aromatic; candana--sandalwood paste; buri'--donhakara--of the Divine couple; sri-ange--on the limbs; dhaliba--I will place; guru--of the spiritual master; rupa--in the form; sakhi--gopi; bame--at the left; tribhanga bhangima--three-fold bending; thame--form; camarera--of the camara fan; batasa--breeze; kariba--I will create.

     When will I fill a golden goblet for the Divine couple? When will I anoint Their limbs with aromatic sandalwood paste?  When, my spiritual master in his original form as a gopi, at my left, will I fan Their three-fold bending forms with a camara wisk?

Text 4

doṅhāra kamala āṅkhi pūlaka haiyā dekhi
duṅhu pada paraśiba kare
caitanya-dāsera dāsa mane mātra abhilāṣa
narottama dāse sadā sphure

     donhara--of both; kamala--lotus flower; ankhi--eyes; pulaka haiya--hairs standing up i ecstasy; dekhi'--seeing; dunhu--of the Divine couple; pada--the lotus feet; parisaba--will touch; kare--does caitanya--of Lord Caitanya; dasera--of the servant; dasa--servant; mane--in his mind; matra--sole; abhilasa--desire; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; sada--continually; aphure--manifests.

     When, seeing the lotus eyes of the Divine couple, will the hairs of my body stand up in ecstasy? When will I be able to directly touch Their lotus feet?  Narottama dasa, who is the servant of Lord Caitanya's servants, desires in this way.  He has no other desires.

Song 12

Text 1

hari hari! āra ki emana daśā haba
kabe bṛṣabhānu-pūre āhīrī gopera ghare
tanayā haiyā janamiba

hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; ara--and; ki--will; emana--like this; dasa--ondition of life; haba--will be; kabe--when?; brsabhanu--of Maharaja Vrsabhanu; pure--in the city; ahiri--of gopis; gopera--and gopas; ghare--the residence; tanaya--a daughter; haiya--becoming; janamiba--I will take birth.

     When will I take birth as a gopi in the town of Maharaja Vrsabhanu, where many gopas and gopis live? O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, will I someday attain this condition of life?

Text 2

jāvaṭe āmāra kabe e-pāṇi-grahaṇa habe
vasati kariba kabe tāya
sakhīra parama śreṣṭha je tāhāra haya preṣṭha
sevana kariba tāṅra pāya

     jabate--         amara--of me; kabe--when?  e--
this; prani--by the living entities; grahana--acceptance; habe--will be; basati--residence; kariba--I will do; kabe--when?; taya--that sakhira--of the gopis; parama srestha--best; je--
who; tahara--of them; haya--is; prestha--most dear; sebana--
service; kariba--I will perform; tanra--of them; paya--
attaining.

     When will I live in the city of Vrsabhanu and be accepted by its residents as one of their kin? When will I become the dear friend of the exalted gopis, and when will I be able to directly serve them?

Text 3

teṅha kṛpābān haiñā rātula caraṇe laiñā
āmāre karibe samarpaṇa
saphala haibe daśā pūribe manera āśā
sevi duṅhāra jugala-caraṇa

     tenha--He; krpaban--merciful; haina--is; ratula--reddish; carane--at the lotus feet; lana--attains; amare--me; karibe--will be; samarpana--offering; saphala--successful; haibe--will be; dasa--condition of life; puribe--will be fullfilled; manera--of the mind; asa--aspiration; se--this; dunhara--of the Divine couple; jugala--both; carana--lotus feet.

     When Lord Krsna is merciful to me I will be able to attain His reddish lotus feet.  When I attain the louts feet of the Divine couple, then my life will be successful, and all the desires of my mind will be fulfilled.

Text 4

bṛndābane dui-jana caturdike sakhī-gaṇa
sevana kariba avaśeṣe
sakhī-gaṇa cāribhite nānā jantra laiñā hāte
dekhiba manera abhilāṣe

     brndabane--in Vrndavana; dui--two; jana--persons; caturddike--all around; sakhi-gana--friends; sebana--service; kariba--I will perform; abasese--specific; sakhi-gana--gopis; caribhite--on all sides; nana--various; jantra--paraphernailia; laina--attain; hate--is; dekhiba--I will see; manera--of the mind; abhilase--in the desire.

     When will I be able to directly serve the Divine Couple, who are surrounded by Their gopi-friends?  When I obtain the facility to directly serve the Divine Couple in the association of the gopis, then all the desires of my mind will be fulfilled.

Text 5

dūṅhu cāṅda-mukha dekhi' juḍābe tāpita āṅkhi
nayane bahibe aśru-dhāra
vṛndāra nideśa pāba doṅhāra nikaṭe jāba
hena dina haibe āmāra

     dunhu--of the Divine couple; canda--moonlike; mukha--gaces; dekhi'--seeing; judabe--will be; tapita--afflicted; ankhi--eyes; nayane--on the eyes; bahibe--will be; asru--of tears; dhara--a stream; brndara--of Vrnda-devi; nidesa--the instruction; paba--will obtain; donhara--of the Divine couple; nikate--in the vicinity; jaba--will go; hena--like this; dina--day; haibe--will b; amara--mine.

     When will I be able to approach very near to the Divine Couple?  When will streams of tears flow from my eyes by seeing the moonlike faces of the Divine Couple?  when will I receive direct orders from Vrnda-devi, the close friend of the the Divine Couple?  When will that day be mine?

Text 6

śrī-rūpa-mañjarī sakhī more anāthinī dekhi
rākhibe rātula duṭī pāya
narottama dāsa bhaṇe priya-narma-sakhī-gaṇe
kabe dāsī karibe āmāra

     sri-rupa-manjari--Sri Rupa-manjari; sakhi--the gopi-friend; more--me anathini--helpless and unprotected; dekhi'--seeing; rakhibe--will protect; ratula--reddish; duti--two lotus feet; paya--attaining; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; bhane--says; priya--narma--sakhi--of the dear gopis; gane--in the assembley; kabe--will be; dasi--maidservant; karibe--will be; amara--of me.

     When will Sri Rupa-manjari, seeing me helpless and without any shelter, become my protectress?  When will I attain the shelter of the reddish lotus feet of the Divine Couple? Narottama dasa;  When will I become one of the maidservants of the gopis?

Song 13

Text 1

     hari hari! āra ki emana daśā haba
chāḍiyā puruṣa-deha kabe vā prakṛti haba
duṅhu aṅge candana parāba

     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; ara--and; ki--will?; emana--like this; dasa--condition of life; haba--be; chadiya--abandoning; purusa-deha--male human body; kabe--when?; ba--or; prakrti--nature; haba--will be; dunhu--of the Divine Couple; ange--on the limbs; candana--sandalwood paste; paraba--I will anoint.

     When, relinquishing this male material body, and obtaining the spiritual body of a gopi, will I anoint the limbs of the Divine Couple with sandalwood paste? O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, when will this day be mine?

Text 2

ṭāniyā bāṅdhiba cūḍā nava guñjā-hāre beḍā
nānā phule gāṅthi diba hāra
pīta-basana aṅge parāiba sakhī-saṅge
badane tāmbūla diba āra

     taniya--pulling; bandhiba--I will tie; cuda--hair; naba--fresh; gunja--of gunja; hare--necklace; beda--enclosing; nana--various; phule--flowers; ganthi--strung; diba--I will give; hara--garland; pita--yellow; basana--garments; ange--on the limbs; paraiba--I will place; sakhi--of the gopis; sange--in the company; badane--in the mouth; tambula--betel-nuts; diba--I will place; ara--and.

     When will I arrange the hair of the Divine Couple?  When will I give them gunja-necklaces and garlands; strung with various flowers?  When will I give Them yellow garments?  When, accompanied by the other gopis, will I place betel-nuts in Their lotus mouths?

Text 3

duṅhu rūpa manohārī heriba nayana bhari
nīlāmbare rāi sājāiyā
nava-ratna-jari āni bāṅdhiba vicitra beṇī
tāte phūla mālati gāṅthiyā

     dunhu--both; rupa--forms; manohari--enchanting; deriba--I will see; nayana--eyes; bhari'--filling; nilamambare--in blus garments; rai--Srimati Radharani; sajaiya--dressing; naba--nine; ratna--jewels; jari--with golden thread; ani--bringing; bandhiba--I will tie; bicitra--wonderful; veni-tate--braids; phula--blossoming; malati--jasmine flowers; ganthiya--stringing.

     When will gaze at the beautiful forms of the Divine Couple?  When will I dress Srimati Radharani in blue garments, and decorate her braided hair with garlands of jasmine flowers and strings of nine different kinds of jewels on a golden thread.

Text 4

sei rūpa-mādhurī dekhiba nayana bhari'
ei kari mane abhilāṣā
jaya rūpa sanātana deha more ei dhana
nivedaye narottama dāsa

     sei--this; rupa--of beauty; madhuri--sweetnes; dekhiba--I will see; nayana--my eyes; bhari'--filling; ei--this; kari--I do; mane--in the mind; abhilasa--desire; jaya--all glories; rupa--of Srila Rupa Gosvami and Srila Sanatana Gosvami; deha--please give; more--to me; ei--this; dhana--treasure; nibedaye--appeals; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa. 

     My desire is that some day I shall be able to directly see the sweet beauty of the transcendental forms of the Divine Couple.  O Srila Rupa Gosvami and Srila  Sanatana Gosvami, all glories to you both.  Please bestow this treasure upon me.  Please grant my desire.  Narottama dasa appeals to you in this way.

Song 14

Text 1

kusumita vṛndāvane nācata sakhī-gaṇe
pika-kula bhramara jhāṅkāre
priya-sahacari saṅge gāiyā jāibe raṅge
manohara nikūñja-kūṭīre

     kusumita--filled with blossoming flowers; brndabane--in Vrndavana; nacate--dance; sikhi-gane--peacocks; pka-kula--cuckoos; bhramara--bees; jhankare--warble and buzz; priya--dear; sahacari--of the gopi-friends; sange--in the association; gaiya--singing; jaiba--I will go; range--in the arena; manohara--enchanting; nikunja--of the grove; kutire--in the cottage.

     Vrndavana is filled with blossoming flowers, the dancing of peacocks and the sounds of cuckoos and bumble-bees.  When, in the association of the dear gopis, will I melodiously sing in a charming cottage in a grove of this Vrndavana?

Text 2

hari hari! manoratha phalibe āmāre
dūṅhuka manthara gati kautuke heraba ati
aṅga bhari pūlaka antare

     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; manoratha--desire; phalibe--will be fulfilled; amare--my; dunhuka--both; manthara--slow; gati--gait; kautuke--in delight; heraba--I will see; ati--very; anga--limbs; bhari--holding; pulaka--hairs standing in ecstasy; antare--within.

     When, seeing the slowly and gracefully moving Divine Couple, will my hairs will stand on end because of the ecstasy in my heart?

Text 3

caudike sakhīra mājhe rādhikāra iṅgite
cirūṇī laiyā kare kari'
kūṭila kūntala saba bikhāriyā āṅcaraba
vanāiba vicitra kabarī

     caudike--on all sides; sakhira--of gopi-friends; majhe--in the midst; radhikara--of Srimati Radharani; ingite--hinted; ciruni-comb; laiya--taking; kare--in the hand; kari'--doing; kutila--curling; kuntala--hair; saba--all; bithariya--stretching; anacaraba--I will act; banaiba--I will pull together; bicitra--wonderful; kabari--locks of hair.

     When, in the company of the gopis, will Srimati Radharani gesture that she wants me to comb her hair, and when will I then take the comb in my hand, and carefully comb her curling locks?

Text 4

mṛgamada malajaya sabe aṅge lepaba
parāiba manohara hāra
candana kūnkūme tilaka banāiba
heraba mūkha-sudhākara

     mrgamada--musk; malajaja--and sandalwood paste; saba--all; ange--on the limbs; lepaba--I will anoint; paraiba--I will place; manohara--beautiful; hara--garland; candana--sandalwood paste; kunkume--and kunkuma powder; tilaka--tilaka marking; banaiba--I will make heraba--I will see; makha--face; sudhakara--like the moon.

     When will I anoint Srimati Radharani's limbs with sandalwood paste and musk?  When will I give her a beautiful garland?  When will I gaze on her moonlike face as I decorate it with tilaka markings drawn in sandlewood paste and kunkuma?

Text 5

nīla paṭṭāmbara yatane parāiba
pāye diba ratana-mañjīre
bhṛṅgarera jale rāṅgā- caraṇa dhoyāiba
muchāiba āpana cikure

     nila--blue; patambara--garments; yatane--with effort; paraiba--I will place; apye--I stay; diba--I give; ratana--jewelled; manjire--anklet; bhrngarera--of the pot; jale--in the water; ranga--reddish; carana--feet; dhoyaiba--I will wash; muchaba--I will wipe; apana--with my own; cikure--hair.

     When will I carefully dress Srimati Radharani in blue garments?  When will I place jewelled ankletson her feet?  When will I take water from a jar and wash her reddish lotus feet?  When will I then dry her feet using my own hair as a towel?

Text 6

kusuma-kamala-dale śeṣa bichāiba
śayana karāba doṅhākāre
dhabala camara āni mṛdū mṛdu bījaba
śaramita dūṅhūka śarīre

     kusuma--flower; kamala--of a lotus; dale--petal; seya-sesa--remaining; bichaiba--I will spread out; sayana--bed; karaba--I will do; donhakare--the Divine Couple; dhabala--white; camara--camara fan; ani--bringing; mrdu mrdu--very gently; bijaba--I will fan; charamita--dunhuka--the Divine Couple; sarire--body.

     When will I make a couch of lotus petals for the Divine Couple?  When will I gently fan Them with a white camara wisk?

Text 7

kanaka sampūṭa kari karpūra tāmbūla bhari
jogāiba doṅhāra vadane
adhara sudhā-rase tāmbūla sūbāse
bhakava adika yatane

     kanaka--golden; samputa--casket; kari'--doing; karpura--camphor; tambula--betel-nuts; bhari'--filling; jogaiba--I will place; donhara--of the Divine Couple; badane--in the mouth; adhara--of the lips; sudha-rase--the nectar; tambula--of betel-nuts; subase--aromatic; bhokhaba--I will taste; adhika--with great; yatane--endeavor.

     When from a golden box will I take betel-nuts and camphor, and place them in the lotus mouths of the Divine Couple?  When will I carefully chew the aromatic remnants of such betel-nuts, which have become mixed with nectar from mouths of the Divine Couple?

Text 8

śrī-guru karuṇā-sindhu lokanātha dīna-bandhu
mūi dine kare abadhāna
rādhā-kṛṣṇa vṛndāvana priya-narma-sakhī-gaṇa
narottama māge ei dāna

     sri-guru--O spiritual master; karuna--of mercy; sindhu--O ocean; lokanatha--O Lokanatha Gosvami; dina--of the wretched conditioned souls; bandhu--O frined; mui--to me; dine--poor and distressed; kara--please give; abadhana--attention; radha-krsna--Sri Sri Radha and Krsna; brndabana--O holy land of Vrndavana; priya-narma-sakhi-gana-O gopis; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; mage--begs; ei--this; cana--charity.

     O Lokanatha Gosvami, O my spiritual master, O friend of the poor and wretched conditioned souls, O ocean of mercy, please hear the appeal of this person who is very misrable and poor-hearted.  O Radha and Krsna, O holy land of Vrndavana, O intimate gopi-friends of the Divine Couple, I beg that you all grant this charity to me.  Please fulfill these desires.

Part 6 Punah Svabhista lalasa-The Author Continues the Description of His Longings

Song 15

Text 1

     hari hari ! kabe mora haibe sudina
govardhana giri-bare parama nibhṛta ghare
rai kānu karāiba śayana

     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; kabe--when?; mora--of me; haibe--wll be; sudina--the auspicious day; gobardhana--on Govardhana; giri-bare--the best of mountains; parama--supremely; nibhrta--concealed; ghare--in a cottage; rai kanu--Radha and Krsna; karaiba--I will make; sayana--a couch.

          When, in a secluded cottage on Govardhana Hill, the best of mountains, will I prepare a couch for Sri Sri Radha and Krsna?  O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, when will that auspicious day be mine?

Text 2

bhṛṅgarera jale raṅgā caraṇa dhoyāiba
muchāba āpana cikure
kanaka-sampūṭa kari karpūra tāmbūla puri
jogāiba dūṅhuka adhare

     bhrngarera--of a pitcher; jale--with the water; ranga--reddish; carana--lotus feet; dhoyaiba--I will wash; muchaba--I will; wipe; apana--with my own; cikure--hair; kanaka--golden; samputa--box; kari'--doing; karpura--camphor; tambula--and betel-nuts puri'--filling; jogaiba--I will place; dunhuka--of the Divine Couple; adhare--on the lips. 

     When will I take water from a jar and wash the lotus feet of the Divine Couple?  When will I then dry Their feet using my own har as a towel?  When, from a golden box will I take betel-nuts and camphor, and place them on the lotus-lips of the Divine Couple?

Text 3

priya-sakhī-gaṇa-saṅge sevana kariba raṅge
caraṇa seviba nija-kare
duṅhuka kamala-diṭhi kautūke heraba
duṅhu aṅga pūlaka antare

     priya-sakhi-gana--of the gopis; sange--in the association; sebana--service; kariba--I will perform; range--in the arena; carana--the lotus feet; sebiba--I will serve; nija-kare--with my own hand; dunhuka--the Divine Couple; kamala--lotus; dithi--glance; kautuka--with joy; heraba--I will see; dunhu--of the Divine Couple; anga--the transcendental forms; pulaka--hairs standing up; antate--within.

     When, in the association of the gopis, will I directly serve the lotus feet of the Divine Couple with my own hand?  When, by seeing the lotus eyes of the Divine Couple, will the hairs of my body stand erect because of the ecstasy within my heart?

Text 4

mallikā mālatī jūhī nānā phule mālā gāṅthi
kabe diba doṅhāra galāya
soṇāra kaṭorā kari karpūra candana bhari
kabe diba doṅhākāra gāya

mallika malati yuthi--with mallika and malati flowers; nana--various; phule--with flowers; mala ganthi--a garland; kabe--when?; diba--I will give; donhara--of the Divine Couple; galaya--on the necks; sonara--golden; katora--vessal; kari--doing; karpura--camphor; candana--and sandalwood paste; bhari'--fillng; kabe--when; diba--will i place; dohnakara--of the Divine Couple; gaya--on the transcendental forms.

     When shall I string garlands of mallika and malati flowers and place them on the necks of the Divine Couple?  When shall I fill a golden goblet with camphor and sandalwood paste, and then anoint the transcendental forms of the Divine Couple with this mixture?

Text 5

āra kabe emana habe duṅhu-mukha-nirakhiba
līlā-rasa nikūñja-śayane
śrī-kundalatāra saṅge keli-kautuka raṅge
narottama karibe śravaṇe

     ara--and; kabe--when; emana--like this; habe--will be; dunhu--of the Divine Couple; mukha--the faces; nirakhiba--I will see; lila--rasa--the nectar of transcendental pastimes; nikunja--in the grove of Vrndavana; sayane--on a couch; sri-kundalatara--of Sri Kundalata devi; sange--in the association; keli--of pastimes; kautuka--bliss; range--in the arena; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; karibe--wil do; srabane--in hearing.

     When will I directly see the lotus faces of the Divine Couple?  When will Narottama dasa jubilantly hear Kundalata-devi's narration of the nectarean pastimes performed by the Divine Couple in the groves of Vrndavana? When will that day be?

Part 7 Lalasa-Longings

Song 16

Text 1

śrī-rūpa-mañjarī-pada sei mora sampada
sei mora bhajana-pūjana
sei mora prāṇa-dhana sei mora ābharaṇa
sei mora jīvanera jīvana

sri-rupa-manjari--of Sri Rupa-manjari; pada--the lotus feet; sei--they; mory--my; sampada--wealth; sei--they; mora--my; bhajana--devotional service; puja--and worship; swi--they; mora-
-my; prana--life-breath; dhana--treasure; sei--they; mora--my; abharana--ornament; sei--they; mora--my; jibera--of the life jibana--the life.

     Sri Rupamanjari's lotus feet are my only treasure.  They are my dovotional service and my worship.  they are my life's breath.  They are the ornament I wear.  They are the sustainer of my life.

Text 2

sei mora rasa-nidhi sei mora bāñca-siddhi
sei mora vedera dharama
sei vrata, sei tapa sei mora mantra-japa
sei mora dharama-karama

sei--they; mora--my; rasa--of nectar; nidhi--ocean; sei--they; mora--my; bancha--of desires; siddhi--the fulfillment; sei--they; mora--my; bedera--of the Vedas; dharama--the prescribed duties; sei--they; brata--vows; sei--they; tapa--austerity; sei--they; mora--my; mantra--of mantras; japa--chanting; sei--they; mora--my; dharama--of religion; karama--acts.

     For me they are an ocean of nectar.  They are the fulfillment of my desires.  For me they are the spiritual path outlined in the Vedas.  They are my religious vows.  They are my austerities.  They are my chanting of mantras.  They are my pious activities.

Text 3

anūkūla habe bidhi se-pade hoibe siddhi
nirakhiba e dui nayane
se rūpa-mādhurī-rāśi prāṇa-kūbalaya śaśi
praphullita habe niśi dine

     anukula--favorable; habe--will be; bidhi--destiny; se--these; pade--by the feet; haibe--will be; siddhi--perfection; nirakhiba--I will see; e dui--the Divine Couple; nayane--with my own eyes; se--this; rupa--of the form; madhuri--of sweetness; rasi--abundance; prana--life-breath; kubalaya--for the lotus flower; sasi--the moon; praphullita--blossomed; habe--will be; nisi--night; dine--and day. 

     Those feet will make destiny become kind to me.  Those feet will grant me perfection.  Those feet will enable me to directly see the Divine Couple with my own eyes.  Those feet are a great reservoir of beauty and sweetness.  Those feet are like a moon which causes the lotus flower of my life-breath to blossom.  Those lotus feet bloom within my heart through the entire day and night.

Text 4

tuyā adarśana-ahi garale jārala dehi
cira-dina tāpita jīvana
hā hā prabhu! kara dayā deho mora-pada-chāyā
narottama laila śaraṇa

     tuya--of you; adarsana--by not seeing; ahi--of the snake; garale--by the poison; jarala--wasted; dehi--soul; cira-dina--for many days; tapita--burning; jibana-life; ha--O; ha--P rupa--Rupa-manjari; kara--please grant; daya--mercy; deha--please give; more--to me; pada--of your lotus feet; chaya--the shade; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; laila--takes; sarana--shelter.

     The venom of the snake of separation from You has caused this spirit soul to wither and decay.  for many days my life-breath has burned in the fire of separation from you.  O Rupa-manjari, please be merciful to me.  Please give me the shade of your lotus feet.  Narottama dasa takes shelter of you.

Song 17

Text 1

śuniyāchi sādhu-mukhe bale sarva-jana
rī-rūpa-kṛpāya mile jugala-caraṇa

     suniyachi--I have heard; sadhu--of the saintly devotees; mukhe--from the mouth; bale--says; sarba--all; jana--people; sri-rupa--of Srila Rupa Gosvami; krpaya--by the mercy; mile--meets; jugala--of the Divine Couple; carana--the lotus feet.

     I have heard from the mouths of the saintly devotees that everyone says that by the mercy of Srila Rupa Gosvami one may approach the lotus feet of the Divine Couple.

Text 2

hā hā prabhu ! sanātana gaura-paribāra
sabe mili bāñcchā pūrṇa karaha āmāra

     ha--O; ha--O; prabhu--master; sanatana--Sanatana Gosvami; gaura--of Lord Caitanya; paribara--personal associate; sabe--every; mili'--meeting; bancha--desire; purna--fill; karaha--do; amara--my.

     O Sanatana Prabhu, O personal associate of Lord Caitanya, please fulfill my desire.

Text 3

śrī-rūpera kṛpā jena āmāra prati haya
se pada āśraya jāra sei mahāśaya
     sri-rupa--of Srila Rupa Gosvami; krpa--the mercy; jena--by which; ama--me; prati--to; haya--is; se--this; pada--lotus feet;asraya--shelter; jaba--will go;  sei--this; mahasaya--great soul.

     Please fulfill my desire that saintly Srila Rupa Gosvami may be merciful to me, and that I will be able to take shelter of his lotus feet.

Text 4

prabhu lokanātha kabe saṅge laiñā jābe
śrī-rūpera pāda-padme more samarpibe

     prabhu--master; lokanatha--Lokanatha Gosvami; kabe--when?; sange--in association; lana--is; jabe--will go; sri-rupera--of Srila Rupa Gosvami; pada-padme--at the lotus feet; more--to me; samarpibe--will place.

     When will my master, Lokanatha Gosvami, place me at the lotus feet of Srila Rupa Gosvami?

Text 5

hena ki haibe mora narma-sakhī-gaṇa
anugata narottama karibe śāsane
     hena--like this; ki--haibe--will it be?; narma-sakhi-gana--the gopis; anugata--following; narottame--Narottama dasa; karibe--will be; sasane--in instruction.

     When, by your mercy, will your faithful followr Narottama dasa become elibigle to receive direct instruction from the gopi-friends of the Divine Couple?

Song 18

Text 1

ei nava-dāsī bali śrī-rūpa cāhibe
hena śubha-kṣaṇa mora kata-dine habe

     ei--this; naba--young; dasi--maidservant; bali--I say; sri-rupa--Sri Rupa-manjari; cahibe--will give orders; hena--like this; subha--auspicious; ksana--moment; mora--my; kati-dine--some days; habe--will be.

     When will I be a young gopi-maidservant?  When will Sri  Rupa-manjari directly order me?  When will that auspicious time be?

Text 2

śīghra ājñā karibena—dāsi hethā āya
sebāra susajjā-kārya karaha tvarāya

     sighra--for a long time; ajna--orders; karibena--will give; dasi--O maidservant; hetha--here; aya--profit; sebara--of service; susajja--of nice dress; karya--duty; karaha--is; twarya--quickly.

     When will Sri Rupa-manjari repeatedly order me about, saying: "O maidservant, come here. Quickly arrange for my fancy garments and ornaments."

Text 3

ānandita hañā hiyā taṅra ājñā-bale
pavitra mane kārya karibe tat-kāle

     anandita--delighted; hana--is; hiya--being so; ajna--of the order; bale--on the strength; pabitra--pure; manete--in the mind; karya--duty; karibe--will be; tat-kale--at that time.

     By hearing these orders I will become delighted.  These orders will completely absorb the attention of my purified.

Text 4

sebāra sāmagrī ratna-ṭhālete kariyā
subāsita bāri svarṇa-jhārite pūriyā

sebara--of service; samagri--paraphernailia; ratna--jewel; khalate--on the tray; kariya--placing; subasita--aromatic; bari--water; swarna--golden; jharite--vessal; puriya--
filling.  

     When, in Sri Rupa-manjari's service, will I fill a jewelled tray with various paraphernalia for worship?  When, engaged in her service.  will I fill a golden goblet with aromatic water?

Text 5

doṅhāra sammūkhe la'ye diba śīghra-gati
narottamera daśā kabe haibe e-mati
     donhara--of the Divine Couple; sammukhe--face to face; la'ye--attains; diba--will give; sighra--swift, gati--gait; narottamera--of Narottama dasa; dasa--condition of life kabe--
when?; haibe--will be; e-mati--like this.

     When will I be able to quickly approach the Divine Couple?  When will Narottama dasa attain this condition of life?

Song 19

Text 1

śrī-rūpa paścāte āmi rahiba bhīta hañā
doṅhe pūnaḥ kahibena āmā pāne cāñā

     sri-rupa--Sri Rupa-manjari; pascate--behind; ami--I; rahiba--will stay; bhita hana--frightened; donhe--the Divine Couple; punah--again; kahibena--will say; ama--I; pane-
-in drinking; cana--desire.

     I timidly follow behind Sri Rupa-manjari.  When will she say to me; "Fetch some water for the Divine Couple?

Text 2

sadaya hṛdaye doṅhe kahibena hāsi
kothāya pāile rūpa! ei nava dāsī
     sadaya--merciful; hrdaya--in the heart; donhe--the Divine Couple; kahibena--will say; hasi--smile; kothaya--where?; paile--will obtain; rupa--Rupa-manjari; ei--this; naba--young; dasi--maidservant.

     When will the Divine Couple, compassionately smiling, say: "Where has Rupa-manjari gotten this young maidservant?"

Text 3
śrī-rūpa-mañjarī tabe doṅhā vākya śuni
mañjūlālī dila more ei dāsī āni

sri-rupa-manjari--Sri Rupa-manjari; tabe--then; donha--of Them; bakya--the statement; suni'--hearing; manjunali--Manjunali; dila--gave; more--to me; ei--this; dasi--maidservant; ani'--having brought.

     Hearing these words, Sri Rupa-manjari will say:  "Manjunali gave this maidservant to me.

Text 4

ati namra-citta āmi ihāre jānila
sebā-kārya diyā tabe hethāya rākhila

     ati--very; namra--humble; citta--at heart; ami--I; haibe--will be; janila--I will know; seba-of service; karya--the duty; niya--taking; tabe--then; hethaya--here; rakhila--place.

     At tha time I will feel very humble at heart,  and I will diligently engage in the service of the Divine Couple.

Text 5

hena tattva doṅhākāra sākṣāte kahiyā
narottame sevāya dibe niyūkta kariyā
     hena--like this; tattwa--principle; donhakare--the Divine Couple; saksate--directly; kahiya--saying; narrottame-- toNarottama dasa; sebaya--of service; dibe--will give; nijukta--engaged; kariya--making.

     When will the Divine Couple directly speak in this way to Narottama dasa, engaging him in Their service?

Song 20

Text 1
hā hā ! prabhu lokanātha rākha pāda-dvandve
kṛpā-dṛṣṭe cāha jadi haiyā ānande

ha--O; ha--O; prabhu--master; lokanatha--Lokanatha Gosvami; rakha--please place; pada-dwandwe--at your lotus feet; krpa--of mercy; drste--by your glance; caha--please ask; jadi--if; haiya--having been; anande--in bliss.

     O Lokanatha Gosvami, O my master, please place me at your lotus feet.  If you are pleased with me, please place your merciful glance upon me.

Text 2

mano-bāñcchā siddhi tabe haṅa purṇa-tṛṣṇa
hethāya caitanya mile sethā rādhā-kṛṣṇa

     mano--of the mind; bancha--the desires; siddhi--fulfillment; tabe--then; hana--will be; purna--ulfilled; trsna--desires; hethaya--here; caitanya-Lord Caitanya; mile--meeting; setha--in tha place; radha-krsna--Sri Sri Radha and Krsna.

     If you are satisfied with me, then all the wishes of my mind will be fulfilled, and attained, and my thirst for happiness will be satiated.  If you are satisfied with me, then I will attain the association of Lord Caitanya.  If you are satisied with me, then I may be able to attain the association of Sri Sri Radha and Krsna.

Text 3

tumi nā karile dayā ke karibe āra
manera vāsanā purṇa kara ei bāra
          tumi--you; na--not; karile--will give; daya--mercy; ke--what?; karibe--will be; ara--then; manera--of the mind; basana--desires; purna--full; kara--ei--pleae do; ei--this; bara--time.

     O master, if you do not become merciful to me, then what will become of me?  Please fulfill my mind's desire, at least this one time.

Text 4

e tina saṁsāre mora āra kehā nai
kṛpa kari ‘nija pada-tale deha ṭhāñi

e--this; tina--a person; samsare--in the world; mora--than me; ara--other; keha--someone; nai--not; krpa--mercy; kari'--giving; nija--own; p;ada--of the lotus fet; tale--at the sole; deha--please give; thani--consider.

     In the entire world there is no one as much in need of your mercy as I am.. Please be merciful to me, and give me shelter at the soles of your lotus feet.

Text 5

śrī rādhā-kṛṣṇa-līlā-guṇa gāna rātri-dine
śrī narottama-bāṅchā purṇa nahe tuyā bine

     radha-krsna--of Sri Sri Radha and Krsna; lila--pastimes; guna--and qualities; gana--sing; ratri--night; dine--and day; narottama--of Narottama dasa; bancha--the desires; purna--fulfilled; nahe--not; tuya--you; bine--without.

     Although he spends all his days and nights glorifying the transcendental pastimes and attributes of Sri Sri Radha and Krsna, nevertheless Narottama dasa knows that his desire to attain Their association cannot be fulfilled without your mercy.

Song 21

Text 1

lokanātha prabhu ! tumi dayā kara more
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa jena sadā citte sphure
     lokanatha--O Lokanatha Gosvami; prabhu--O master; tumi--you; daya--mercy; kara--pleasse do; more--to me; radha-krsna--of Sri Sri Radha and Krsna; carana--the lotus feet; jena-by which; sada--always; citte--in my mind; sphure--are manifest.

     O Lokanatha, O my master, please be merciful to me and bless me tha Sri Sri Radha-Krsna's lotus feet may be always manifested within my mind.

Text 2

tomāra sahita thāki sakhīra sahite
ei ta vāsanā mora sadā uṭhe cite

     tomara--you; sahita--with; thaki--I remain; sakhira--the gopis; sahite--with; ei--this; ta'--indeed; basana--desire; mora--my; sada--always; uthe--rises; cite--in the mind.

     I wish to have your association when you manifest your form as a gopi-friend of the Divine Couple. This desire continually arises in my mind.

Text 3

sakhī-gaṇa-jyeṣṭha jeṅho tāṅhāra caraṇe
mora samarpibe kabe sebara kāraṇe

     sakhi-gana--of the radha-krsna; jyestha--best; jenho--who; tanhara--of her; carana--the lotus feet; mora--to me; samarpibe--will place; kabe--when?; sebara--of service; karane--cause.

     O master, when, by your mercy, will I be allowed to serve the lotus feet of Srimati Radharani, the best of all gopis.

Text 4

tabe se haibe mora bāñcchita pūraṇa
ānande seviba doṅhāra jūgala caraṇa
     tabe--then; se--this; haibe--will be; mora--my; banchita--of desires; purana--fulfillment; anande--with bliss; sebiba--I will serve; donhara--of the Divine Couple; jugala--pairs; carana--of lotus feet.

     If you fulfill my desire, then I shall be able to blissfully serve the lotus feet of the Divine Couple.

Text 5

śrī-rūpa-mañjarī sakhī! kṛpā-dṛṣṭe cāñā
tāpī narottame siñca sevāmṛta diñā
     sri-rupa-manjari--O Sri Rupa-manjari; sakhi--o gopi-friend of the Divine Couple; krpa--of mercy; drste--with a glance; cana--please glance; tapi--distressed; narottame--Narottama dasa; sinca--please sprinkle; seba--of servicer; amrta--nectar; diya--granting.

     O Sri Rupa-manjari, O friend of the Divine Couple, please cast your glance of mercy upon me.  Please sprinkle this disreessed Narottama dasa with the nectar of your devotional service.

Song 22

Text 1

hā hā prabhu ! kara dayā karuṇā tomāra
michā māyā-jāle tanu dahiche āmāra

     ha--O; ha--O; prabhu--master; kara--please grant; daya--mercy; karuna--mercy; tomara--your; micha--false; maya--of the illusoryh potency; jale--in the net; tanu--body; dahiche--burns; amara--my.

     My body and mind burn in the network of material illusion.  O master, be merciful to me, and rescue me from it.

Text 2

kabe hena daśā habe sakhī-saṅga pāba
bṛndābanera phūla gāṅthi doṅhāke parāba

     kabe--when; hena--like this; dasa--condition of life; habe--will be; sakhi--of the gopis; sange--association; paba--I will attain; brndabane-- in Vrndavana; phula--flowers; ganthi--stringing; donhake--the Divine Couple; paraba--I will decorate.

     When will I attain the association of the gopis?  When will I string flower garlands in the forest of Vrndavana, and then place those garlands on the necks of the Divine Couple?

Text 3

sammukhe basiyā kabe cāmara ḍhulāba
agurū-candana-gandha doṅha aṅge diba

     sammukhe--face to face; basiya--staying; kabe--when?; carama--camara wisk; dhulaba--I will wabe; aguru--of aguru; candana--and sandalwood paste; gandha--aromatic substances; donha--of the Divine Couple; ange--on the limbs; diba--I will place.

     When will I meet the Divine Couple face-to-face?  When will I fan Them with a camara wisk? When will I anoint Their limbs with aguru, sandalwood paste, and other fragrant substances?

Text 4

sakhīra ājñāya kabe tāmbūla jogāba
sindūra tilaka kabe doṅhāke parāba

     sakhira--of the gopis; ajnaya--by the order; kabe--when?; tambula--betel-nuts; jogaba--I will bring; sindura--with red sindura; tilaka--tilaka markings; kabe--when? donkake--the Divine Couple; paraba--I will place.

     When, following the gopis' orders, will I offer betel-nuts to the Divine Couple?  When will I draw artistic tilaka markings in red sindura on the Divine Couple's foreheads?

Text 5

bilāsa-kautuka keli dekhiba nayane
candramūkha nirakhiba basāye siṁhāsane

     bilasa--of playfulness; kautuka--with joy; keli--pastimes; dekhiba--I will see; nayane--with my own eyes; candra--moonlike; mukha--faces; nirakhiba--I will see; basaye--seated; simha--
asane--on Their thrones.

     When, with my own eyes, will I see the Divine Couple jubilantly perform pastimes?  When will I see Their moonlike faces as They sit on Their thrones?

Text 6

sadā se mādhurī dekhi manera lālase
kata-dine habe dayā narottama dāse

     sada--continually; se--this; madhuri-sweetness; dekhi--I see; manera--of the mind; lalase--longing; kata-dine--someday; habe--will be; daya--mercy; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa.

     O my master, if at some time you are merciful to me, then the desire of my mind will be fulfilled, and I will be able to directly see the transcendental sweetness of the Divine Couple.

Song 23

Text 1

sadā se mādhurī dekhi manera lālase
kata-dine habe dayā narottama dāse

     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; kabe--when; hena--like this; dasa--condition of life; habe--will be; mora--my; sebiba--I will serve; donhara--of the Divine Couple; pada--the lotus feet; anande--with bliss; bibhora--overwhelmed.

     When, overwhelmed with bliss, will I directly serve the lotus feet of the Divine Couple?  O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, when will I attain this?

Text 2

bhramara haiyā sadā rahiba caraṇe
śrī-caraṇāmṛta sadā kariba āsvādane

     bhramara--a bumble-bee; haiya--becoming; sada--continually; rahiba--I will remain; carane--at Their lotus feet; sri-carana--of Their lotus feet; amrta--the nectar; sada--continually; kariba--I will do; aswadane--the relishing.

     When will I become a bumble-bee staying continually at the lotus feet of the Divine Couple, and continually drinking the honey of those lotus feet?

Text 3

ei āśā kari āmi jata sakhī-gaṇa
tomādera kṛpāya haya bāñcchita pūraṇa

ei--this; asa--aspiration; kari--do; ami--I; jata--as much as; sakhi-gana--the gopis; tomadera--of you; krpaya--by the mercy; je--which; banchita--of desires; purana--fulfillment.

     This is my desire---to join the company of the gopi-frineds of the Divine Couple.  O my master, by your mercy only can my desire be fulfilled.

Text 4

bahu-dina bāñcchā kari pūrṇa jāte haya
sabe meli dayā kara haiyā sadaya

     bahu--for many; dine--days; bancha--desire; kari--I do; purna--fulfilled; jate--goes; haya--is; sabe--all; meli--meeting; daya--mercy; kara--please do; haiya--having become; sadaya--merciful.

     For many days I have desired in this way.  Please be merciful to me and fulfill my request.

Text 5

sevā āśe narottama kāṇḍe dibā-niśi
kṛpā kari’ kara more anūgata dāsī
     seba--service; ase--with the hope; narottama--Narottama dasa; kande--weeps; diba--day; nisi--and night; krpa--mercy; kari'--doing; kara--please do; more--to me; anugata--follower; dasi--maidservant.

     Yearning and hoping in this way, Narottama dasa weeps day and night.  Please be merciful to me, and make me your follower and gopi-maidservant.

Song 24

Text 1

jaya jaya śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya nityānanda
jayādvaitacandra jaya gaura-bhakta-vṛnda

jaya--all glories; jaya--all glories ; sri--krsna-caitanya--Sri Krsna Caitanya; nityananda--Lord Nityananda; jaya--all glories; adwaitacandra--Lord Adwaitacandra; jaya--all glories; gaura-of Lord Gauranga; bhakta--of devotees; vrnda--the commuity.

     O Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, all glories to you.  O Prabhu Nityananda, all glories to You. O Lord Advaitacandra, all glories to You.  O devotees of Lord Gauranga, all glories to you all.

Text 2

kṛpā kari sabe meli karaha karuṇā
adhama patita-jane nā kariha ghṛṇa
     krpa--mercy; kari'--giving; sabe--all; meli--meeting; karaha--please give; karuna--mercy; adhama--lowest; patita--fallen; jane--person; na--not; kariha--do; ghrna--contempt.

     I beg all of you to please be merciful to me. Please do not despise or reject this most fallen person who is approaching You all.

Text 3

e tina-saṁsāra-mājhe tuyā pada sāra
bhāviyā dekhinū mane-gati nāhi āra
     e--this; tina--in this; samsara--material world; majhe--in the midst; tuya--Your; pada--lotus feet; sara--are the best thing; bhariya--filling; dekhinu--I see; mane--in my mind; gati--goal; nahi--not; ara-another.

     Your lotus feet are the most valuable thing in this material world.  I always see Your lotus feet within my mind.  I have no other goal.


Text 4

se pada pābāra āśe kheda uṭhe mane
byākūla hṛdaya sadā kariye krandane

     se--these; pada-pabara--of the lotus feet; ase--in hope; kheda--distress; uthe--arises; mane--in my mind; byakula--distressed; hrdaya--heart; sada--always; kariye--does; krandane--crying.

     I hope to one day attain Your lotus feet, and this causes great pain to arises within my mind. I constantly cry, my heart full of suffering.

Text 5

ki-rūpe pāiba kichu nā pāi sandhāna
prabhu-lokanātha pada nāhika smaraṇa

     ki-rupe--in what way?; paiba--I will attain; kichu--a little; na--not; pai--I attain; sandhana--search; prabhu--my master; lokanatha-Lokanatha Gosvami; pada--lotus feet; nahika--I am not able; smarana--remembering.

     I do not see how I will ever be able to attain Your lotus feet.  I do not see how I can always remember the lotus feet of Lokanatha Gosvami, my spiritual master.

Text 6

tūmi ta dayālu prabhu! cāha eka bāra
 narottama hṛdayera ghucā-o andhakāra

     tumi--you; ta--if; dayalu--merciful; prabhu--O master; caha--please glance; eka--one; bara--time; narottama--Narottama dasa; hrdayera--of the heart; ghuca-o--please dispell; andhakara--the darkness.

     O master, if you are at all merciful to me, then please glance upon me one time.  Please dispell the darkness in Narottama dasa's heart.

Part 8 Sadhaka dehocita lalasa-The Devotee's Aspiration



Song 25

Text 1

hari hari! kabe mora haibe sudina
bhajiba śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa hañā premādhīna
     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; kabe--when?; mora--of me; haibe--will be; su-dina--auspicious day; bhajiba--I will worship; sri-radha-krsna--Sri Sri Radha and Krsna; haina--I will be; prema--by love; adhina--controlled.

     When will I directly worship Sri Sri Radha and Krsna?  When will I be overwhelmed with love for the Divine Couple?  O Lord Hari, when will that aupsicious day be mine?

Text 2

sujantre miśāyā gāba sumadhura tāna
ānande kariba doṅhāra rūpa-guṇa-gāna

     su-jantre--with a nice instrument; misana--accompanying; gaba--I will sing; su--very; madhura--sweet; tana--melody; anande--with bliss; kariba--I will do; dinhara--of the Divine Couple; rupa--of the beautiful forms; guna--of the transcendental qualities; gana--song.

     When, accompanying myself on a musical instrument, will I happily sing sweet songs describing the beautiful forms and qualities of the Divine Couple

Text 3

‘rādhikā govinda’ bali kāndiba uccaiḥ-svare
bhijibe sakala aṅga nayanera nīre

     radhika--O Radhika; givinda--O Govinda; bali'--saying; kandiba--I will cry; uccaih-sware--loudly; bhijibe--will become wet; sakala--all; anga--the limbs; nayanera--of the eyes; nire--with the tears.

          When will I loudly call out "O Radhika, O Govinda", the tears from my eyes wetting my entire body.




Text 4

ei-bāra karuṇā kara rūpa sanātana
raghunātha dāsa mora śrī-jīva-jīvana
     ei-bara--this time; karuna--mercy; kara--please give; rupa--O Srila Rupa Gosvami; sanatana--O Srila Sanatana Gosvami raghunatha dasa--O Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; mora--my; sri-jiva--O Srila Jiva Gosvami; jivana--life and soul.

     O Srila Rupa Gosvami, O Srila Gosvami, O Srila  Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, O Srila Jiva Gosvami, my life and soul, please be merciful to me this one time.

Text 5

ei bāra karuṇā kara lalitā-viśākhā
sakhya-bhāve śrīdama-subala-adi sakhā
     ei-bara--this time; karuna--mercy; kara--please give; lalita--O Lalita; bisakha--O Lalita; sakhya-bhabe--in friendship; sridama-by Sridama; subala--Subala; adi--headed; sakha--O friends.

     O Lalita, O Visakha, O Sridama, O Subala and other friends of Lord Krsna, please be merciful to me this one time.

Text 6

sabe mili kara dayā purūka mora āśa
prārthanā karaye sadā narottama dāsa
     sabe--all; mili'--meetingt; kara--please give; daya--mercy; puraka--filling; mora--my; asa--hope; prarthana this prayer; karaye--does; sada--constantly; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa.

     All of You please be merciful to me and fulfill my desire.  This is the constant prayer of Narottama dasa.


Part 9 Sadhaka dehocita Sri brndabana basa lalasa-The Devotee's Aspiration to Reside in Sri Vrndavana

Song 26

Text 1

     hari hari ! āra ki emana daśā haba
e bhava saṁsāra tyaji parama ānande maji
āra kabe brajabhūme jāba

hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; ara--also; ki--will; emana--like this; dasa--condition of life; haba--be; ei-this; bhava--condition of life; haba--be; ei--this; bhava--condition; samsara--the material circle of family life; tyaji--abandoning; parama--transcendental; anande--in bliss; maji'--drowning; ara--and; kabe--when?; brajabhume--in Vrajabhumi; jaba--I will go.

     When will I renounce the circle of material family life, and, drowning in transcendental bliss, go to Vrajabhumi?  O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, when will this be?

Text 2

sukhamaya vṛndāvana kabe habe daraśana
se dhūli lāgibe kabe gāya
preme gadagada haiñā rādhā-kṛṣṇa-nāma laiñā
kāṅdiyā beḍāiba ubharāya
     sukhamaya--full of happiness; brndabana--Vrndavana; kabe--when?; habe--will be; darasana--sight; see this; dhuli--dust; labibe will be smeared; kabe--when?; gaya--singing; preme--in ecstatic love; gadagada--a choked voice; haina--will be; radha-krsna--of Sri Sri Radha and Krsna; nama--the holy names; laina--talking; kaniya--crying; bedaba--I will walk; ubharaya--shouting. 

     When will I see the blissful land of Vrndavana?  When will I smear the dust of Vrndavana over my body?  When will I walk about Vrndavana, loudly singing the names of Radha and Krsna, and crying, my voice choked with ecstatic love.

Text 3

nibhṛta nikuñja jāñā aṣṭāṅge praṇāma haiñā
ḍākiba hā rādhā-nātha ! bali
kabe jamunāra tīre paraśa kariba nīre
kabe piba kara-puṭe tuli

     nibhrta--solitary; nikunja--grove; jana--going; astanga--pranama--full obeisances; haina--doing; dakiba--I will call; ha--O; radha--of Srimati Radharani; natha--O master; bali--I say; kabe--when?; jamunara--of the Yamuna; tire--on the bank; parasa--touch; kariba--I will do; nire--in the water; kabe--when: piba--I will drink; kara--of my hands; pute--in the hollow; tuli' weighing.

     When, in a solitary grove in Vrndavana, will I offer my full obeisances to the Divine Couple?  When will I call out: "O Krsna, O master of Srimati Radharani"? When, standing on the shore of the Yamuna, will I drink some of its water in my cupped hands?

Text 4

āra kabe emana ha’ba śrī-rāsa-maṇḍale jāba
kabe gaḍagaḍi diba tāya
vaṁśīvaṭa-chāyā pāñā parama ānanda hañā
paḍiyā rahiba tāra chāya
     ara--and; kabe--when?; emana--like this; haba--will be; sri-rasa--of the rasa-dance; mandale--the arena; jaba--I will go; kabe--when?; gadagadi--rolling about; diba--I will give; taya--that; bamsibata--of Vamsivata; chaya--the shadow; pana--will obtain; parama--transcendental; ananda--bliss; hana--will be; padiya--falling down; rahiba--I will stay; tara--of that; chaya--shadow.

     When will this be?  When will I go to the arena of the rasa-dance, and roll about in the dust, overwhelmed with ecstasy? When will I visit Vamsivata, and fall down to the ground, overwhelmed by transcendental bliss?

Text 5

kabe govardhana giri dekhiba nayana bhari
kabe habe rādhā-kuṇḍe vāsa
bhramite bhramite kabe e deha patana habe
kahe dīna narottama dāsa
     kabe--when?; gobardhana giri--Govardhana Hill; dekhiba--I will see; nayane--my eyes; bhari--filling; kabe--when?; habe--will be; radha-kunde--at Radha-kunda; basa--the residence; bhramite bhramite--constant wandering; kabe--when; ei--this; deha--body; patana--falling; habe--will be; kahe--says; dina--poor; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa. 

     When will I see Govardhana Hill, my eyes filling with tears?  When will I reside at Radha-kunda?  When, as a result of constantly wandering Vrndavana, will this body fall down?  Poor-hearted Narottama dasa speaks in this way.

Song 27

Text 1

     hari hari ! āra kabe pālaṭibe daśā
e saba kariyā bāme jāba vṛndāvana-dhāme
ei mane kariyāchi āśā

     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; ara--and; kabe--when?  palatibe--will become changed; dasa--condition of life; e--this; saba--all; kariya--doing; bame--unfavorable; jaba--I will go; brndabana--of Vrndavana; dhama--to the abode; ei--this; mane--in my mind; kariyachi--I do; asa--the hope.  

     When will I renounce all material impediments and go to Vrndavana dhama?  O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, when will my life change in this way?  I hope I shall be able to change my mode of living in this way.

Text 2

dhana jana pūtra dvāre e saba kariyā dūre
ekānta haiyā kabe jāba
saba duḥkha parihari vṛndāvane bāsa kari
madhukarī māgiyā khāiba
     dhana--wealth; jana--followers; putra--children; dare--wife; e--this; saba--everything; kariya--placing; dure--far away; ekanta--with single-pointed concentration; haiya--being; kabe--when; jaba--will I go; saba--all; duhkha--material miseries; parihari--leaving behind; brndabane--in Vrndavana; basa--residence; kari'--doing; madhukari--alms; magiya--begging; khaiba--I will eat.

          When will I leave all my wealth, followers, children, and wife far behind, and with only one desire, go to Vrndavana?  When will I lelave all material miseries, and live in Vrndavana, eating only whatever foodstuff I can obtain by begging?

Text 3

jamunāra jala jena amṛta samāna hena
kabe piba udara pūriyā
kabe rādhā-kuṇḍa-jale snāna kari kutūhale
śyama-kuṇḍe rahiba paḍiyā

     jamunara--of the Yamuna; jala--the water; jena--by which; amrta--nectar; samana--equal; hena--like this; kabe--when?; piva--I will drink; udara--my belly; puriya--filling; kabe--when?; radha-kunda--of Tadha--kunda; jale--in the water; snana-bath; kari' taking; kutuhale--with happiness; syama-kunda--at Syama-kunda; rahiba--I will stay; padiya--having come.

     When will I take long drinks of the Yamuna's water, which is as sweet as nectar?  When, with great happiness, will I bathe at Radha-kunda?  When will I premanently reside at Syama-kunda?

Text 4

hhramiba dvādaśa bane rasa-keli je je sthāne
premābeśe gaḍagaḍi diyā
sudhāiba jane jane vraja-bāsī-gaṇa-sthāne
nivediba caraṇa dhariyā

     bhramiba--I will wander; dwadasa--twelve; bane--in the forests; rasa-keli--of the Lord's nectarean pastimes; je je--various; sthane--places; prema-abese--overwhelmed by pure love of Krsna; gadagadi--rolling about on the ground; diya--doing; sudhaiba--I will become pure; jane--jane--to all the people; braja--of vraja; basi-gana--of the residents; sthane--at the places; nibediba--I will offer respectful obeisances; carana--their lotus feet; dhariya--taking.
     When will I travel to the twelve forests where various pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa took place and roll on the ground? When will I fall at the feet of the Vrajāvāsīs and inquire about the locations of the pastimes?

Text 5

bhojanera sthāna kabe nayana-gocara habe
āra jata āche upabana
tāra madhye vṛndāvana narottama dāsera mana
āśā kare jugala caraṇa
          bhajanera--of whorship; sthana--the place; kabe--when?; nayana--of the eyes; gocara--within the rangeof perception; habe--will be; ara--and; jata--as many as there are; upabana--gardens; ara---and; madhye--in the midst; brndabana--Vrndavana; narottama dasera--of Narottama dasa; mana--the mind; asa--hope; kare--does; jugala--of the Divine Couple; carana--the lotus feet.

          When will I be able to see the gardens of Vrndavana where the great devotees whrshipped the Lord?  Narottama dasa hopes to one day attain the lotus feet of the Divine Couple.

Song 28

Text 1

karaṅga kaupīna lañā cheṅḍa kāṅthā gāya diyā
teyāgiba sakala biṣayā
kṛṣṇe anurāga habe brajera nikuñje kabe
jāiyā kariba nijālaya
     karanga--a waterpot; kaupina--and loincloth; lana--taking; chenda--torn; kanha--where; gaya--singing; diya--giving; tejagiba--I will give up; sakala--all; bisaya--sense-gratification; krsna--for Lord Krsna; anuraga--ecstatic love; habe--will be; brajera--of Vraja; nikunja--the groves; kabe--when?; jaina--I will go; karibas--I will make; nija--my; alaya--residence.

     When will I renounce all sense-gratification?  When will I accept only a water-pot and torn garment?  When will I constantly sing Lord Krsna's holy names?  When will I go to the groves of Vraja and make my permanent residence there?  When will I attain ecstatic love for Lord Krsna?

Text 2

     hari hari! kabe mora haibe su-dina !
phalamūla bṛndābane khāñā dibā-abasāne
bhramiva haiyā udāsīna


     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; kabe--when?; maora--my; haibe--sill be; su--auspicious; dina--day; phala--fruit; mula--root; brndabane-- in Vrndavana; khana--I will eat; diba--by day; abasane--at the end; bhramiba--I will wander; haiya--being; udasina--detached.

     When will I wander in Vrndavana, detached from material affairs, and only eating some roots and fruit at the end of the day?  O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, when will that auspicious day be mine?

Text 3

śītala jamunā jale snāna kari kūtūhale
premābeśe ānandita hañā
bāhura upara bāhu tuli vṛndāvane kuli kuli
kṛṣṇa bali beḍāba kāṅdiyā
     sitala--cool; jamuna--of the Yamuna river; jale--in the waters; snana--bath; kari--taking; kutuhale--with delight; prema-abese--overwhelmed by ppure love of Krsna; anandita--blissful; hana--become; bahura upara bahu tuli'--raising my arms; brndabane -- in Vrndavana; kuli kuli krsna bali'--calling out the name of Lord Krsna; bedaba--I will wander about; kandiya--crying.

     When will I become full of bliss, overwhelmed by ecstatic love by bathing in the cool waters of the Yamuna river? When will I wander about Vrndavana with my arms upraised calling out the name of Lord Krsna, and crying?

Text 4

dekhiba saṅketa-sthāna juḍābe tāpita prāṇa
premābeśe gaḍagaḍi diba
kāṅhā rādhā! prāṇeśvari! kāṅhā giribara-dhāri!
kāṅhā nātha ! baliyā ḍākiba
     dekhiba--I will see; sanketa-sthana--place of rendezvous; judabe--will attain; tapita-agitated; prana--life; prema-abese--overwhelmed by ecstatic love; gadagadi diba--I will roll about in the dust; kanha--where are You?; radha--O Radha; prana--of my life; iswari--the controller; kanha--where are You?; giribara--of Govardhana, the best of Hills; dhari--O lifter; kanha--where are You; natha--O my Lord; baliya--saying; dakiba--I will call out.

     When will I see the place where Radha and Krsna secretly met?  When, overwhelmed with ecstatic love, will I roll about in the dust at that place?  When will I call out "O Radha, O controller of my life, where are You? O Krsna, O lifter of Govardhana Hill, where are You? O my masters, where are You?"

Text 5

mādhavī-kuñjera pari sukhe basī śuka-śārī
gāibeka rādhā-kṛṣṇa-rasa
taru-mūle basi tāhā śuni juḍāiba hiyā
kabe sukhe goñāba dibasa
     madhavi--of madhavi creepers; kunjera--of the grove; 'pari--above; sukhe--with happiness; basi'--residing; suka-sari-a male and female parrot; gaibeka--will sing; radha-krsna--of Sri Sri Radha-Krsna; rasa--the nectarean pastimes; taru--of that tree; mule--at the root; basi'--staying; taha--that; suni'--hearing; judaiba--will be; hiya--being; kabe--when?; sukhe--with happiness; gonaba--I will pass; dibasa--the day.

     When will I happily pass my days at the roots of a tree in the grove of madhavi creepers, listening to a parrot-couple jubilantly sing the glories of the nectarean pastimes of Sri Sri  Radha and Krsna?

Text 6

śrī-govinda gopīnātha śrīmatī-rādhikā-sātha
dekhiba ratana-siṁhāsane
dīna narottama dāsa karaye durlabha āśa
e-mati haibe kata dine
     sri-govinda--Sri Govinda; gopi--of the gopis; natha---the master; srimati-radhika--Srimati Radharani; sakha--along with; dekhiba--I will see; ratana--jewelled; simha-asane--on the throne; dina--poor-hearted; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; karaye--does; durlabha--difficult to attain; asa--hope; e-mati--in this way; haibe--will be; kata--at some; dine--day.

     When will I see Lord Govinda, the master of the gopis, accompanied by Srimati Radharani, asa They both sit on a jewelled throne?  Poor-hearted Narottama dasa hopes that some day he will be able to obtain this so-difficult-to-obtain desire.

Song 29

Text 1

hari hari ! kabe haba vṛndāvana-vāsī
nirakhiba nayane jugala-rūpa-rāśi
     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; kabe--when?; haba--will I become; brndabana--of Vrndavana; basi--a resident; nirakhiba--will I see; nayane--with my own eyes; jugala-- of the Divine Couple; rupa--of the beauty; rasi--abundance.

     O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, when will I become a resident of Vrndavana?  When with my own eyes, will I see the great beauty of the Divine Couple.

Text 2

tyajiyā śayana-sukha vicitra pālañka
kabe brajera dhūlāya dūsara habe anga

     tyajiya--abandoning ; sayana--of sleeping; sukha--the happiness; bicitra--wonderful; palanka--bed; kabe--when?; habe--will be; anga--limbs.

         When will I renounce very comfortable sleeping arrangements and instead take rest on the ground of Vraja?

Text 3

ṣaḍa-rasa-bhojana dūre parihari
kabe braje māgiyā khāiba mādhukarī
     jada--material; rasa--palatable; bhojana--foodstuffs; dure--far away; parihari--renouncing; kabe--when?; braje--in Vraja; magiya--begging; khaiba--I will eat; madhukari--accepting the position of a beggar.

     When will I renounce materially palatable foodstuffs, and simply eat whatever I can obtain by begging in the land of Vraja?

Text 4

parikramā kariyā beḍāba vane vane
viśrāma kariba jāi jamunā-puline
     parikrama kariya--circumambulating; bedaba--I will wander; bane bane from forest to forest; bisrama kariba--I will rest; jai--going; jamuna--of the Yamuna river; puline--on the shore.

     When will I circumambulate the land of Vraja, wandering from forest to forest?  When, becoming fatigued, will I stop to rest on the shore of the Yamuna?

Text 5

tāpa dūra kariba śītala vaṁśīvaṭe
kabe kuñje baiṭhaba hāma vaiṣṇava-nikaṭe

     tapa--the heat of the day; dura--far away; kariba--I will place; sitala--cooling; bamsibate--at Vamsivata; kabe--when?; kunje--in the grove; baithaba--I will meet; hama--will be; baisnaba--the Vaisnavas; nikate--near.

     When will I find relief from the heat of midday by resting in the cooling shade of Vamsivata? When will I associate with the Vaisnavas in the froves of Vrndavana?

Text 6

narottama dāsa kahe karī parihāra
kabe vā emana daśā haibe āmāra

     narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; kahe--says; kari'--doing; parihara--renunciation; kabe--when?; ba--or; emana--like this; dasa--condition of life; haibe--will be; amara--my.

     Narottama dasa renounces the materialistic way of life and says:  "When will I attain this perfection of spiritual life?"

Part 10 Sa bilapa Sri brndabana basa lalasa-Lamentation and Yearning to Reside in Sri Vrndavana

Song 30

Text 1

āra ki emana daśā haba
saba chāḍi vṛndāvane jāba

     ara--and; ki--will it be?; emana--like this; dasa--condition of life; haba--will be; saba--everything; chadi;--renouncing; brndabane--to Vrndavana; jaba--I will go.

     When will I renounce everything and go to Vrndavana? When will this be?

Text 2

āra kabe śrī-rāsa-maṇḍale
gaḍagaḍi diba kūtūhale
     ara--and; kabe--when?; sri-rasa--of the rasa dance; mandale--in the arena; gadagadi diba--I will roll oabout on the ground; kutuhale--with ecstatic happiness.

     When in great ecstasy will I roll about on the ground where Lord Krsna performed the rasa-dance?

Text 3

āra kabe govardhana giri
dekhiba nayana-juga bhari
     ara--and; kabe--when?; gobardhana giri--Govardhana Hilll; dekhiba--I will see; nayana--juga--my two eyes; bhari--filling with tears.

     When will I see Govardhana Hill, my eyes filling with tears.

Text 4

śyāma-kuṇḍe rādhā-kuṇḍe snāna
kari kabe juḍāba parāṇa
     syama-kunde--in Syama-kunda; radha-kunde--in Radha-kunda; snana--bath; kari'--doing; kabe--when?; judaba--will I engage; parana--my life.

     When by bathing in Syama-kunda and Radha-kunda, will I attain the stage of dedicating my entire life and soul to the service of the Divine Couple?

Text 5

āra kabe jamunāra jale
majjane haiba niramale
ara--and; kabe--when?; jamunara--of the Yamuna; jale--in the water; majjane--by bathing; haiba--I will become; niramale--pure.

     When will I become pure at heart by bathing in the waters of the yamuna river?

Text 6

sādhu-saṅge vṛndāvane vāsa
narottama dāsa kare āśa
     sadhu--of the saintly devotees; sange--in the association; brndabane--in Vrndavana; basa--residence; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; kare--does; asa--hope.

     Narottama dasa hopes that he will be able to reside in Vrndavana in the association of the saintly devotees.

Part 11 Mathura virahocita darsana lalasa-The Author Yearns to Again see Mathura

Song 31

Text 1

kabe kṛṣṇa-dhana pāba hiyāra mājhāre thoba
juḍāiba tāpita-parāṇa
sājāiyā diba hiyā basāiba prāṇa-priyā
nirakhiba se candra-bayāna

     kabe--when; krsna--of Lord Krsna; dhana--the wealth; paba--will I claim; hiyara--of the heart; majhare-thoba--of the middle; judaiba--I will engage; tapita--distressed; parana--life; sajaiya--dressing upl diba--I will give;; hiya--the heart; basaiba--I will reside; prana--to the life; priya--dear; nirakhiba--I will see; se--this; candra--moonlike; bayana--face.

     When will I attain the dark treasure known as Lord Krsna?  When, agitated with ecstatic love, will I give my heart to Lord Krsna?  When will I consider Lord Krsna more dear to me than my own life's breath?  When will I be able to see Lord Krsna's moonlike face?

Text 2

     he sajani ! kabe mora haibe su-dina
se prāṇa-nāthera saṅge kabe vā phiriba raṅge
sukhamaya jamunā-pulina

     he--O; sajani--friend; kabe--when?; mora--of me; haibe--will be; su--dina--auspicious day; se--this; prana--of my life; nathera--of the Lord; sanga--the association; kabe--when?; ba--or; phiriba--will I return; range--with singing and dancing; of the Lord's pastimes; sukhamaya--full of happiness; jamuna--of the Yamuna; pulina-to the shore.

     When will I regain my master's association?  When will I happily return with singing and dancing to the shore of the Yamuna?  O friend, when will this auspicious day be mine.

Text 3

lalitā viśākhā lañā tāṅhāre bheṭiba giyā
sājāiyā nānā upahāra
sadaya haiyā bidhi milāibe guṇa-nidhihena bhāgya haibe āmāra

     lalita--Lalita; bisakha--and Visakha; lana--accept; tanhare--Him; bhetiba--I will meet; giya--singing; sajaiya--I will offer; nana--various; upahare--with presentations; sadaya--compassionate; haiya--becomeing; bidhi--destiny; milaibe--will meet; guna-of good qualities; nidhi--ocean; hena--like this; bhagya--good fortune; haibe--will be; amara--of me.

     When, in the company of Lalita and Visakha, will I meet Lord Krsna?  When will I be able to offer various gifts to please Him?  When will destiny be compassionate to me?  When will my destiny become like a virtuous person who is an ocean of good qualities?  When will this good fortune be mine?

Text 4

dāruṇa bidhira nāṭa bhāṅgila premera hāṭa
tila-mātra nā rākhila tā’ra
kahe narottama dāsa ki mora jivane āśa
chāḍi gela brajendra-kumāra
     daruna--ominous; vidhira--of fate; nata--dancing; alinga--embracing; premera--of pure love of Krsna; hata--the marketplace; tila--a grain of sesame; matra--even; na--not; rakhila--place; tara--there; kahe--says; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; ki--or; mora--of me; jibvane--in the life; asa--the hope; chadi'--renouncing; gela--I go; braja-indra-kumara--to Lord Krsna, the prince of Vraja.

     Cruel fate has made me poverty-stricken and i do not have even a penny to purchase the goods sold in the markdetplace of pure love for Krsna.  Nevertheless, Narottama dasa says: "My life's hope is to renounce everything and attain the prince of Vraja.

Song 32

Text 1

ei-bāra pāile dekhā caraṇa du’ khāni
hiyāra mājhāre rākhi juḍāba parāṇī
     ei-bara--this time; paile--will attain; dekha-sight; carana--feet; du'khani--two; hiyara--of the heart; majhare--in the middle; rakhi'--placing; juda'ba--I will engage; parani--my life.

     I pray that I may now see the two lotus feet of Lord Krsna.  I shall place these lotus feet in my heart.  I will dedicate my entire life and soul to them.

Text 2

tāṅre nā dekhiyā mora mane baḍa tāpa
anale paśiba kiṁva jale diba jhāṁpa
   tan're--them; na--not; dekhiya--having seen; mora--my; mane--in the mind; bada--great tapa--distress; anale--in the fire; pasiba--I will enter; kimba--or; jale--in the water; diba--I will give; jhampa--leap.

     If I am not able to see Lord Krsna's lotus feet, my heart will burn with suffering.  I will end this life by entering a blazing fire, or jumping into the water.

Text 3

mukhera muchaba ghāma khāoyāba pāna guyā
ghāmete bātāsa diba candanādi cuyā
     mukhera--of the face; muchaba--I will wipe; ghama--perspiration; khaojaba--I will feed; pana--drink; guja--betel-nuts; ghamete--on the perspiration; batasa--breeze; diba--I will give; candana--sandalwood paste; adi--beginning with; cuja--aromatic substances.

     When I meet Lord Krsna I will serve Him in various ways.  I will wipe the perspiration from His face.  I will give Him nice food and drink.  I will offer Him betel-nuts.  I will fan Him. I will anoint His body with sandalwood paste and other aromatic substances.

Text 4

vṛndāvanera phulera gāṅthiya diba hāra
bināiyā bāndhiva cūḍā kuntalera bhāra
     brndabanera--of Vrndavana; phulera--of the flowers; ganthiya--stringing; diba--I will give; hara--a garland; binaiya--tying; bandhiba--I will bind; cuda--the topnot; kuntalera--of hair; bhara--the abundance.

     I will string a garland of Vrndavana forest flowers, and then present that garland to Lord Krsna.  I will carefully arrange His hair and tie His topknot.

Text 5

kapāle tilaka diba candanera cāṅda
narottama dāsa kahe pirītera phāṅda
     kalape--with a peacock feather; tilaka--tilaka markings; diba--i will place; candanera--of sandalwood paste; canda--a moon; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; kahe--says; piritera--of love; phanda--begin.

     I will decorate Lord Krsna with a peacock feather, tilaka markings, and a moon drawn in sandalwood paste.  Narottamadasa says; In this way I will gradually attain love for Lord Krsna.

Song 33

Text 1

vṛndāvana ramya-sthāna divya-ciṅtāmaṇi-dhāma
ratana-mandira manohara
abṛta kālindī-nīre rāja-haṁsa keli kare
tāhe śobhe kanaka-kamala

     brndaban--Vrndavana; ramya--beautiful; sthana--place; dibya---transcendental; cintamani--of cintamani gems; dhama--the abode; ratana--jewellled; mandira--temples; manohara--enchanting; abrta--surrounded; kalindi--of the Yamuna; nire--by the waters; raja-hamsa--regal swans; keli--pastimes; kare--performs; tahe--there; sobhe--splendid; kanaka--golden; kamala--lotus flowers.

          Beautiful Vrndavana is filled with cintamani gems and many jewelled palaces and temples. Many regal swans play in the waters of the Yamuna, and in those waters a splendid golden lotus flower grows.

Text 2

tāra madhye hema-pīṭha aṣṭa-dale beṣṭita
aṣṭa-dale pradhānā nāyikā
tāra madhye ratnāsane ba’si āchen dui-jane
śyāma-saṅge sundarī rādhikā
     tara--of that place; madhye--in the middle; hema--a golden; pitha--place; asta--with eight; dale--petals; bestita--surrounded; asta--on the eight; dale--petals; pradhana--the principal; nayika--gopis; tara--of them; madhye--in the middle; ratna--a jewelled; asane--on a throne; basi' achen--reside; dui--two; jane--persons; syama--of Lord Syamasundara; sange--in the association; sundari--beautiful; radhika--Srimati Radharani.

     In the middle of that lotus is a golden place surrounded by eight petals.  On these eight petals the eight principal gopis reside, and in the center Lord Syamasundara and beautiful Srimati Radharani sit on a jewelled throne.

Text 3

o-rūpa-lābaṇya-rāśi amiya pariche khasi
hāsya-parihāsa-sambhāṣaṇe
narottama-dāsa kaya nitya-līlā sukha-maya
sadāi sphurūka mora mane
     o-rupa--of their transcendental forms;labanya--of beauty; rasi--abundance; amiya--nectar; pereche khasi--showers; hasya-parihasa--of laughing and joking; sambhasane--by talking; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; kaya--says; nitya--eternal; lila--pastimes; sukha-maya--full of happiness; sadai--eternally; sphuruka--may be manifest; mora--mu; mane--in the mind.

     The great beauty of the Divine Couple, and Their charming joking and laughter appears to be constantly showering nectar everywhere.  Narottama dasa says: I pray that these blissful eternal transcendental pastimes of the Divine Couple may be always manifest in my heart.

Song 34

Text 1

kadamba tarura ḍāla nāmiyāche bhūme bhāla
phuṭiyāche phula sāri sari
parimale bharala sakala vṛndāvana
keli kare bhramarā bhramarī

     kadamba tarura--of the kadamba tree; dala--branch; namiyache--offered obeisances; bhume--on the ground; bhala--with forehead; phutiyache--blossoms; phula--flowers; sari sari--in a series; parimale--with pleasant fragrance; bharala--filled; sakala--all; brndabana--of Vrndavana; keli--pastimes; kare--do; bhramara bhramari--bumble-bees.

     In Vrndavana the kadamba trees offer obeisances, their flowering branches reverentially touching the ground.  bumvle bees perform pastimes in that Vrndavana, which is filled with a very sweet fragrance.

Text 2

rāi kānu bilāsai raṅge
kibā rūpa lābaṇī baidagadha-khani dhani
maṇimaya ābharaṇa aṅge
     rai--of Srimati Radharani; kanu of Lord Krsna; bilasai--of the pastimes; range--in the arena; kiba--how wonderful; Rupa--of Their transcendental forms; labani--the beauty; baidagadha--of expertise; khani--mine; dhani--wealthy; mani--maya--made of jewels; abharana--with ornaments; ange--on Their bodies.

     Radha and Krsna stay in the place where They perform pastimes.  How beauriful They are.  Their bodies are decorated with jewelled ornaments, and They are like two wealthy aristocrats who own many gem mines of intelligence and with.

Text 3

rādhāra dakṣina kare dhari priya giridhara
madhura madhura cali jāya
āge pāche sakhī-gaṇa kare phula bariṣaṇa
kona sakhī cāmara ḍhulāya

     radhara--of Srimati Radharani; daksina--right; kare--at the hand; dhari'--holding; priya--dear; giridhari--Lord Krsna, the lifter of Govardhana Hill; madhura madhura--with charming sweetness; cali' jaya--they go; age--in front; pache--and behind; sakhi-gana--Their gopi-friends; kare--at hand; phula--flower; barisana--raining; kona--one; sakhi--gopi; camara--the camara wisk; dhulaya--waves.

     Dear Giridhari holds Srimati Radharani's right hand, and together They gracefully stroll about.  The gopis shower flowers before and behind Them, and one gopi fans them with a camara wisk.

Text 4

parāge dhūsara sthala candra-kare su-śitala
maṇimaya bedīra upare
rāi kānu kara joḍi nṛtya kare phirī phirī
paraśe pulake tanu bhare
     parage--with pollen; dhusara--grey; sthala--place; candra--of the moon; kare--by the rays; su--very; sitala--cool; manimaya--made of jewels; bedira--platform; upare--on top; rai--Srimati Radharani; kanu--Lord Krsna; kara--hands; jodi'--holding; nrtya kare--dance; phiri' phiri'--moving; parase--by touching; pulake--hairs standing up; tanu--the body; bhare--manifest.

     That place is filled with the aromatic pollen of the lotus, and it is made pleasantly cool by the shining of the moon.  On a raised platform there, Radha and Krsna dance, holding hands, the hairs of Their bodies standing up in ecstasy.



Text 5

mṛgamada-candana kare kari sakhī-gaṇa
barikhaye phula gandha-rāje
śrama-jala bindu bindu śobha kare mukha-indu
adhare muralī kibā bāje
     mrgamada--musk; candana--sandalwood; kare--in the hand; kari--placing; sakhi-gana--the gopi-friends; barikaye--shower; phula--flowers; gandha--fragrance; raje--king; srama--jala--of perspiration; bindu bindu--drop by drop; sobha--beautiful; kare--with the hand; mukha--face; indu--moon; adhare--on His lips; murali--the flute; kiba--nicely; raje--manifested.

     The gopis decorate the Divine Couple with musk and sandalwood paste, and shower Them with aromatic flower.  Drops of perspiration make Lord Krsna's moonlike face appear splendidly beautiful.  The flute is gracefully placed agains Lord Krsna's lips.

Text 6

hāsya-bilāsa-rasa sarala madhura bhāṣa
narottama-manoratha bharū
duṅhuka vicitra beśa kusume racita keśa
locana-mohana līlā karū

hasa--of joking an laughing; bilasa--of pastimes; rasa--nectar; sarala--sincere; madhura--charming; bhasa--words; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; manoratha--the desire; bharu--fulfill; dunhuka--the Divine Couple; bicitra--wonderful; bese--withgarments; kusuma--with flowers; racita--decorated; kesa--hair; locana--the eyes; mohana--enchanting; lila--pastimes; karu--perform.

     With the nectar of Their joking and laughter, and the sweetness of Their charming talks, the Divine Couple fulfills all the desires of Narottama dasa. Dressed in wonderful colorful garments, Their hair decorated with flowers, the Divine Couple performs pastimes, enchanting the eyes of everyone.

Part 12 Swa nistha-My Faith

Song 36

Text 1

dhana mora nityānanda pati mora gauracandra
prāṇa mora jugala-kiśora
advaita ācārya bala gadādhara mora kula
narahari bilasai mora

     dhana--wealth; mora--my; nityananda--Lord Nityananda; pati--master; mora--my; gauracandra--Lord Gauracandra; prana--life; mora--my; jugala-kisora--the youthful Divine Couple; adwaita acarya--Advaita Acarya; bala--my strength; gadadhara--Gadadhara; mora--my; kula--family; narahari--Narahari Sarakara; bilasai--glory; mora--my.

     Lord Nityananda is my wealth.  Lord Gauracandra is my master.  The Youthful Divine Couple is my life.  Advaita Acarya is my strength.  Gadadhara is my family.  narahari Sarakara is my glory.

Text 2

aiṣṇavera pada-dhūli tāhe mora snāna-keli
tarpaṇa mora vaiṣṇavera nāma
vicāra kariyā mane bhakti-rasa āsvādane
madhyastha śrī-bhāgavata purāṇa

     baisnabera--of the devotees; pada--of the feet; dhuli--the dust; tahe--they; mora--my; snana--of bathing; keli--pastimes; tarpana--satisfaction; mora--my; baisnabera--of the devotees; nama--the name; bicara--consideration; kariya--doing; mane--in the mind; bhakti--of devotional service; rasa--the nectar; aswadance--by relishing; madhyastha--in the midst; sri-bhagabata--Srimad Bhagavatam; purana--the Purana.

     The dust of the devotees' lotus feet is my bathing water.  The chanting of the devotees names is my satisfaction.  Considering the merits of all Vedic literatures in the light of devotional service, I have concluded the the Srimad- Bhagavatam is the best of all scriptures.

Text 3

vaiṣṇavera ucchiṣṭa tāhe mora mana-niṣṭha
vaiṣṇavera nāmete ullāsa
vṛndāvane cautārā tāhe mora mana-gherā
kahe dīna narottama dāsa
     baisnabera--of the devotees; ucchista--remnants of foodstuffs; tahe--they; mora--my; mano--of the mind; nistha--faith; baisnabera--of the devotees; namete--the name; ullasa--joy; brndabane cautara--in Vrndavana; tahe--that; mora--my; mano--of the mind; ghera--enclosure; kahe--says; dina-poor hearted; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa.

     My mind is firmly convinced of the spiritual  benefit obtained by eating the remnants of foodstuff left by the devotees.   The names of the devotees are my happiness. The land of Vrndavana is the enclosure within which I keep my mind. Poor-hearted Narottama dasa speaks in this way.

Part 13 Nityanda nistha-Faith in Lord Nityananda

Song 37

Text 1

nitāi-pada-kamala koṭī-candra-suśītala
je chāyāya jagat juḍāya
hena nitāi bine bhāi rādhā-kṛṣṇa pāite nāi
dṛḍha kari dhara nitāiyera pāya

     nitai--of Lord Nityananda; pada-kamala--lotus feet; koti--millions; candra--of moons; su-sitala--pleasantly cool; je--which; chayaya--shade; jagate--the world; juraya--relief; hena--like this; nitai--Lord Nityananda; bine--without; bhai--O brother; radha-krsna--Sri Sri Radha and Krsna; paite--attain; nai--not; drrha--firm; kari--making; dhara--hold; nitaira--of Lord Nityananda; paya--attaining.

     Lord Nityananda's lotus feet are a shelter where one will get the soothing moonlight not only of one, but of millions of moons.  The shade of Lord Nityananda's lotus feet give relief from the sufferings of material existance.  If one does not take shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Nityananda, then it will be very difficult for him to approach Radha and Krsna.  Therefore, with firm conviction, one should take shelter of Lord Nityananda's lotus feet.

Text 2

se sambandha nāhi jāra bṛthā janma gela tā’ra
sei paśu baḍa durācāra
nitāi nā balila mukhe majila saṁsāra-sukhe
vidya-kule ki karibe tāra

     se--this; sambhandha--relationship; nahi--not; ja'ra--attaining; brtha--useless; janma--birth; gela--went; ta'ra--his; sei--he; pasu--animal; bada duracara--very misbehaved; nitai--Lord Nitai; na--not; balila--says; mukhe--with his mouth; majila--becomes immersed; samsara--of material existance; sukhe--in happiness; bidya--knowledge; kule--by noble birth; ki--what?; karibe--will he do; tara--his.

     Anyone who has not contacted a relationship with Lord Nityananda is understood to have spoiled his human birth.   Such a person is just like a misbehaved animal.  Such persons never say the name of Lord Nityananda.  Such persons simply become absorbed in so-called material enjoyment.  What benefit will such persons obtain by their so-called academic education or birth in a high family or great nation?

Text 3

ahaṅkare matta haiyā nitāi pada pāsariyā
asatyere satya kari māni
nitāiyera karuṇā habe braje rādhā-kṛṣṇa pā’be
dhara nitāi-caraṇa du’khāni

     ahankare--by false ego; matta--maddened; haiya--having become; nitai--of Lord Nityananda; pada--the lotus feet; pasariya--forgetting; asatyere--in the unreal; satya--real; kori mani--considering; nitaiera--of Lord Nityananda; karuna--mercy; habe--will be; braje--in Vraja; radha-krsna--Sri Sri Radha-Krsna; pabe--will attain; dhara--hold; nitai--of Lord Nityananda; carana--lotus feet; du'khani--two.

     These persons have become maddened by a false concept of bodily life, and thus they have forgotten their eternal relationship with Nityananda, and instead accept the illusory material energy as factual.  If you actually want to approach the association of Radha-Krsna, you must achieve the mercy of Lord Nityananda first.  When he is merciful toward you, then you will be able to approach Radha-Krsna. For this reason one should firmly catch the lotus feet of Lord Nityananda.

Text 4

nitāiyera caraṇa satya tāṅhāra sevaka nitya
nitāi-pada sadā kara āśa
narottama baḍa duḥkhī nitāi more kara sukhī
rākha rāṅgā caraṇera pāśa

     nitaiera--of Lord Nityananda; carana--the lotus feet; satya--are real; tahara--of them; sebaka--the servant; nitya--is eternal; nitai--of Lord Nityananda; pada--the lotus feet; sada--always; kara--do; asa--hope; narottama--Narottama dasa; bada--very; duhkhi--unhappy; nitai--O Lord Nityananda; more--me; kara--please make; sukhi--happy rakha--please give me protection; ranga caranera--of the reddish soles of Your lotus feet; pasa--in a corner.

     The lotus feet of Lord Nityananda are not illusion; they are a fact, and therefore one who engages in the transcendental loving service of Nityananda is also transcendental.  For this reason one should always try to catch the lotus feet of Lord Nityananda.  O Lord Nityananda, this Narottama dasa is very unhappy, and therefore I am praying that You please make me happy.  Please keep me in a corner of Your reddish lotus feet.

Part 14 Gauranga nistha-Faith in Lord Caitanya

Song 38

Text 1

     are bhāi! bhaja mora gaurāṅga-caraṇa
nā bhajiyā mainu duḥkhe ḍubi gṛha-biṣa-kūpe
dagdha kaila e pāñca parāṇa

     are--O; bhai--brother; bhaja--please worship; mora--my; gauranga--of Lord Caitanya; carana--the lotus feet; na--not; bhajiya--having worshipped; mainu-uhkhe--unhappy; dubi'--diving; grha--of household life; bisa--of poison; kupe--in the well; dagdha-burned; kaila--became; e--this; panca--five; parana--life airs.

     O brother, please worship the lotus feet of Lord Gauranga.  I have not worshipped them, but instead have dived into the poisonous well of materialistic household-life, and as a result my five life-airs are burning with the poison of material life.

Text 2

tāpa-traya-biṣānale ahar-niśi hiyā jvale
deha sadā haya acetana
ripu-baśa indriya haila gaura-pada pāśarila
bimukha haila hena dhana
     tapa--of miseries; traya--of three; bisa--of poison; anale--with the fire; ahar-day; nisi--and night; jwale--in the fire; deha--body; sada--continually; haya acetana--faints into unconscioussness; ripu--by enemies; asa--subdued; indriay--senses; haila--have become; gora--of Lord Gauranga; pada--the lotus feet; pasabila-bimukha-become averse; haila--became; hana--like this; dhana--treasure.

     Day and night I burn in the poisonous fire of the threeforld miseries of material life, and as a result I repeatedly faint.  mys senses are overwhelmed by lust, agreed, and numberless other enemies, and I am averse to the great treasure which is the lotus feet of Lord Gauranga.

Text 3

hena gaura dayāmaya chāḍi saba lāja-bhaya
kāya mane laha re śaraṇa
parama durmati chila tāre gaurā uddhārila
tā’rā haila patita-pāvana
     hena--like this; gaura--Lord Gauranga; dayamaya--merciful; chadi'--giving up; saba--all; laja--shyness; bhaya--and fear; kaya--with body; mane--and mind; laha--attain; re--O; sarana--shelter; parama--very; durmati--wicked at heart; chila--I have been; tare--him; gora--Lord Gauranga; uddharila--will deliver; ta'ra--of him; haila--becomes; patita--of the fallen; pabana--the savior.

     O brother, give up all fear and shyness, and take shelter of merciful Lord Gauranga.  Lord Gauranga rescues those who are most wicked at heart, and therefore He is known as Patita-pavana, the savior of the fallen.

Text 4

gaurā dvija-naṭa-rāje bāndhaha hṛdaya-mājhe
ki karibe saṁsāra-śamana
narottama dāsa kahe gaurā-sama keha nahe
nā bhajite deya prema-dhana
     gora--Lord Caitanya; dwija--of the brahmanas; nata--and dancers; raje--the king; bandhaha--please keep; hrdaya--of the heart; majhe--in the middle; ki--what?; karibe--will do; samsara--of material life; samana--death; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; kahe--says; gora--with Lord Gauranga; sama--equal; keha--someone; nahe--there is not; na--not; bhajite--worshipped; deya--payable; prema--of pure love of Krsna; dhana--treasure.

     If you place Lord Gauranga, the brahmana king of dancers, within your heart, then what will death be able to do to you? Narottama dasa says: There is no one equal to Lord Gauranga.  Even if one will not become His devotee, still Lord Gauranga will freely give him the treasure of love of Krsna.

Part 15 Sabarana Gaura mahima-The Glories of Lord Gauranga

Song 39

Text 1

gaurāṅgera duṭī pada jā’ra dhana sampada
se jāne bhakati-rasa-sāra
gaurāṅgera madhura-līlā jāra karṇe praveśilā
hṛdaya nirmala bhela tā’ra
     gaungera--of Lord Gauranga; duti--the two; pada--lotus feet; jara--of which; dhana sampada--wealth; se--this; jane--understands; bhakati--of devotional service; rasa--the mellows; sara--the essence; gaurangera--of Lord Gauranga; madhura--sweet; lila--pastimes; jara--of whom; karne--in the ear; prabesila--will enter; hrdaya--the heart; nirmala--pure; bhela--becomes; tara--his.

     Anyone who has accepted the two lotus feet of Lord Caitanya can understand the true essence of devotional service. If one is captivated by the pleasing pastimes of Lord Caitanya, the dirty things in his heart will all become cleansed.

Text 2

je gaurāṅgera nāma laya tā’ra haya premodaya
tāre muñi jāi balihārī
gaurāṅga-guṇete jhure nitya-līlā tāre sphure
se jana bhakati-adhikārī
     je--one who; gaurangera--of Lord Gauranga; nama--the name; laya--accepts; tara--of him; haya--there is; premodaya--the arisal of pure love of Krsna; tare--to him; mui--I; jai--go; balihari--excellent; gauranga--of Lord Gauranga; gunete--the qualities; jhure--appreciates; nitya--eternal; lila--pastimes; tare--to him; sphure--become manifest; se--this; jana--person; bhakati-adhikari--is a person fit to understand devotional service.

     One who simply takes the holy name of Gaurasundara,  Sri Krsna Caitanya, will immediately develop love of God.  To such a person I say; Bravo.  Very nice.  Excellent; If one appreciates the merciful pastimes of Lord Caitanya and feels ecstasy and sometimes cries, this process will imediately help him to understand the eternal pastimes of Raha-Krsna.

Text 3

gaurāṅgera saṅgi-gaṇe nitya-siddha kāri mane
se jāya brajendra-suta-pāsa
śrī-gauḍa-maṇḍala-bhūmi jebā jāne cintāmaṇi
tāra haya braja-bhūme vāsa
     gaurangera--of Lord Gauranga; sangi-gane--the associates; nitya--eternally; siddha--perfect; kari'--doing; mane--in the mind; se--he; jaya--attaining; braja-indra-suta--of the prince of Vraja; pasa--nearness; sri-gauda--mandala-bhumi--the land where Lord Caitanya performed pastimes; jeba--whoever; jane--understands; cintamani--cintamani gem; tara--of him; haya--is; braja--bhume--in Vrajabhumi; basa--residence.

       Simply by ynderstanding that the associates of Lord Gauranga are eternally free from material contamination, one can immediately be promoted to the transcendental abode of Lord Krsna.  If one simply understands that the land of Navadvipa is not diifferent from Vrndavana, then he actually lives in Vrndavana.

Text 4

gaura-prema-rasārṇave se taraṅge jebā ḍube
se rādhā-mādhava-antaraṅga
gṛhe vā vanete thāke hā gaurāṅga bale ḍāke
narottama māge tā’ra saṅga

     gaura--of Lord Caitanya; prema--of the love of God; rasa--of the nectar; arnabe--in the ocean; se--this; taranga--waves; jeba--whoever; dube--dives; se--he; radha-madhava--of Sri Sri Radha and Krsna; antaranga--becomes a confidential associate; grhe--at home; ba--or; vanete--in the forest; thake--he may stay; ha--O; gauranga-- Gauranga; bo'le--he will say; dake--he calls out; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; mage--begs; tara--his; sanga--association.

     If one says: "Let me dive deep into the waves of the nectarean ocean of the transcendental loving movement introduced by Lord Caitanya," he immediately becomes  one of the confidential devotees of Radha and Krsna.  It does not matter whether one is a householder living at home or a vanaprastha or sannyasi living in the forest, if he chants "O Gauranga", and becomes a devotee of Lord Caitanya, then Narottama dasa begs to have his association.

Part 16 Punah Prarthana-Another Prayer

Song 40

Text 1

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu dayā kara more
tomā binā ke dayālu jagata saṁsāre

     sri-krsna-caitanya--Sri Krsna Caitanya; prabhu--O Lord; daya--mercy; kara--please give; more--to me; toma--You; bina--except for; ke--who?; dayalu--is merciful; jagat--samsare--in this material world.

     My dear Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, please be merciful to me, because who can be more merciful than Your Lordship within these three worlds.

Text 2

patita-pāvana-hetu tava avatāra
mo sama patita prabhu nā paibe āra

     patita--of the fallen; pabana--the purifier; hetu--the reason; taba--Your; abatara--incarnation; mo sama--like me; patita--fallen; prabhu--O Lord; na--not; paibe--ther is; ara--another.

     Your incarnation is just to reclaim the conditioned, fallen souls, but I assure You that You will not find a greater fallen soul than me.  Therefore my claim is first.

Text 3

hā hā prabhu nityānanda! premānanda sukhī
kṛpābalokana kara āmi baḍa duḥkhī

     ha--O; ha--O; prabhu--lord; nityananda-Nityananda; prema--of pure love of God; ananda--with the bliss; sukhi--happy; krpa--of mercy; abalokana--glance; kara--please do; ami--I; bada--very; duhkhi--unhappy.

     My dear Lord Nityananda, You are always joyful in spiritual  bliss.  Since You always appear very happy, I have come to You because I am most unhappy.  If You kindly put Your merciful glance over me, I may also become happy.

Text 4

dayā kara sītā-pati advaita gosāñi
taba kṛpā-bale pāi caitanya-nitāi

     daya--mercy; kara--please do; sita--of Sita-devi; pati--O husband; adwaita gosai--O Advaita Bosvami; taba--Your; krpa--mercy; bale--by the strength; pai--I may attain; caitanya--Lord Caitanya; nitai--and Lord Nityananda.

     My dear Advaita Prabhu, husband of Sita, Your are so kind.  Please be kind to me.  If Your are kind to me, naturally Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityananda also will be kind to me.

Text 5

hā hā svarūpa sanātana rūpa raghunātha
bhaṭṭa-juga śrī-jīva hā prabhu lokanātha

ha--O; ha--O; swarupa--Svarupa Damodara Gosvami; sanatana--Sanatana Gosvami; rupa--Rupa ; raghunatha-Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; bhatta-juga-Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami and gopala Bhatta Gosvami; jiva--Jiva Gosvami; ha--O; prabhu--my master; lokanatha--Lokanatha Gosvami.

O Sri Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, O Sri Sanatana Gosvami, O Sri  Rupa Gosvami, O Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, O Sri  Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami and Sri  gopala Bhatta Gosvami, O Sri  Jiva Gosvami, O my master, Sri  Lokanatha Gosvami...

Text 6

dayā kara śrī-ācārya prabhu śrīnivāsa
rāmacandra-saṅga māge narottama-dāsa

     daya--mercy; kara--please do; sri-acarya--spiritual master; prabhu--O Lord; srinivasa-Srinivasa Acarya; ramacandra--of Ramacandra dasa; sanga--the association; mage---begs; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa.

    ... O Sri Srinivasa Acarya, I beg you all to please be merciful to me. Narottama dasa prays that he may always have the company of Ramacandra Cakravarti.

Part 17 Sa parsada bhagavad viraha janita vilapa-Separated from the Lord and His Associates, the Author Laments

Song 41

Text 1

je ānila prema-dhana karuṇā pracura
hena prabhu kothā gelā ācārya-ṭhākura*
     je--who; anila--brought; prema--of love of Krsna; dhana--the treasure; karuna--mercy; pracura--abundant; hena--like this; prabhu--master; kotha--where?; gela--has gone; acarya-thakura--Srinivasa Acarya.

     He who brought the treasure of divine love and who was filled with compassion and mercy--where has such a personality as Srinivasa Acarya gone?

Text 2

kāṅhā mora svarūpa rūpa kāṅhā sanātana
kāṅhā dāsa raghunātha patita-pāvana

     kaha--where?; mora--my; swarupa-Svarupa Damodara Gosvami; rupa--Srila Rupa Gosvami; kaha--where?; sanatana--Srila Sanatana Gosvami; kaha--where?; dasa raghunatha--Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; patita--of the fallen; pabana--the deliverer.

     Where are my Svarupa Damodara and Rupa Gosvami?  Where is Sanatana?  Where is Raghunatha dasa, the savior of the fallen?

Text 3

kāṅhā mora bhaṭṭa-juga kāṅhā kavirāja
eka-kāle kothā gela gorā naṭarāja

     kaha--where;  mora--my; bhatta-juga--Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami and Gopala Bhatta Gosvami; kaha--where; kabiraja--Krsna dasa viraja Gosvami; eka-kale--in a single moment; kotha--where; gela--have they gone; gora--Lord Gauranga; nata--of dancers; raja--the king.

     Where are my Raghunatha Bhatta and Gopala Bhatta and wehre is Krsnadasa Kaviraja?  Where did Lord Gauranga, the great dancer, suddenly go?

Text 4

pāṣāṇe kuṭibo māthā anale paśiba
gaurāṅga guṇera nidhi kothā gele pāba

     pasane--against the rock; kutiba-I will smash; matha--my head; anale--in the fire; pasiba--I will enter; gauranga--Lord Gauranga; gunera--of transcendental qualities; nidhi--the reservoir; kotha--where?; gele--going; paba--I will attain.

     I will smash my head against the rock and enter into the fire.  Where will I find Lord Gauranga, the reservoir of all wonderful qualities?

Text 5

se-saba saṅgīra saṅge je kaila vilāsa
se-saṅga nā paiya kānde narottama dāsa

     se--this; saba--all; sangira--of the associat4es; sange--association; je--who; kaila-performed; bilasa--pastimes; se--this; sanga--association; na--not; paiya--attaining; kande--cries; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa.

     Being unable to obtain the association of Lord Gauranga accompanied by all of these devotees in whoseassociation He performed His pastimes, Narottama dasa simply weeps.

Part 18 Aksepa-regret

Song 42

Text 1

gorā paṅhu nā bhajiyā mainū
prema-ratana-dhana helāya hārāinu

     gora--Gauranga; panhu--the Lord; na-not; bhajiya--worshipped; mainu--I became distressed; prema-- of pure love of Krsna; ratana--the jewels; dhana--the treasure; helaya--disregarding; harainu--I becamer lost.

     I did not worship Lord Gauranga Prabhu, and thus I becme full of suffering.  I refused to accept the treasure of pure love of Krsna, and thus I became lost.

Text 2

adhane jatana kari dhana teyāginu
āpana karama-doṣe āpani dubinū

     adhane--poor; jatana--endeavor; kari'--doing; dhana--treasure; tejaginu--I renounced; apana--myself; karama--of actions; dose--in defect; apani--personally; dhubinu--I dived;

     I rejected the treasure of love of Krsna and deliberately struggled to become poor.  I dived into a host of sinful deeds.

Text 3

sat-saṅga chāḍi kainu asate vilāsa
te-kāraṇe lāgila je karma-bandha phāṅsa

     sat--of the saintly devotees; sanga--the association; chadi'--rejecting; kainu--I did; asate--among the impious; bilasa--my sports; te-karane--for this reason; lagila--I attained; je--which; karma--of fruitive actions; bandha--bondage; phamsa--noose.

     I rejected the association of the saintly devotees, and instead tried to enjoy among the impious non-devotees. In this way I became caught in the noose of karma.

Text 4

viṣaya viṣama viṣa satata khainu
gaura-kīrtana-rasa magana nā hainu

     bisaya--of sense-gratification; bisama--virulent; bisa--poison; satata--continually; khainu--I drank; gora--of Lord Caitanya; kirtana--of the sankirtana movement; rase--in the nectarean mellows; magana--immersion; na--not; hainu--I did.

     I continually drank the virulent poison of sense-gratification.  I refused to swim in the nectar of Lord caitanya's sankirtana movement.

Text 5

kena bā āchaye prāṇa ki sukha pāiyā
narottama dāsa kena nā gela mariyā

     kena--why?; ba--or; achaye--I am; prana--life-breath; ki--what?; sukha--happiness; paiya--have I attained; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; kena--why?; na--not; gela--went; mariya--dying.

     Why do I stay alive?  What happiness do I have?  Why has Narottama dasa not died long ago?

Song 43

Text 1

     hari hari! ki mora karama anūrata
biṣaye kuṭila-mati sat-saṅge nā haila rati
kise āra taribāra patha

     hari--O Lord Hari; hari--O Lord Hari; mora--my; karama--actions; anurata--attached; bisaye--in sense-gratification; kutila--crooked; mati--minded; sat--of the saintly devotees; sange--in the association; na--not; haila--wa; rati--delight; kise--by what?; ara--and; taribara--to cross over; patha—path.

     My crooked mind delights in sense-gratification, but not in the association of the saintly devotees.  Why do I follow this dangerous pathy?  O Lord Hari, Lord Hari, how have I become so attached to materialism?

Text 2

svarūpa sanātana rūpa raghunātha bhaṭṭa-juga
lokanātha siddhānta-sāgara
śunitām se-saba kathā ghucita manera byathā
tabe bhāla haila antara

     swarupa--Svarupa Damodara Gosvami; sanatana- Srila Sanatana Gosvami; rupa--Srila Rupa Gosvami; raghunatha--Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; bhatta-juga--Srila Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami; and Srila Gopala Bhatta Gosvami; lokanatha--Srila Lokanatha Gosvami; siddhanta--of the definitive conclusions of devotional life; sagara--O ocean; sunitama--please hear; se-saba--all these; katha--words; ghuicita--ended; manera--of the mind; byatha--pain; tabe--then; bhala--=good; haita--was; antara--within.

     In the past I continually heard the philosophy of Krsna consciousness from Srila Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, Srila Sanatana Gosvami, Srila Rupa Gosvami; Srila  Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, Srila Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami, Srila  Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, and Srila  Lokanatha Gosvami, who is like a great ocean of devotional truth.  By hearing their words the pain within my mind subsided, and I attained an auspicious condition of life.

Text 3

jakhana gaura-nityānanda advaitādi-bhakta-bṛnda
nadiyā-nagare avatāra
takhana nā haila janma ebe dehe kibā karma
michā mātra bahi phirī bhāra

     jakhana--when; gaura--Lord Caitanya; nityananda--Lord Nityananda; adwaita--with Lord Advaita; adi--beginning; bhakta--of devotees; brnda--the multitude; nadiya--of Nadiya; nagare--in the town; abatara--incarnation; takhana--then; na--not; haila--was; janma--birth; ebe--now; kiba--how excellent; karma--actions; micha--false--matra--only; bahi--I carry phiri--I go; bhara--burden.

     Lord Caitanya, Lord Nityananda, Lord Advaita, and the devotees who are Their personal associates have descended from the spiritual  world to the town of Nadiya.  They have not taken birth as ordinary mortals do.  How wonderful are Their transcendental activities!  I am not like Them.  I simply trudge along carrying a great heap of illusory materialistic burdens.

Text 4

haridāsa ādi bule mahotsava ādi kare
nā herinu se sukha-vilāsa
ki mora duḥkhera kathā janama goṅainu bṛthā
dhik dhik narottama dāsa

     haridasa--with Haridasa Thakura; adi--beginning; bule--travelled; maha-utsaba--great festivals; adi--beginning with; kare--did; na--not; herinu--I saw; se--this; sukha--of transcendental happiness; bilasa--pastimes; ki--what?; mora--of me; duhkhera--of suffering; katha--description; janama--this birth; gonanu--I have spent; brtha--uselessly; dhik--fie; dhik--fie; narottama dasa--on Narottama dasa. 

     Haridasa Thakura and the other devotees travelled about absorbed in a sonstant festival of the glorification of Lord Krsna, but i myself was unable to see these blissful pastimes.  How sad is my tale.  I have wasted my life.  Fie, fie on Narottama dasa.

Part 19 Baisnaba mahima-Glorification of the Devotees

Song 44

Text 1

ṭhākura vaiṣṇava-pada avanīra su-sampada
śuna bhāī hañā eka mana
āśraya laiyā bhaje tāre kṛṣṇa nāhi tyaje
āra saba mare akāraṇa

     thakura--saintly; baisnaba--of the devotees; pada--the lotus feet; abanira--of the earth; su--sampada--the great treasure; suna--please hear; bhai--O brother; hana--give; eka mana--full attention; asraya--shelter; laiya--attaining; bhaje--worship; tare--of them; krsna--Lord Krsna; nahi--not; tyaje--they abandon; ara--and; saba--all; mare akarana--free from birth and death.

     O brother, please haer my words with rapt attantion.  The lotus feet of the Vaisnavas the most valuable treasure of this world.  These Vaisnavas continually take shelter of Lord Krsna and worship Him, They never abandon their Lord.  They are liberated.  They are free from the cycle of birth and death.

Text 2

vaiṣṇava-caraṇa-jala prema-bhakti dite bala
āra keha nahe balavanta
vaiṣṇava-caraṇa-reṇu mastake bhūṣaṇa binu
āra nāhi bhuṣaṇera aṅta

     baisnaba--of the devotees; carana--of the feet; jala--the water; prema-bhakti--devotional service in pure love of Goid; dite--gives; bala--strength; ara--and; keha--anyone; nahe--not; balabanta--strong; baisnaba--of the devotees; pada--of the feet; renu--the dust; mastake--on the head; bhusana--the ornament; binu--I place; ara--and; nahi--ther is not; bhusanera--of ornaments; anta--another.

     The water which has washed the lotus feet of the Vaisnavas bestows devotional service in pure love of God, and there is nothing as effective for attaining this divine love.  I place the dust from the lotus feet of the Vaisnavas upon my head.  I wear no other ornament.

Text 3

tīrtha-jala pavitra-guṇa likhiyāche purāṇe
se saba bhaktira pravancana
vaiṣṇavera pādodaka sama nahe ei saba
jāte haya vāñcchita pūraṇa

     tirtha--of the places of pilgrimage; jala--the water; pabitra--purifying; guna--qualities; likhiyache--is written; devotional service; prabancana--a deception; baisnabera--of the devotees; pada--of the feet; udaka-the water; sama--equal; nahe--not; ei--this; saba--everything; jate--which; haya--is; banchita--wished; purana--fulfillment.

     The purifying power of the waters at the various holy places of pilgrimage is described in the Puranas, although this issomething of a deceptive trick.  Actually there is not anything as purifying as the water which has washed the lotus feet of the Vaisnavas.  This water fulfills all desires.

Text 4

vaiṣṇava-saṅgete mana ānandita anukṣana
sadā haya kṛṣṇa-para-saṅga
dīna narottama kānde hiyā dhairya nāhi bāndhe
mora daśā kena haila bhaṅga

     baisnaba--of the devotees; sangete--by the association; mana--my mind; anandita--delightede; anuksana--moment after moment; sada--always; haya--is; krsna-para--of those devoted to Lord Krsna; sanga--the association; dina--poor-hearted; narottama--Narottama dasa; kande--cries; hiya--of the heart; dhairya--composure; nahi--not; bandhe--I bind; mora--my; dasa--condition of life; kena--why?; haila--become; bhanga--broken.

     Moment after moment my mind finds constant pleasure in the association of the Vaisnavas.  I always seek out the company of those who are devoted to Lord Krsna.  Poor-hearted Narottama dasa breaks down and cries. How has this fallen condition come upon me?

Part 20 Baisnaba bijnapti-Prayer to the Vaisnavas

Song 45

Text 1

ṭhākura vaiṣṇava-gaṇa kari ei nibedana
mo baḍa adhama durācāra
dārūṇa-saṁsāra-nidhi tāte ḍubāila vidhi
keśe dhari more kara pāra

     thakura baisnaba-gana--O saintly devotees; kari--I do; ei--this; nibedana--appeal; mo--me; bada--very; adhama--fallen; duracara--and misbehaved; daruna--frightening; samsara--of material existence; nidhi--the ocean; tahe--in that; dhubaila--has dived; bidhi--my destiny; kese--by the hair; dhari'--holding; more--me; kara--please do; para--to the other shore.


     O saintly Vaisnavas, although I am very fallen and misbehaved, I nevertheless place this appeal before you:  My destiny has immersed me in this fearsome ocean of repeated birth and death.  Please grab me by the hair, and pull me to the opposite shore.

Text 2

vidhi baḍa balavān nā śune dharama-jñāna
sadāi karama-pāśe bāṅdhe
nā dekhi tāraṇa leśa jata dekhi saba kleśa
anātha kātare teñi kānde

     bidhi--destiny; bada--is very; balaban--strong; na--I do not hear; dharama--of religion; jnana--the knowledge; sadai--always; karama-of karma; pase--in the net; bandhe--I am bound; na--I do not; dekhi--see; tarana--means to cross; lesa--little; jata--which; dekhi--I see; saba--all; klesa--sufferings; anatha--without a master; katare--with grief; teni--therefore; kane--I cry.

     My destiny is very powerful.  I am not able to hear the knowledge of spiritual life, and I am always bound by the ropes of karma.  I cannot see any way to escape my condition.  I see only suffering.  Helpless and stricken with grief, I cry.

Text 3

kāma krodha lobha moha mada abhimāna saha
āpana āpana sthāne ṭāne
aichana āmāra mana phire jena andha jana
supatha vipatha nāhi jāne

     kama--lust; krodha--anger; lobha--greed; moha--bewilderment; mada--madness; abhimana-pride; saha--with; apana apana--freely; sthane--in this place; tane--drag; aichana--like this; amara--of me; mana--mind; phire--moves; jena--by which; andhajana--blind; supatha--auspicious path; vipatha--inauspicious path; nahi--does not; jane--know.

     My blind mind cannot see what path is auspicious or inauspicious.  My blind mind is helplessly dragged from here to there by lust, anger, greed, bewilderment, madness, and pride.

Text 4

nā lainu sat mata asate majila citta
tuyā pāye nā karinu āśa
narottama dāse kaya dekhi śuni lāge bhaya
tarāiyā laha nija pāśa

     na--not; lainu--I attained; sat mata--the proper understanding; asate--in the impermanent; majile--I was immersed; cita--mind; tuya--Your; paye--lotus feet; na--not; karinu--I did; asa--hope; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; kaya--how many?; dikhi'--seeing; suni'--hearing; lage--I touch; bhaya--fear; taraiya--having crossed beyond; laha--attain; nija--own; pasa--vicinity.

     My mind became immersed in the impermanent satisfaction of the senses, and I could not understand the reals goal of life.  for this reason I did not aspire to attain Your lotus feet.  Narottama dasa says--Now that I am able to see, hear, and touch the Vaisnavas, I have become free form all fear.

Song 46

Text 1

ei-bāra karuṇā kara vaiṣṇava gosāñi
patita-pāvana tomā bine keha nāi

     ei-bara--this time; karuna-mercy; kara-please do; baisnaba gosai--O Vaisnavas Gosvami; patita--of the fallen souls; pabana-O savior; toma--you; bine-except; keha--someone; nai--there is not.

     O Vaisnavas Gosvami, please be merciful to me now.  ther is no one except you who can purify the fallen souls.

Text 2

jāhāra nikaṭe gele pāpa dūre jāya
emana dayāla prabhu kebā kothā pāya

     jahara--of whom; darsane--by the sight; saba--all; papa--sins; dure--far away; jaya--go; emana--like this; dayala--merciful; prabhu--master; keba--whoever; kotha--where; paya--attaining;

     Where does anyone find such a merciful personality by whose mere audience all sins go far away?

Text 3

gaṅgara paraśa haile paścāte pāvana
darśane pavitra kara-ei tomāra guṇa

     gangara--of the Ganges; parasa--touch; haile--is; pascate--afterwiards; pabana--purifier; darsane--by the sight; pabitra--pure; kara--you may do; ei--this; tomara--of you; guna--the virtue.

     After bathing in the waters of the sacred Ganges many times, one becomes purified, but just by the sight of you, the fallen souls become are pruified.  This is your great power.

Text 4

hari-sthāne aparādhe tāre harinām
tomā sthāne aparādhe nāhika eṛhāna

     hari--Of Lord Hari; sthane--at the place; aparadhe--the offense; tare--delifers; hari--of Lord Hari; nama--hte name; toma--of you; sthane--at the place; aparadhe--by offense; nahi--there isnot; paritrana--deliverer.

     The holy name delivers one who has committed an offense of Lord Hari, but if one commits an offense to you, there is no means of deliverance.

Text 5

tomāra hṛdaye sadā govinda-viśrām
govinda kahena—mama vaiṣṇava parāṇ

     tomara--of you; hrdaye--in the heart; sada--always; govinda--of Lord Govinda; bisrama--restingplace; govinda--govinda; kahena--says; mama--My; baisnaba--devotees; parana--life and soul.

     Lord Govinda always stays within your heart.  Lord Govinda says:  "the Vaisnavas are my life and soul."

Text 6

prati-janme kari āśā caraṇera dhūli
narottame kara dayā āpanāra bali

     prati-janme--in every birth; kari--I do; asa--the hope; caranera--of your lotus feet; dhuli--the dust; narottame--Narottama; kara--please do; daya--mercy; apanara--yours; boli'--saying.

     I hope that in every birth I may attain the dust of your lotus feet.  Please declare this Narottama dasa to be your property.  Pleae be merciful to him.

Song 47

Text 1

ki-rūpe pāiba sevā mui durācāra
śrī-gurū-vaiṣṇave rati nā haila āmāra

     ki-rupe--how?; paiba--will attain; seba--devotional service; mui--I; duracara--misbehaved; sri-guru--to the spiritual master; baisnabe--and the Vaisnavas; rati--attachment; na--not; haila--is; amara--of me.

          I have no deovtion for either the Vaisnavas or my own spiritual master.  How is it possible for a rascal like me to attain devotional service?

Text 2

aśeṣa māyāte mana magana haila
vaiṣṇavete leśa-mātra rati nā janmila

     asesa--completely; mayate--in illusion; mana--my mind; magana--immersed; haila--is; baisnabete--for the Vaisnavas; lesa--a little; matra--even; rati--devotion; na--does not; janmila--become manifested.   

     My mind is always drowning in illusion.  I have not even the smallest fragment of devotion for the Vaisnavas.

Text 3

viṣaye bhuliya andha hainu dibā-niśi
gale phaṅsa dite phire māyā se piśācī

     bisaye--in sense objects; tuliya--considering; andha--blind; hainu--I have become; diba-day; nisi--and night; gale--around my neck; phamsa--the noose; dite--is placed; phire--moves; maya--illusory energy; se--this; pisaci--witch.

     I have become blind by constantly meditating on the objects of the senses.  The maya-witch has placed a hangman's noose around my neck.

Text 4

ihāre kariyā jaya chāḍāna nā jāya
sādhu-kṛpā binā āra nāhika upāya

     ihare--this; kariya--having done; jaya--victory; chadana--relief; na--does not; jaya--attain; sadhu--of the saintly devotees; krpa--the mercy; bina--without; ara--and; nahika--there is not; upaya--a remedy.

     Even if I can cure my blindness and defeat the maya-hangman, I cannot become free from material illusion without the mercy of the saintly devotees.

Text 5

adoṣada-rāśi-prabhu patita-uddhāra
ei-bāra narottame karaha nistāra

     adosada-rasi--O purifier; prabhu--O Lord; patita--of the fallen; uddhara--deliverer; ei-bara--this time; narottame--Narottama; karaha nistara--please deliver.

     O master, O purifier of the sinful, O savior of the fallen souls, please rescue this Narottama dasa.

Part 21 Sri rupa rati manjaryah Vijnaptih-Prayer to Sri Rupa manjari and Sri Rati manjari

Song 48

Text 1

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sevon muñi jīvane maraṇe
tāṅra sthāna taṅra līlā dekhoṅ rātri dine

     radha-krsna--Sri Sri Radha and Krsna; sebon muni-I will serve; jibane--in life; marane--in death; tanra--of Them; sthana--the place; tanra--of Them; lila--the pastimes; dekhon--will see; ratri--night; dine--and day.

          I shall serve Sri Sri Radha and Krsna in this life and also afer my death.  Night aned day I shall see Their transcendental abode and pastimes.

Text 2

je sthāne je līlā kare jugala-kiśora
sakhīra saṅginī hañā taṅhe haṅa bhora

     je--which; sthane--in the place; lila--pastime; kare--did; jugala-kisoa--the youthful Divine Couple; sakhira--of the gopis; sangini--in the company; hana--is; tanhe--of Them; hana--is; bhora--dawn.

     Wherever the youthful Divine Couple shall go to perform transcendental pastimes I shall follow as an associate of Their gopi-frineds, and I shall stay with Them until sunrise.

Text 3

śrī-rūpa-mañjarī-pada sevoṅ niravadhi
taṅra pāda-padma mora mantra-mahauṣadhi

     sri-rupa-manjari--of Sri Rupa manjari; pada--the feet; sebon--I shall serve; nirabadhi--without limit; tanra-of her; pada-padma--the lotus feet; mora--myu; mantra--mantra; maha--great; ausadhi--medicinal herb.

     I shall continually serve the lotus feet of Sri Rupa-manjari.  Her lotus feet are my purifying mantra and my medicinal herb.

Text 4

śrī-ratī-mañjarī devī more kara dayā
anukṣaṇa deha tuyā pāda-padma-chāyā

     sri-rati-manjari devi--O Sri Rati manjari-devi;  more--to me; kara--please do; daya--mercy; anuksana--at every moment; deha--please give; tuya--of you; pada-padma--of the lotus feet; chaya--the shade.

     O Sri Rati-manjari-devi, please be merciful to me.  Please give me the continual shade of your lotus feet.

Text 5

śrī-rāsa-mañjarī devī kara abadhāna
anukṣaṇa deha tuyā pāda-padma-dhyāna

     sri-rasa-manjari--O Sri Rasa manjari; devi--O goddess; kara--please give; abadhana--your attention; anuksana--at every moment; deha--please give; tuya--of you; pada--padma--of the lotus feet; dhyana--the meditation.

     O Sri Rasa-manjari-devi, please notice me.  please allow me to constantly meditate on your lotus feet.

Text 6

vṛndāvane nitya nitya jugala-vilāsa
prārthanā karaye sadā narottama dāsa

     brndabane--in Vrndavana; nitya nitya--eternally; jugala--of the Divine Couple; bilasa--pastimes; prarthana--prayer; karaye--does; sada--constantly; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa.

     Please allow me to join the eternal pastimes of the Divine Couple in Vrndavana.  Narottama dasa constantly prays in this way.

Part 22 Sakhi vrnde vijnaptih-Prayer to the Gopis

Song 49

Text 1

rādhā-kṛṣṇa prāṇa mora jugala-kiśora
jīvane maraṇe gati āra nāhi mora

     radha-krsna--Sri Sri Radha and Krsna; prana--life and soul; mora--my; jugala-kisora--the youthful Divine couple; jibane--in life; marane--and death; gati--goal; ara--another; nahi--there is not; mora--of me.

     The youthful Divine Couple Sri Sri Radha and Krsna are my life and soul.  In life or death I have no other refuge but Them.

Text 2

kālindīra kūle keli-kadambera vana
ratana-vedīra upara vasāba du’jana

     kalindira--of the Yamuna river; kule--on the shore; keli--for pastimes; kadambera--of kadamba trees; bana--a forest; ratana--jewelled; bedira--of a throne; upara--above; basaba--I shall enthrone; du-jana--the Divine Couple.

     I shall install the Divine Couple on a jewelled throne in a pleasant forest of kadamba trees on the shore of the Yamuna river.

Text 3

śyāma-gaurī-ange diba (cuyā) candanera gandha
cāmara ḍhulāba kabe heriba mukha-candra

     syama--of Lord Syamasundara; gauri--of Srimati Gaurangi; ange--on thelimbs; diba--I shall place; candanera--of sandalwood paste; gandha--perfume; camara--the camara wisk; dhulaba--i shall wave; kabe--when?; heri--I will see; mukha--Their faces; candra--like the moon.

     When will I place aromatic sandalwood paste on the limbs of Lord Syamasundara and Srimati Gaurangi-devi?  When will I fan Them with a camara wisk?  When will I see Their moonlike faces?

Text 4

gāṅthiyā mālatīr mālā diba doṅhāra gale
adhare tuliyā diba karpūra-tāmbūle

     ganthiya--stringing; malatira--of malati flowers; mala--a garland; diba--I will place; donhara--of the Divine Couple; gale--on the necks; adhare--on Their lips; tuliya--considering; diba--I will place; karpura--camphor; tambule--and betel-nuts.

     When will I string garlands of malati flowers and place them on the necks of the Divine Couple?  When will I place betel nuts mixed with camphor in their lotus mouths?

Text 5

lalitā viśākhā-ādi jata sakhī-vṛnda
ājñāya kariba sevā caraṇāravinda

     lalita--with lalita; bisakha--and Visakha; adi--beginning; jata--which; sakhi--of gopis; brnda--group; ajnaya--order; kariba--I will carry out; seba--the service; carana--arabina--the lotus feet.

     When, following the orders of Lalita, Visakha and the other gopis, will I serve the lotus feet of the Divine Couple?

Text 6

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-prabhur dāser anudāsa
sevā abhilāṣa kare narottama-dāsa

sri-krsna-caitanya-prabhura--of Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dasera--of the servant; anudasa--the servant; seba--service; abhilasa--desire; kore--does; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa.

     Narottama dasa, the servant of the servant of Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, longs for this service to the Divine Couple.

Part 23 Siddha dehena Sri vrndavanaisvaryam saksad vijnaptih-The Author Prays to Attain a Spiritual body in Sri Vrndavana dhama

Song 50

Text 1

prāṇeśvari! ei bāra karuṇā kara more
daśanete tṛṇa dhari añjali mastake kari
ei-jana nivedana kare

     prana--of my life; iswari--O queen; ei-bara--this time; karuna--mercy; kara--please do; more--to me; dasanete--in my teeth; trna--a straw; dhari'--holding; anjali--folded hands; mastake--on my head; kari'--placing; ei--jana--this person; nibedana--an appeal; kare--does.

     This person places a straw between his teeth and his folded hands over his head.  This person appeals to you.  O queen of my life, please be merciful to me.

Text 2
priya-sahacarī-saṅge sevana kariba raṅge
aṅge beśa karibeka sādhe
rākha ei sevā-kāje nija pada-paṅkaje
priya-sahacarī-gaṇa-mājhe

     priya--dear; sahacari--friends; sange--in the company; sebana--service; kariba--I will do; range--with delight; ange--on Your body; besa--garments; karibeka--I will do; sadhe--voluntarily; rakha--place; ei--this; seba-kaje--with devotional service; nija--own; pada--pankaje--at the lotus feet; priya--dear; sahacari-gana--of associates; majhe--in the midst.

     Please engage me in the service of Your lotus feet.  Please place me among Your gopi--associates. In their company I shall serve You with great happiness.  I shall dress You in nice garments, and serve You in various ways.

Text 3

sugandhi candana maṇimaya ābharaṇa
kauśika basana nānā raṅge
ei saba sevā jaṅra dāsī jena haña tiara
anukṣaṇa thāki tāṅra saṅge
     sugandhi--aromatic; candana--sandalwood paste; manimaya--jewelled; abharana--ornaments; kausika--silk; basana--garments; nana--various; range--with happiness; ei--this; saba--all; seba--service; janra--of whom; dasi--maidservant; jena--by which; hana--is; tanra--of her; anuksana--at every moment; thaki--I stay; tanra--of her; sange--in the company.

     I shall anoint You with aromatic sandalwood paste.  I shall happily decorate You with various silken garments and jewelled ornaments.  I shall always stay near You as Your maidservant.

Text 4

jala subāsita kāri ratana bhṛṅgāre bhari
karpūra-bāsita guyā pāna
e-saba sājāiya dālā labaṅga mālatī-mālā
bhakṣya-dravya nānā Anupama

     jala--water; subasita--aromatic; kari'--making; ratana--jewelled; bhrngare--in a pitcher; bhari'--filling; karpura--with camphor; basita--fragrant; guya pana--betel-nuts; e--this; saba--everything; sajaiya--preparing; dala--twig; labanga--clove; malati--of jasmine flowers; mala--garland; bhaksya--food; dravya--substances; nana--various; anupama--incomparable.

     I shall bring You fragrant water in a jewelled pitcher, and betel-nuts mixed with camphor.  I shall bring You a clove-twig, a garland of jasmine flowers, and various imcomparably palatable foods. 

Text 5

sakhīra iṅgita habe e-saba āniyā kabe
jogāiba lalitāra kāche
narottama dāsa kaya ei jena mora haya
dāṅṛhaiyā rahu sakhīra pāche

     sakhira--of the gopis; ingita--hints; habe--will be; e--they; sabas--all; aniya--bringing; kabe--when?; jogaiba--I will attain; lalitara--of Lalita; kache-nearness; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; kaya--says; ei--this; jena--by which; mora--of me; haya--will be; dandaiya--being established; bahu--the many; sakhira--gopis; pache--behind.

     When shall I carry out every order hinted or gestured by the gopis?  When shall I attain the association of Lalita--devi? Narottama dasa says:  I hope that by praying in this way I shall some day become eligible to follow behind the gopi-frineds of the Divine Couple.

Song 51

Text 1

arūṇa-kamala-dale śeṣa bichāiba
basāiba kiśora-kiśorī
alakābhṛta-mukha- paṅkaja manohara
marakata-śyāma hema-gaurī

     aruna--red; kamala--lotus; dale--petal; sesa--remainder; bichaiba--I will scatter; basaiba--I will install; kisora-kisori--the youthful Divine Couple; alaka--with curling locks of hair; abrta--decorated jukha--faces; pankaja--lotus; manohara--enchanting; marakata--as emerald; syama--dark; hema--as gold; gauri--fair.

     When will I scatter red lotus petals before the charming youthful Divine Couple, whose lotus faces are nicely decorated with curling locks of hair, and who appear like a dark emerald accompanied by glittering gold?

Text 2

prāṇeśvari kabe more habe kṛpa diṭhi
ājñāya āniya kabe bibidha phula-bara
śunaba racana duṅhu miṭhi

     prana--of my life; iswari--O queen; kabe--when?; more--to me; habe--will be; krpa--mercy; dithi--glance; ajnaya--order; aniya--fulfilling; kabe--when?; bibidha--various; phula--flowers; bara--excellent; sunaba--I will hear; racana--creation; dunhu--the Divine Couple; mithi--candy.

     O queen of my life, when will you place Your merciful glance upon me?  When, directly hearing the orders of the Divine Couple, will I bring them various flowers and sweet candies?

Text 3

mṛgamada tilaka sa-sindūra banāyaba
lepaba candana-gandhe
gānthi mālatī-phula hāra parāoba
dhāoyāba madhukara-vṛnde

     mrgamada--with musk; tilaka-tilaka markings; sa--with; sindura--red sindura; banayaba--I will collect; lepaba--I will anoint; candana-gandhe--with aromatic sandlawood paste; ganthi--I will string; malati-phula--jasmine flowers; hara-pahiraoba--bringing the necklace; dhaoyaba--I will run; madhukara-brnde--from the bumble--bee.

     When will I anoint the Divine Couple with tilaka markings made of musk and red sindura? When will I anoint Their bodies with sandalwood paste?  When will I string a garland of jasmine flowers for Them, and then have to flee from the swarm of bumble-bees eager to claim the honey of those flowers?

Text 4

lalitā kabe more bījana deoyaba
bījana māruta mande
śrama-jala sakala miṭaba duṅhu-kalebara
heraba parama ānande

     lalita--Lalita; kabe--when?; more--me; bijana--in falling; deoyaba--I will engage; bijana--fanning; marita--breeze; mande--with a gentle; srama--jala--perspiration; sakala--all; mitaba--I will end; dunhu--of the Divine Couple; kalebara--on the bodies; heraba--I will see; parama--with transcendental; anande--bliss.  When, on Lalita's order will I gently fan the Divine Couple; kalebara--on the bodies; heraba--I will see; parama--with transcendental; anande--bliss.

     When, on Lalita's order, will I gently fan the Divine Couple, banishing the perspiration from Their transcendental bodies?  When, will I see the Divine Couple, my heart filling with spiritual bliss?

Text 5

narottama dāsa āśa pada-paṅkaja
sevana mādhurī-pāne
ho-oba hena dina nā dekhiye kona cihna
duṅhu-jana heraba nayāne

     narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; asa--hope; pada--feet; pankaja--lotus flower; sebana--service; madhuri--sweetness; pane--in drinking; ho-oyaba--will be; hena--like this; dina--day; na-not; dekhiye--I see; kona--any; cihna--sign; dunju-jana--the Divine Couple; hereba--I will see; nayane--with my own eyes.

     Narottama dasa hopes that some day he will be able to drink the sweet honey of the service of the lotus feet of the Divine Couple.  Will that day ever be?  I do not see any indication that I will become able to directly see the Divine Couple with my own eyes.

Part 24 Sri Krsne Vijnaptih-Prayer to Sri Krsna

Song 52

Text 1

     prabhu he! ei-bāra karaha karuṇā
jugala-caraṇa dekhi saphala kariba āṅkhi
ei mora manera kāmanā

     prabhu--Lord; he--O; ei--bara--this time; karaha--please do; karuna--mercy; jugala--of the Divine Couple; carana--the lotus feet; dekhi--see; saphala--successful; kariba--I will do; ankhi-eyes; ei--this; mora--of me; manera--of the mind; kamana--the desire.

     The sight of the lotus feet of the Divine Couple will be the crowning success of my eyes.  My heart and mind yearn to attain this sight.  O Lord, please be merciful and grant this sight to me.

Text 2

nija-pada-sevā diyā nāhi more upekṣibā
duṅhu pahu karuṇā-sāgara
duṅhu binu nāhi jāno ei baḍa bhāgya māno
mui baḍa patita pāmara

     nija--Your; pada--of the lotus feet; seba--service; diba--give; nahi--do not; maore--me; upekhiba--neglect; dunhu--two; pahu--Lords; karuna--of mercy; sagara--oceans; dunhu--the Divine Couple; binu--without; nahi--not; janon--I know; ei--this; bada--very; bhagya-full of glory and opulence; sanon--I know; mui--i; bada--very; patita--fallen; pamara--sinful.

     Please grant me the service of Your lotus feet.  Do not neglect me, for You, my two Lords, are like two oceans filled with compassion.  I know that You are full of all transcendental glory and opulence, and I do not know anyone except You.  I am very fallen and sinful.  Please be merciful to me.

Text 3

lalitā ādeśa pāñā caraṇa seviba jāñā
priya-sakhī saṅge haya mane
duṅhu dāta-śiromaṇi ati dīna more jāni
nikaṭe caraṇa dibe dāne
              lalita--of Lalita; adesa--the order; pana--I will attain; carana--the lotus feet; sebiba yana--I will serve; priya-sakhi--of the dear gopis; sange--in the association; haya--will be; mane--in my mind; dunhu--the Divine Couple; data--of philanthropists; siromani--the crest jewels; ati--very; dina--poor-hearted; more--me; jani'--knowing; nikate--near; carana--the lotus feet; dibe--will give; dane--in charity.

     By Your mercy I will attain the association of the gopis.  By Your mercy I will become Lalita's maidservant, to be ordered about by her.  By Your mercy I will attain the service of Your lotus feet.  I know that You are both the two crest-jewels among all wealthy philanthropists, and You know that I am the poorest of the poor.  Please, therefore, give me the charity of Your lotus feet.

Text 4

pāba rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pā ghucibe manera ghā
dūre jābe e-saba vikala
narottama dāse kaya ei vāñcchā siddhi haya
deha prāṇa saphala sakala

     paba--I will attain; radha-krsna--of Sri Sri Radha and Krsna; pa--the lotus feet; ghucibe--will disappear; manera--of my mind; gha--the wounds; dure--far away; jabe--will go; ei-saba--all these; biphala--fruitless things; narottama dasa--Narottama dasa; kaya--says; ei--this; bancha--of my desires; siddhi--the fulfillment; haya--is; deha--of my body; prana-and life; sakala--all; saphala--successful.

     By Your mercy I will attain Your lotus feet.  By Your mercy all the painful wounds in my mind will heal.  By Your mercy my lack of success will go far away.  Narottama dasa says: by Your mercy all my desires will be fulfilled, and this body and life will at last become fruitful.

Song 53

Text 1

aji rase bādara niśi
preme bhāsala saba vṛndavāna-vāsī

     aji--today; rase--in nectar; badara--after; nisi--at night; preme--with love; bhasala--will float; saba--all; brndabana--of Vrndavana; basi--the residents.  

Soon all the residents of Vrndavana will float in the nectar of pure love fror Radha and Krsna.


Text 2

śyāma-ghana barikhaye prema-sudhā-dhāra
kore raṅgiṇī rādhā bijurī-saṅcāra
     syama--adark; ghana--cloud; barikhaye-showers; prema--of love; sudha--of nectar; dhara--stream; kore--on the lap; rangini--jubilant; radha--Srimati Radharani; bijuri--lightning; sancara--moving.

     Sri Krsna is like a dark cloud which showers the nectar of pure love, and Srimati Radharani is like a movinglightning bolt sittting in the lap of that cloud.

Text 3

preme pichala patha gamana bhela baṅka
mṛgamada-candana-kuṅkume bhela paṅka

     preme--in love; pichala--slippery; patha--path; gamana--going; bhela--mixed; banka--winding; mrgamada--with musk; candana--sandalwood paste; kunkume--and kunkuma; bhela--mixed; panka--mud.

          The path of love for Krsna is winding and crooked.  It is slippery, and filled with mud mixed with kunkuma, sandalwood paste, and musk.

Text 4

dig vidig nāhi premera pāthāra
dubila narottama nā jāne saṅtara
     dig bidig--in all directions; nahi--not; premera--of love for Krsna; pathara--the ocean; dubila--I plunge; narottama--Narottama dasa; na--does not; jane--know; santara--swimming.

     The great ocean of love of Krsna stretches without limit in all directions.  Although Narottama dasa does not know how to swim across that ocean, he plunges headfirst into it.

Part 25 Miscellaneous songs

Song 54

Text 1
govinda gopīnātha! kṛpā kari rākha nijapade
kāma krodha chayajane laye phire nānāsthāne
viṣaya bhuñjāya nānāmate
govinda—Lord Govinda; gopīnātha—the beloved Lord of the gopīs; kṛpā kari—please be merciful; rākha—please keep; nijapade—at Your lotus feet; kāma—lust; krodha—anger; chayajane—six enemies; laye—taking; phire—wander; nānāsthāne—in various places; viṣaya—sense objects; bhuṣjāya—make me enjoy; nānāmate—in various ways.
O Govinda! The beloved of the gopīs, please keep me at Your lotus feet. The six enemies such as lust, anger drag me to many places and make me enjoy sense objects in various ways. 

Text 2
haiyā māyāra dāsa kari nānā abhilāṣa
tomārā smaraṇa gela dūre
artha-lābha ei āśe kapāṭa vaiṣṇava beśe
bhramiye beḍai ghare ghare
haiya—being; māyāra dāsa—a servant of māyā; kari—I do; nānā—ṁany; abhilāṣa—desires; tomārā—Your; smaraṇa—remembrance; gela dūre—lost; artha-lābha—in order to gain wealth; ei āśe—with this desire; kapāṭa—pseudo; vaiṣṇava beśe—in the guise of a Vaiṣṇava; bhramiye bedāi—wander; ghare ghare—from house to house.
Being a servant of Māyā, I am full of material desires, hence I lost Your remembrance. In order to gain wealth, I wander from door to door in the garb of a pseudo renunciate. 


Text 3
aneka duḥkhera pare layechile vrajapure
kṛpāḍore galāya bāṅdhiyā
daiva-māyā balātkāre khasaiyā sei ḍore
bhavakūpe dileka ḍāriyā
aneka—so much; duḥkhera—of misery; pare—after; layechile—took me; vrajapure—in Vraja-pura; kṛpāḍore—with the rope of mercy; galāya—in the neck; bāṅdhiyā—by tying; daiva-māyā—by the illusory energy of the Lord; balātkāre—being forced; khasaiyā—untie; sei ḍore—that rope; bhavakūpe—in the well of material existence; dileka ḍāriyā—put me in.
After a great deal of distress, You mercifully took me to Vraja. But Your illusory energy forcibly untied the rope of compassion and again placed me in the well of material existence. 

Text 4
punaḥ yadi kṛpā kari e-janāra keśe dhari
ṭaniyā tulaha vrajadhāme
tabe se dekhire bhāla natubā parāṇa gela
kahe dīna dāsa narottame
punaḥ—again; yadi—if; kṛpā kari—please be merciful; e-janāra—of this person; keśe dhari—pulling the hair; ṭaniyā tulaha—pick me up; vrajadhāme—in the abode of Vraja; tabe—then; se—that; dekhire bhāla—my only hope; natuba—otherwise; parāṇa gela—I will die; kahe—says; dīna—poor; dāsa narottame—Narottama dāsa.
Please again be merciful to this fallen person and pick me up to Your abode of Vraja by pulling my hair. This is the only hope of my life. Otherwise I am ruined. Thus prays Narottama dāsa.

Song 55

Text 1

mora prabhu madana gopāla
śrī govinda gopīnātha tumi anāthera nātha
dayā kara muñi adhamera
saṁsāra sāgara ghore paḍiyāchi kārāgare
kṛpā ḍore bāndhi laha more
mora—my; prabhu—the Lord; madana gopāla—Śrī Madana Gopāla; śrī govinda gopīnātha—Śrī Govinda, the Lord of the gopīs; tumi—You are; anāthera nātha—the protector of the helpless; dayā kara—please be merciful; muṣi—to me; adhamera—fallen soul; saṁsāra—material existence; sāgara—ocean; ghore—absorbed; paḍiyāchi—I have fallen; kārāgāre—in the prison house; kṛpā ḍore bandhi—with the rope of mercy; bāndhi—bind; laha more—please take me.
O my Lord Madana Gopāla! O Govinda, the Lord of the gopīs! You are the protector of the helpless. Please be merciful to this fallen soul. I am imprisoned in this formidable ocean of material existence. Kindly pick me up with the rope of Your mercy. 

Text 2
adhama caṇḍāla āmi dayāra ṭhākura tumi
śuniyāchi vaiṣṇavera mukhe
e baḍa bharasā mane laye phela vṛndāvane
vaṁśīvaṭa jena dekhi sukhe
adhama—fallen; caṇḍāla—dog-eater; āmi—I am; dayāra ṭhākura—personification of mercy; tumi—You are; śuniyāchi—I have heard; vaiṣṇavera mukhe—from the lips of the Vaiṣṇavas; e baḍa bharasā—this is a great hope; mane—in my mind; laye—pick me up; phela—and place me; vṛndāvane—in Vṛndāvana; vaṁśīvaṭa—the place of vaṁśīvata; jena—so that; dekhi—I may see; sukhe—happily.
I am like a wretched dog-eater, but I have heard from the lips of the saintly Vaiṣṇavas that You are the personification of compassion. O Lord, this is my only hope, therefore please give me shelter in Vṛndāvana so that I may happily see Vaṁśivata. 

Text 3
kṛpā kara āgu guri laha more keśe dhari
śrī yamunā deha pada-chāyā
aneka dinera āśa nahe jena nairāśa
dayā kara nā kariha māyā
kṛpā kara—be merciful; āgu guri—take the initiative; laha more—please take me; keśe dhari—by pulling my hair; śrī-yamunā—Yamunā; deha pada-chāyā—give me the shade of Your lotus feet; aneka dinera—for a long time; āśa—desire; nahe jena—may not be; nairāśa—disappointed; dayā kara—be merciful; nā kariha māyā—do not deceive me.
Please come forward and pulling my hair, give me shelter on the banks of the River Yamunā. This is my long cherished desire. Please be merciful to me and do not disappoint me. 

Text 4 
anitya śarīra dhari āpana āpana kari
pāche pāche śamanera bhaya
narottama dāse bhane prāṇa kānde rātri dine
pāche vraja prāpti nāhi haya
anitya—temporary; śarīra—body; dhari—accepting; āpana āpana kari—consider it as mine; pāche pāche—in the behind; śamanera bhaya—the fear of death; narottama dāse bhane—Narottama dāsa says; prāṇa—life air; kānde—cries; rātri dine—day and night; pāche—so that; vraja prāpti—attainment of Vraja; nāhi haya—may not happen.
I consider this temporary material body to be the self and I am so fearful of death. Narottama dāsa says, “My soul is crying day and night with the fear that I may not attain the shelter of Vraja.”

Song 56
Text 1
hari balaba āra madana-mohana heraba go
ei rūpe vrajera pathe calaba go
hari—O Lord Hari; balaba—will chant; āra—and; madana-mohana—the attractor of Cupid; heraba go—I will see; ei rūpe—in this way; vrajera pathe—on the way to Vṛndāvana; calaba go—I will walk.
When will I chant the names of Hari and see Lord Madana Mohana? In this way I want to travel on the path of Vraja. 

Text 2
jaba go vrajendra-pura ha’ba gopīkāra nupura
tāṅdera caraṇe madhura madhura bājava go
vipine vinoda khelā saṅgete rākhālera melā
tāṅdera caraṇera dhulā mākhaba go
jaba go—I will go; vrajendra-pura—the city of the King of Vraja; ha’ba—I will become; gopīkāra—of the gopīs; nupura—the ankle bells; tāṅdera—their; caraṇe—on the feet; madhura madhura—sweetly; bājava go—tinkling sound; vipine—in the forest; vinoda khelā—the loving pastimes; saṅgete—in the association; rākhālera melā—innumerable cowherd boys; tāṅdera—their; caraṇera dhulā—the dust from the feet; mākhaba go—I will smear.
Entering Vraja, I will become an ankle-bell on the feet of the gopīs and cause a sweet tinkling sound. I will watch the sporting pastimes of the cowherd boys in the forest of Vṛndāvana and smear the dust from their feet on my body. 


Text 3
rādhā-kṛṣṇera rūpa-mādhurī heraba du’nayana bhari
nikuñjera dvāre dvārī rahiba go
tomarā saba vrajavasī purā-o manera abhilāṣa-e
kabe śrī kṛṣṇera baṅśī śunaba go
rādhā-kṛṣṇera—of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; rūpa-mādhurī—the sweet beauty; heraba—I will see; du—two; nayana bhari—to my eyes’ satisfaction; nikuṣjera—of the groves; dvāre—near the gates; dvārī—a gatekeeper; rahiba go—I will remain; tomarā saba—all of you; vrajavāsī—residents of Vṛndāvana; purā-o—fulfill; manera—of the mind; abhilāṣa-e—only desire; kabe—when will; śrī kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; baṅśī—the flute; śunaba go—I will hear.
I will see the sweet beauty of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to my eyes’ satisfaction and I will stand as a guard at the gate of the groves of Vraja. O residents of Vraja! Please fulfill my desires and allow me to hear the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute. 

Text 4
ei deha antima kāle rākhaba śrī-jamunāra jale
jaya rādhā govinda bale bhāsaba go
kahe narottama dāsa nā purila abhilāṣa
āra kabe vraje vāsa kareba go
ei deha—this body; antima kāle—at the time of death; rākhaba—will place; śrī-jamunāra—of the River Yamunā; jale—in the water; jaya rādhā govinda—all glories to Rādhā Govinda; bale—while chanting; bhāsaba go—will float; kahe—says; narottama dāsa—Narottama dāsa; nā purila—did not fulfill; abhilāṣa—desires; āra kabe—when will; vraje—in Vraja; vāsa karaba go—will reside.
At the time of giving up my body, I will simply place it in the waters of the Yamunā and float while chanting, “Jaya Rādhā Govinda.” Narottama dāsa laments thus, “My desires are not fulfilled. When will I reside in Vraja?”

Song 57

Text 1
hari hari! kata dine hena daśā haba
śrī- rāsa-mañjarī saṅge śrī-maṇi-mañjarī rāṅge
śrī-rūpera anugā haiba
hari hari!—O Lord Hari; kata dine—after how long; hena—such; daśā haba—my state will be; śrī-rasa-maṣjarī saṅge—in the association of Śrī Rasa Maṣjarī; śrī-maṇi-maṣjarī range—in the ecstasy of Maṇi-maṣjarī; śrī-rūpera—of Śrī Rūpa-maṣjarī; anugā—a follower; haiba—will become.
O Lord Hari! How many days more before this will happen to me? In the ecstatic association of Śrī Rasa-maṣjarī and Śrī Maṇi-maṣjarī, I will become a follower of Śrī Rūpa-maṣjarī.

Text 2
suśītala vṛndāvana ratnavedī suśobhana
tāhe maṇimaya siṁhāsana
hema nīla-kāntidhara rāi-kānu sundara
tāhe basāiba duijana
suśītala—soothing; vṛndāvana—Vṛndāvana; ratnavedī—on the jewelled altar; suśobhana—beautiful; tāhe—in that; maṇimaya—jewelled; siṁhāsana—the throne; hema—golden; nīla—blue; kāntidhara—possessing the complexion of; rāi—Śrī Rādhikā; kānu—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sundara—enchanting; tāhe—on that throne; basāiba—make Them sit; duijana—both.
In the soothing atmosphere of Vṛndāvana, there is a jewelled throne placed on a jewelled altar and golden-complexioned Rādhā and blue-complexioned Kṛṣṇa sit on that throne. 



Text 3
sakhīra ādeśa habe cāmara ḍhulāba kabe
tāmbula yogāba cāṅda-mukhe
ānandita ha’ba sadā śuddha-bhāve prema-kathā
duṅhāra pīriti rasa-sukhe
sakhīra—of the sakhīs; ādeśa habe—will instruct; cāmara—the whisk; ḍhulāba—will swing; kabe—when; tāmbūla—betel nuts; yogāba—will supply; caṇda-mukhe—in the lotus mouth; ānandita—jubilant; ha’ba sadā—always become; śuddha-bhāve—purely; prema-kathā—loving topics; duṅhāra—of both; pirīti rasa—of the loving mellows; sukhe—in ecstasy.
I will swing a camara under the instruction of the gopīs and supply betelnuts to Their lotus mouths. I will always be ecstatic to hear the pure loving topics of Their conjugal pastimes. 


Text 4
mallikā mālatī yūthī nānā phule mālā gāṅthi
parāiba duṅhāra galāye
rasera ālasa kāle basiyā caraṇa tale
sevana kariba duṅhāra pāye
mallikā mālatī yūthī—mallikā, mālatī, and yūthī flowers; nānā phule—various other flowers; mālā gāṅthi—make a garland; parāiba—I will put; duṅhāra galāye—on Their necks; rasera—of the pastimes; ālasa kāle—during the break; basiyā—sitting; caraṇa tale—under Their lotus feet; sevana kariba—I will serve; duṅhāra pāye—massage the feet.
I will make garlands of various flowers such as māllikā, mālatī, and yūthī, and put them on Their necks and then massage Their lotus feet. 


Text 5
rādhā-kṛṣṇa prāṇapati jīvane maraṇe gati
ihā bine āra nāhi mane
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-prāṇa svarūpa-rūpa-sanātana
narottama ei nivedana
rādhā kṛṣṇa—Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; prāṇapati—Lord of my heart; jīvane maraṇe—in life or death; gati—only destination; ihā bine—without this; āra nāhi—nothing else; mane—in my mind; śrī-kṛṣṇa caitanya prāṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya is my life; svarūpa rūpa sanātana—Śrīla Śvārūpa, Rūpa, and Sanātana Gosvāmīs; narottama—Narottama dāsa; ei—only this; nivedana—requests.
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are my life and soul and the goal of my life. I have no other desire than this. O Lord Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, O Śvarūpa, O Rūpa, O Sanātana, O my lords, this is the only request of Narottama dāsa!


Song 58

Text 1
hede he! nāgara bara śuna he mūralīdhara
nivedana kari tuyā pāya
caraṇa nakhara maṇi yena cāṅdera gāṅthani
bhāla śobhe āmāra galāya
hede he—O hello; nāgara bara—the best of the heroes; śuna he—please hear; mūralīdhara—Śrī Kṛṣṇa who holds a flute; nivedana—request; kari—let me do; tuyā pāya—at Your lotus feet; caraṇa nakhara—the nails of Your feet; maṇi—jewel; yena—as if; cāṅdera gāṅthani—the rows of moon; bhāla—beautifully; śobhe—decorated; āmāra galāya—on my neck.
O my dear Hero! O Lord, the flute player! Please hear my request to You. Your jewel-like toenails resemble the rows of moons when You go to the forest with Śrīdāma and Sudāma. 


Text 2
śrīdāma sudāma saṅge yakhana vane yāo raṅge
takhana āmi duyāre dāṅḍāye
mane kari saṅge yāi gurūjanara bhaya pāi
āṅkhi raila tuyā pāne ceye
rīdāma—Śrīdāma; sudāma—Sudāma saṅge—along with; yakhana—when; vane—in the forest; yāo raṅge—go happily; takhana—at that time; āmi—I am; duyāre—at the doorstep; dāṅḍāye—stand; mane kari—I think; saṅge yāi—I go with you; guru-janara—of the elderly respectable persons; bhaya pāi—be afraid of; āṅkhi—the eyes; raila—remain fixed; tuyā pāne ceye—looking at You.
At that time, I stand at the doorstep thinking of going with You. But I am afraid of the elders and the respectable people. Therefore, my eyes simply gaze after You.


Text 3
cāi navīna-megha-pāne tuyā baṅdhu paḍe mane
elāiyā keśa nāhi bāṅdhi
randhana-śālāte jāi tuyā baṅdhu guṇa gāi
dhuṅyāra chalanā kari kāṅdi
cāi—look; navīna—new; megha pāne—towards the clouds; tuyā—You; bandhu—O my friends; paḍe mane—remember; elāiyā—let loose; keśa—hair; nāhi bāṅdhi—do not comb; randhana śālāte—in the kitchen; jāi—when I go; tuyā—Your; baṅdhu—O friend; guṇa gāi—sing Your glories; dhuṅyāra chalanā kari—on the pretext of smoke; kāṅdi—I cry.
Whenever I see the new clouds, O my friend, I immediately remember You and I let loose my hair. When I cook in the kitchen, I simply sing Your glories and cry on the pretext of smoke. 



Text 4
maṇi nao māṇika nao āṅcale bāṅdhile rao
phula nao ye keśe karibeśe
nārī nā karita vidhi tuyā hena guṇanidhi
laiyā phiritāma deśe deśe
maṇi nao—You are not a jewel; māṇika nao—You are not a diamond; āṅcale—at the end of a sari; bāṅdhile—if I tie; rao—You will remain; phula nao—You are not a flower; ye—that; keśe—in the hair; karibeśe—decorate; nārī—woman; nā karita—did not create; bidhi—the creator; tuyā—You; hena—such as; guṇa nidhi—the ocean of transcendental qualities; laiyā—taking; phiritāma—wander; deśe deśe—country to country.
O beloved Lord! You are neither a jewel nor a diamond that I can keep You tied to the end of my cloth. You are not a flower that I can decorate my hair with. If I were not a woman, I could have taken You, the ocean of divine qualities, all over the country.




Text 5
aguru candana haitāma tuyā ange mākhā raitāma
ghāmiyā paḍitāma rāṅgā pāya
ki mora manera sādha vāmana haye cāṅda hāta
vidhi ki sādha pūrābe āmāra
aguru—scented powder; candana—sandalwood powder; haitāma—if I become; tuyā—Your; aṅge—on the limbs; mākhā—smeared; raitāma—remain; ghāmiyā—with sweat; paḍitāma—fall down; rāngā pāya—on the lotus feet; ki—what; mora—mine; manera—of the mind; sādha—desire; vāmana haye—being like a dwarf; cāṅda hāta—touching the moon; vidhi ki—will the creator; sādha—desire; purābe—fulfill; āmāra—mine.
If I were aguru or sandalwood, then I would be smeared on Your limbs, and when You would perspire, I would have fallen at Your reddish lotus feet. What desires I have! Although I am a dwarf, still I want to touch the moon. Will the creator ever fulfill my desire?


Text 6
narottama dāsa kaya śuna ahe dayāmaya
tumī āmāya nā chāḍiha dayā
je dina tomāra bhāve āmāra e deha jābe
sei dine diya pada chāyā
narottama dāse—Narottama dāsa; kaya—says; śuna—please hear; ahe dayāmaya—O most merciful one; tumī—You; āmāya—to me; nā chāḍiha—do not withdraw; dayā—compassion; jedina—the day; tomāra—of You; bhave—in the mood; āmāra—mine; e deha—this body; jābe—will perish; sei dine—on that day; diya—please give; pada chāyā—the shelter of Your lotus feet.
Narottama dāsa says, “Please hear, O most merciful Lord! Please do not neglect me. The day I give up my body being fully absorbed in Your thoughts, please give me shelter at Your lotus feet.”
