Song 0 
Text 1
Auspicious Invocation
Mangalācaraṇa
ajñāna-timirāndhasya
jñānāñjana-śalākayā
cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena
tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ
ajñāna—of ignorance; timirāndhasya—of the darkness; jñana—of knowledge; añjana-śalākayā—with the torchlight; cakṣur—eyes; unmīlitaṁ—opened; yena—by whom; tasmai—to him; śrī-gurave—my spiritual master; namaḥ—I offer my respectful obeisances.
I was born in the darkest region of ignorance, and my spiritual master opened my eyes with the torchlight of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto him.

Text 2
śrī-caitanya-mano ’bhīṣṭaṁ
sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale
svayam rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ
dadāti sva-padāntikam
śrī-caitanya—of Lord Caitanya; mano-abhīṣṭaṁ—the desire; sthāpitaṁ—established; yena—by whom; bhū-tale—in the material world; svayam—personally; rūpaḥ—Śrīla Rūpa Gośwāmī; kadā—when; mahyam—to me; dadāti—will give; sva-padāntikam—shelter under His lotusfeet.
When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?

Text 3
akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ
prasṛmara-ruci-ruddha-tāraka-pāliḥ
kalita-śyāmā-lalito
rādhā-preyān vidhur jayati
akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ—the reservoir of all pleasures; prasṛmara—spreading forth; ruci—by His bodily luster; ruddha—who has subjugated; tāraka—the gopī named Tarakā; pāliḥ—the gopī named Pālī; kalita—who has absorbed; śyāmā—the gopī named Śyāma; lalito—and the gopī named Lalitā; rādhā-preyān—dearmost to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; vidhur—Kṛṣṇa; jayati—all glories to.
May Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, be glorified! By virtue of His ever expanding attractive features, He has subjugated the gopīs named Tārakā and Pālī and absorbed the minds of Śyāmā and Lalitā. He is the dearmost lover of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and the reservoir of pleasure in all devotional mellows.



Song 1

Text 1
Glories of the Spiritual Master
Śrī Guru Mahimā
śrī-guru-caraṇa-padma, kebala-bhakati-sadma
bando mui sābadhāna mate
jāhāra prasāde bhāi, e bhava tariyā jāi
kṛṣṇa-prāpti haya jāhā hate
śrī-guru—the spiritual master; caraṇa-padma—lotus feet; kebala—only; bhakati-sadma—abode of devotional service; bando—bow down; mui—I; sābadhāna mate—with care and attention; jāhāra—by whose; prasāde—mercy; bhāi—my dear brother; e bhava—this material world; tariyā jāi—cross beyond; kṛṣṇa-prāpti—attainment of Kṛṣṇa; haya—is; jāhā hate—from whom.
The lotus feet of the spiritual master are the abode of pure devotional service. I bow down to those lotus feet with great care and attention. My dear brother (my dear mind)! It is through the grace of the spiritual master that we cross over this material existence and obtain Kṛṣṇa.
Text 2
guru-mūkha-padma-vākya, cittete kariya aikya
ār nā kariha mane āśā
śrī-guru-caraṇe rati, ei se uttama-gati
je prasāde pūre sarba āśā
guru—the spiritual master; mūkha—mouth, padma—lotus; vākya—words; cittete—in the heart; kariya-aikya—make one with; āra—more; nā—not; kariha—do; mane—in the mind; āśā—desires; śrī-guru—the spiritual master; caraṇe—unto the lotus feet; rati—attachment; ei—this; se—that; uttama-gati—the highest goal; je prasāde—by whose mercy; pūre—fulfills; sarba—all; āśā—desires.
Make the teachings from the lotus mouth of the spiritual master one with your heart, and do not desire anything else. Attachment to the lotus feet of the spiritual master is the best means of spiritual advancement. By his mercy all desires for spiritual perfection are fulfilled.
Text 3
cakhu-dāna dilā jei, janme janme prabhu sei
divya-jñāna hṛde prakāśita
prema-bhakti jāhā haite, abidyā bināśa jāte
bede gāya jāhāra carita
cakhu-dāna—transcendental vision; dilā—gave; jei—whoever; janme janme—birth after birth; prabhu sei—is my lord; dibya-jñāna—divine knowledge; hṛde—in the heart; prakāśita—manifested; prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; jāhā haite—from whom; abidyā—nescience; bināśa—destroy; jāte—by which; bede—the Vedas; gāya—glorify; jāhāra—whose; carita—characteristics.
He who has given me the gift of transcendental vision is my lord, birth after birth. By his mercy, divine knowledge is revealed within the heart, bestowing prema-bhakti and destroying ignorance. The Vedic scriptures sing of his character.
Text 4
śrī-guru karuṇā-sindhu, adhama janāra bandhu
lokanātha lokera jībana
hā hā prabhū kara dayā, deha mora pada-chāyā
ebe jaśa ghuṣuk tribhūvana
śrī-guru—the spiritual master; karuṇā—mercy; sindhu—ocean; adhama—fallen; janāra—persons; bandhu—friend; lokanātha—protector of the people; lokera jībana—life and soul of the people; hā hā prabhū—O my lord; kara—do; dayā—mercy; deha—please give; mora—to me; pada-chāyā—shelter of the lotus feet; ebe—now; jaśa—fame; ghuṣuk—be preached; tribhūvana—in the three worlds.
O spiritual master, ocean of mercy and friend of the fallen souls, you are the teacher of everyone and the life of all people. O master! Be merciful unto me, and give me the shade of your lotus feet. May your glories now be proclaimed throughout the three worlds.
Text 5
Śrī Vaiṣṇava Mahimā 
The Glories of the Vaiṣṇava
baiṣṇaba-caraṇa-reṇū bhūṣana kariyā tanū
jāhā haite anūbhava haya
mārjjana haya bhajana sādhu-saṅge anūkṣaṇa
ajñāna-abidyā-parājaya
baiṣṇaba—the Vaiṣṇavas; caraṇa-reṇū—the dust of the feet; bhūṣana—decorate; kariyā—doing; tanū—body; jāhā haite—by which; anūbhava—realization; haya—is; mārjjana—cleanse; haya—is; bhajana—worship; sādhu-saṅge—in the association of the devotees; anūkṣaṇa—constantly; ajñāna—ignorance; abidyā—nescience; parājaya—defeat.
One should decorate the body with the dust from the lotus feet of the Vaiṣṇavas, because, by this, one can achieve transcendental realizations. By constantly associating with the devotees, one’s cultivation of devotional service is purified and one can conquer nescience.
Text 6
The Glories of Śrīla Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs
jaya sanātana rūpa prema-bhakti-rasa-kūpa
jūgala-ujjwala-rasa-tanū
jāhāra prasāde loka pāśarila dūḥkha śoka
prakaṭa kalpa-taru janū
jaya—all glories; sanātana—Sanātana Gosvāmī; rūpa—Rūpa Gosvāmī; prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; rasa—transcendental mellows; kūpa—well; jūgala—both; ujjwala-rasa—bright devotional mellows; tanū—body; jāhāra—by whose; prasāde—mercy; loka—people; pāśarila—forgot; dūḥkha—distresses; śoka—lamentation; prakaṭa—manifest; kalpa-taru—desire tree; janū—generation.
All glories to Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmīs, who are the reservoirs of loving devotional service, being the personifications of the highest transcendental mellows directed towards Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. By their mercy, a desire tree has been generated in this world that can relieve the distress and lamentation of all people.
Text 7
prema-bhakti-rīti jata nija-granthe sū-bekata
kariyāchena dui mahāśaya
jāhāra śrabana haite parānanda haya cite
jūgala-madhūra-rasāśraya
prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; rīti—process; jata—all those; nija-granthe—in this books; sū-bekata—properly described; kariyāchena—have written; dui mahāśaya—the two personalities; jāhāra—by which; śrabana—hearing; haite—from; parānanda—transcendental happiness; haya—is; cite—in the heart; jūgala—both; madhūra—sweet; rasāśraya—the shelter of sweet mellows.
The various characteristics of loving devotional service have been elaborately described by these two great personalities in their books. One who hears these descriptions feels transcendental happiness in his heart and takes shelter of the sweet Divine Couple.
Text 8
jūgala-kiśora-prema lakṣa bāna jini hema
hena dhana prakāśila jāṅrā
jaya rūpa sanātana deha more sei dhana
se ratana mora gale hārā
jūgala-kiśora—Divine Young Couple; prema—love; lakṣa bāna—refined; hema—gold; hena—such; dhana—treasure; prakāśila—disclosed; jāṅrā—those who; jaya rūpa sanātana—all glories to Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmī; deha—please give; more—to me; sei—that; dhana—wealth; se—that; ratana—jewel; mora—mine; gale—neck; hārā—garland.
The loving affairs of the young Divine Couple are like refined gold. O Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana! You have unfolded this treasure to me and I will wear these jewels of love as a garland around my neck.
Text 9
Śuddha-bhakti-tattva 
Truth About Pure Devotional Service
bhāgabata-śāstra-marma naba-bidha bhakti-dharma
sadāyei kariba sū-sebana
anya-devāśraya nāi tomāre kahila bhāi
ei bhakti parama-kāraṇa
bhāgabata—Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; śāstra—scriptures; marma—purport; naba—nine; bidha—types; bhakti-dharma—devotional service; sadāyei—always; kariba—will do; sū-sebana—serve; anya—other; devāśraya—taking shelter of the demigods; nāi—not; tomāre—to you; kahila—telling; bhāi—O dear brother; ei—this; bhakti—devotional service; parama—supreme; kāraṇa—method.
The nine processes of devotional service are the essence of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. O brother! The best method of attaining loving devotional service is to always engage in performing these nine limbs of devotional service without taking shelter of the demigods. 
Text 10
sādhu-śāstra-guru-bākya hṛdaye kariyā aikya
satata bhāsiba prema-mājhe
karmī jñāni bhakti-hīna ihāke karibe bhina
narottama ei tattwa gāje
sādhu—devotees; śāstra—scriptures; guru—spiritual master; bākya—words; hṛdaye—in the hearts; kariyā—doing; aikya—unity; satata—always; bhāsiba—float; prema-mājh—in love of God; karmī—fruitive workers; jñāni—mental speculators; bhakti-hīna—persons devoid of devotional service; ihāke—them; karibe—will do; bhina—separate; narottama—Narottama dāsa; ei—this; tattwa—truth; gāje—sings.
My desire is to have my heart purified by the statements of the Vaiṣṇavas, scriptures and spiritual master, and seeing the unity of these three, I will always float in the ocean of love of God. I will be aloof from the bad association of the fruitive workers, mental speculators, and the people devoid of devotional service. I, Narottama Dāsa, sing this truth.
Song 2
(refrain)
śrīmad-rūpa-gosvāmī-prabhupadenoktam
anyābhilāṣita-sunyam
jñāna-karmady-anavṛtam
anukulyena kṛṣṇānu-
śīlanam bhaktir uttama
śrīmad-rūpa-gosvāmī-prabhupadena—by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda; uktam—said; anya—other than devotional services; ābhilāṣita—act of desiring; sūnyam—devoid of; jñāna—the path of the monists; karma—fruitive work; adi—et cetera; anāvṛtam—uncovered by; anukuIyena—favorably; kṛṣṇa—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa; anuśilanam—to act practically; bhaktiḥ—devotional services; uttama—superior quality
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda has said in (Bhakti-rasamṛta-sindhu 1.1.11): “The superior quality of devotional service to Kṛṣṇa is to act favorably for the Personality of Godhead. This means that the service must not be covered by the path of the monists, fruitive workers or desires other than devotional service.”
 

Text 1
The Process of Fixed Devotional Service
Ekānta bhakti
anya-abhilāsa chāḍi jñāna karma parihari
kāya mane kariba bhajana
sādhu-saṅge kṛṣṇa-sebā nā pūjiba devī-devā
ei bhakti parama-kāraṇa
anya—other; abhilāsa—desires; chāḍi—give up; jñāna—speculative knowledge; karma—fruitive actions; parihari—abandon; kāya mane—with body and mind; kariba—will do; bhajana—worship; sādhu-saṅge—in the association of devotees; kṛṣṇa-sebā—serving Lord Kṛṣṇa; nā—not; pūjiba—will worship; devī—demigodesses; devā—or demigods; ei—this; bhakti—devotional service; parama—the supreme; kāraṇa—process
The topmost process of devotional service is to worship the Lord with body and mind, giving up desires for fruitive activities and mental speculation. One should serve Lord Kṛṣṇa in the association of devotees without worshipping any demigods. 
Text 2
mahā janera jei patha tāte habe anūrata
pūrbāpara kariyā bicāra
sādhana-smaraṇa-līlā ihāte nā kara helā
kāya mane kariyā sūsāra
mahā janera—of the mahājanas; jei—that which; patha—path; tāte—in that; habe—will be; anūrata—attached; pūrbāpara—previous and later; kariyā—doing; bicāra—consideration; sādhana—practise; smaraṇa—remembrance; līlā—pastimes; ihāte—in this; nā—not; kara—do; helā—neglect; kāya-mane—with body and mind; kariyā—doing; sūsāra—essence.
The essence of sādhana bhakti is to carefully consider and follow the path displayed by the previous and the present mahājanas (great personalities). One should not neglect the practice of remembering the pastimes of the Lord, for devotional service should be performed with the mind as well as the body. 
Text 3
asat-saṅga sadā tyāga chāḍa anya gīta-rāga
karmī jñānī parihari dūre
kebala bhakata-saṅga prema-kathā-rasa-raṅga
līlā-kathā braja-rasa-pūre
asat-saṅga—bad association; sadā—always; tyāga—give up; chāḍa—leave; anya—other; gīta-rāga—attachment for worldly songs; karmī—fruitive worker; jñānī—mental speculator; parihari—reject; dūre—away; kebala—only; bhakata-saṅga—association with devotees; prema-kathā—topics of love; rasa—mellows; raṅga—happiness; līlā-kathā—pastimes; braja-rasa-pūre—in braja.
O my dear brothers, always give up the bad association of the karmīs and jñānīs from a distance, and give up the attachment for singing songs not related to Kṛṣṇa. Associate only with the devotees and merge in topics of the loving pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Braja. 
Text 4
jogī nyāsī karmī jñānī anya-deba-pūjaka dhyānī
iha-loka dūre parihari
karma dharma dūḥkha śoka jebā thāke anya joga
chāḍi bhaja giribara-dhārī
jogī—the yogīs; nyāsī—the renunciates; karmī—fruitive workers; jñānī—impersonalists; anya-deba pūjaka—worshippers of the demigods; dhyānī—the meditators; iha-loka—these people; dūre—far away; parihari—give up; karma—fruitive actions; dharma—religious duties; dūḥkha—miseries; śoka—lamentations; jebā—whatever; thāke—in these; anya—other; joga—attachment; chāḍi—by giving up; bhaja—worship; giribara-dhārī—the lifter of Govardhana Hill.
Please give up the association of the yogīs, sannyāsīs, karmīs, jñānīs, meditators, and the worshippers of the demigods. Also abandon attachment for all varieties of fruitive activities, religious duties, distresses, lamentations and material objects. Just worship Kṛṣṇa, the lifter of Govardhana Hill.
Text 5
tīrtha-jātrā pariśrama kebala-manera-bhrama
sarba-siddhi gobinda-caraṇa
dṛdha-biśwāsa hṛde dhari mada-mātsarjya parihari
sadā kara ananyā bhajana
tīrtha-jātrā—travelling to the holy places; pariśrama—hard labour; kebala—only; manera—mind; bhrama—illusion; sarba-siddhi—highest perfection; gobinda-caraṇa—the lotus feet of Govinda; dṛdha—firm; biśvāsa—conviction; hṛde—in the heart; dhari—keeping; mada—pride; mātsarjya—envy; parihari—give up; sadā—always; kara—do; ananyā—bhajana—unalloyed.
Travelling to the holy places is a waste of energy and born from illusion, for the lotus feet of Śrī Govinda are the perfection of one’s life. Therefore, one should give up pride and envy and with firm determination in the heart, one should always worship the Lord without deviation.
Text 6
kṛṣṇa-bhakta saṅga kari kṛṣṇa-bhakta aṅga heri
śraddhānbita śrabaṇa-kīrtana
arcana bandaṇa dhyāna naba-bhakti mahā-jñāna
ei bhakti parama-kāraṇa
kṛṣṇa-bhakta—devotees of Kṛṣṇa; saṅga-kari—by associating; kṛṣṇa-bhakta—devotees of Kṛṣṇa; aṅga heri—seeing Their body; śraddhānbita—with faith; śrabaṇa-kīrtana—hearing and chanting; arcana—worshiping; bandaṇa—offering prayers; dhyāna—meditating; naba-bhakti—nine types of devotional service; mahā-jñāna—highest place; ei-bhakti—this devotional service; parama—supreme; kāraṇa—method.
The best process of devotional service is to hear, chant, worship, glorify and meditate with faith on the names, forms, qualities and pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in the association of the devotees of Kṛṣṇa through the nine forms of bhakti.
Text 7
hṛsīke gobinda-sebā nā pūjiba devī-devā
ei ta ananya-bhakti-kathā
āra jata upālambha biśeṣa sakali dambha
dekhite lāgaye mane byathā
hṛsīke—with the sense; gobinda-sebā—serving the Supreme Lord Govinda; nā—not; pūjiba—will worship; devī-devā—demigods and demigodesses; ei—this; ta—only; ananya—unalloyed; bhakti—devotional service; kathā—topics; āra jata—everything else; upālambha—condemned; biśeṣa—particularly; sakali—all; dambha—pride; dekhite—to see; lāgaye—feels; mane—in the mind; byathā—pain.
I will serve Govinda with all my senses and I will not worship demigods and goddesses. This is the highest principle of devotional service. All other processes are simply born of pride and I feel great pain in my heart by seeing them.
Text 8
dehe baise ripū-gaṇa jateka indriya-gaṇa
keha kāra bādhya nāhi haya
śunile nā śuna kāṇa jānile nā jāne prāṇa
daḍhāite nā pāre niścaya
dehe—in the body; baise—reside; ripū-gaṇa—the enemies; jateka—all; indriya-gaṇa—the senses; keha—anybody; kāro—of anyone else; bādhya—controlled; nāhi—not; haya—is; śunile—by hearing; nā—not; śuna—hears; kāṇa—ears; jānile—knowing; nā—not; jāne—knows; prāṇa—life; daḍhāite—to determine; nā—not; pāre—can; niścaya—confidence.
The six enemies; lust, anger, greed, illusion, pride and envy and the five senses of sight, sound, smell, taste, and touch reside in my body but I am unable to control them. Although I hear and understand repeatedly that one should serve Kṛṣṇa with all his senses, still I cannot accept this fact with firm determination. 
Text 9
kāma krodha moha lobha mada mātsarjya dambha-saha
sthāne sthāne nijūkta kariba
ānanda kari hṛdaya ripū kari parājaya
anāyāse gobinda bhajiba
kāma—lust; krodha—anger; moha—illusion; lobha—greed; mada—pride; mātsarjya—envy; dambha-saha—with vanity; sthāne sthāne—in their respective places; nijūkta—engage; kariba—will do; ānanda—happiness; kari—doing; hṛdaya—heart; ripū—the enemies; kari—do; parājaya—defeat; anāyāse—easily; gobinda—Lord Govinda; bhajiba—will worship.
I will engage lust, anger, greed, illusion, envy and pride in their proper places. In this way, I will defeat the enemies and with ecstacy in my heart, I will worship Govinda without difficulty.
Text 10
kṛṣṇa sevā kāmārpane krodha bhakta-dwesi-jane
lobha sādhu-saṅge hari-kathā
moha iṣṭa-lābha-bine mada kṛṣṇa-guṇa-gāne
nijūkta kariba jathā tathā
kṛṣṇa sevā—service to Kṛṣṇa; kāmārpane—engage lust; krodha—anger; bhakta—devotee; dwesi-jane—envious persons; lobha—greed; sādhu-saṅge—in the association of devotees; hari-kathā—opics of Hari; moha—illusion; iṣṭa-lābha—attaining; bine—without; mada—pride; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; guṇa-gāne—glorifying the qualities; nijūkta—engaged; kariba—will do; jathā tathā—proper places.
I will engage my lust in eagerness to serve Kṛṣṇa and I will use my anger against those who are envious of the devotees. I will be greedy to hear the topics of Hari in the association of the devotees. I will be illusioned if I fail to achieve my worshipable Lord and I will feel proud to chant the glories of Kṛṣṇa. In this way, I will engage them in their respective duties.
Text 11
anyathā swatantra kāma anarthādi jāra nāma
bhakti-pathe sadā deya bhaṅga
kibā bā karite pāre kāma-krodha sādhakere
jadi haya sādhu-janāra saṅga
anyathā—otherwise; swatantra—independent; kāma—lust; anarthādi—unwanted things; jāra—whose; nāma—names; bhakti-pathe—on the path of devotional service; sadā—always; deya—gives; bhaṅga—ruins; kibā—what; bā—else; karite pāre—can do; kāma—lust; krodha—anger; sādhakere—to the practitioners; jadi—if; haya—is; sādhu-janāra—of the devotees; saṅga—association.
Otherwise, independent lusty desires, which are the source of all unwanted things will always disturb the path of devotional service. What harm can lusty desires and anger do to a practioner of devotional service if he associates with devotees?
Text 12
krodha bā nā kare kibā krodha-tyaga sadā dibā
lobha moha ei ta kathana
chaya ripū sadā hīna kariba manera adhīna
kṛṣṇacandra kariyā smaraṇa
krodha—by anger; bā nā—what not; kare—does; kibā—what; krodha—anger; tyaga—give up; sadā—always; dibā—will give; lobha—greed; moha—illusion; ei—this; ta—is all; kathana—opinion; chaya—six; ripū—enemies; sadā—always; hīna—inferior; kariba—will do; manera—of the mind; adhīna—under the control; kṛṣṇacandra—Lord Kṛṣṇa; kariyā smaraṇa—by remembering.
Anger spoils everything. Therefore, I will always give up anger, greed and illusion. I will control the six enemies with the help of my mind while remembering Lord Kṛṣṇa.
Text 13
āpani pālābe saba śuniyā gobinda raba
siṁha-rabe jena kari-gaṇa
sakali vipatti jābe mahānanda sūkha pābe
jāra haya ekāṅta bhajana
āpani—automatically; pālābe—run away; saba—all; śuniyā—by hearing; gobinda—Lord Govinda; raba—sound; siṁha-rabe—by the sound of a lion; jena—just as; kari-gaṇa—deers; sakali—all; vipatti—dangers; jābe—will vanquish; mahānanda—great pleasure; sūkha—happiness; pābe—will; jāra—who; haya—is; ekāṅta—unalloyed; bhajana—worship.
All the enemies will run away by hearing the sound vibration of Govinda’s name just as a deer flee upon hearing the roar of a lion. One who performs unalloyed devotional service will feel great happiness and all his dangers will be vanquished.
Text 14
nā kariha asat-ceṣṭa lābha pūjā pratiṣṭha
sadā cinta gobinda-caraṇa
sakalī vipatti jābe mahānanda sūkha pābe
prema-bhakti parama-kāraṇa
nā—not; kariha—do; asat—ill; ceṣṭa—endeavour; lābha—profit; pūjā—adoration; pratiṣṭha—distinction; sada—always; cinta—remember; gobinda-caraṇa—lotus feet of Govinda; sakalī—all; vipatti—danger; jābe—will go; mahānanda—ecstacy; sūkha—happy; pābe—will receive; prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; parama—supreme; kāraṇa—process.
Therefore my dear mind, do not endeavour for bad association, profit, adoration and distinction, but always remember the lotus feet of Govinda. Please engage in loving devotional service with great happiness and all your dangers will be destroyed.
Text 15
asat-kriya kuṭināṭi chāḍa anya paripāṭī
anya debe nā kariha rati
āpana āpana sthāne pirīti sabhāya ṭane
bhakti-pathe paḍaye bigati
asat-kriya—sinful activities; kuṭināṭi—duplicity; chāḍa—give up; anya—other; paripāṭī—bodily care; anya debe—to other demigods; nā—not; kariha—do; rati—attachment; āpana āpana—respective; sthāne—places; pirīti—love; sabhāya—all; ṭane—attracts; bhakti-pathe—on the path of devotion; paḍaye—happens; bigati—checked.
Please give up all duplicity, illusory activities and the search for bodily happiness. Do not be attached to the worship of various demigods. Mundane love and affection for material relationships attracts everyone to their respective illusions and thus advancement on the path of devotional service is checked.
Text 16
Naiṣṭhika Bhajana
Fixed Devotional Service
āpana bhajana-patha tahe habe anūrata
iṣṭa-deva-sthāne-līlā-gāṇa
naiṣṭhika bhajana ei tomāre kahinū bhāi
hanumān tāhāte pramāna
āpana—one’s own; bhajana-patha—the path of worship; tahe—in that; habe—will be; anūrata—attached; iṣṭa-deva—worshipable Lord; sthāne—in the place; līlā-gāṇa—sing the pastimes; naiṣṭhika—fixed; bhajana—worship; ei—this; tomāre—to you; kahinū—speaking; bhāi—O brother; hanumān—Śrī Hanumān; tāhāte—in that; pramāṇa—example.
O dear brother, my mind, be continuously engaged on the path of devotional worship and be attached to glorifying the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. This process of devotional service is known as steady devotional service. The prime example of this is Hanumān.
Text 17
śrīnāthe jānakī-nāthe
cābhedaḥ paramātmani
tathāpi mama sarvasvaṁ
rāmaḥ kamala-locanaḥ
śrīnāthe—the Lord of Lakṣmi; jānakī-nāthe—the Lord of Sītā; ca—also; abhedaḥ—no difference; paramātmani—Supersoul; tathāpi—still; mama—my; sarvasvaṁ—all in all; rāmaḥ—Lord Ramacandra; kamala-locanaḥ—lotus eyed.
As spoken by Sri Hanumān, “Although Śrī Nārāyaṇa, the Husband of Lakṣmīdevī and Śrī Rāma, the Husband of Sītadevī are both the Supersoul, still the lotus-eyed Śrī Rāma is my all in all.”
Text 18
devaloka pitṛloka pāya tārā- mahā-sūkha
sādhu sādhu bale anūkṣana
jūgala bhajana jārā premānande bhāse tārā
tribhūbanatāṅdera nichani 
devaloka—heavenly planets; pitṛloka—the planets of the ancestors; pāya—receive; tārā—they; mahā-sūkha—great happiness; sādhū—sādhū—well done, well done; bale—addressed; anūkṣana—always; jūgala-bhajana—worship of the Divine Couple; jāṅrā—those; premānande—in the ocean of love; bhāse—float; tārā—they; tribhūbana—the three worlds; tāṅdera—of his; nichani—insignificant.
Those who worship Their Divine Lordships Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, float in the ocean of ecstatic love, and the inhabitants of all the three worlds worship such persons. The demigods and the forefathers become greatly pleased and shower their blessings saying, “well done, well done.”
Text 19
pṛthak ābāsa-joge dūḥkamaya-viṣaya-bhāge
braja bāsa gobinda-sevana
kṛṣṇa-kathā kṛṣṇa-nāma satya-satya rasa-dhāma
braja-loka-saṅge anūkṣaṇa.
pṛthak—separate; ābāsa-joge—reside in; dūḥkamaya—full of misery; viṣaya-bhāge—material enjoyments; braja—in Braja; bāsa—reside; gobinda-sevana—service to Śrī Govinda; kṛṣṇa-kathā—topics of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa-nāma—the holy names of Kṛṣṇa; satya-satya—trully; rasa-dhāma—the abode of transcedental bliss; braja-loka-saṅge—in the association of the residents of Braja; anūkṣaṇa—constantly.
One should not reside in ordinary places and enjoy material objects which are full of miseries, but should live in Braja and serve Śrī Govinda. The names and topics of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are actually the reservoir of all pleasures and one should constantly glorify Them in the association of the residents of Braja.
Text 20
vṛndāvane kimathavānija mandira vā
kārāgṛhe kimathavā kanakasane vā
īndram jaje kimathavā narakaṁ bhajāmi
śrī kṛṣṇa-sevanāmṛta na sukhaṁ kadāpi
vṛndāvane—in Vṛndāvana; kimathavā—or; nija mandira—own house; vā—or; kārāgṛhe—in prison; kimathavā—or; kanakasane—on a golden throne; vā—or; īndram—the post of Indra; jaje—awarded; kimathavā—or; narakaṁ—in the hell; bhajāmi—reach; śrī kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; sevanāmṛta—the nectar of this service; na—not; sukhaṁ—happiness; kadāpi—ever.
"Whether I live in Vṛndāvana or at home, whether I live in the prison or I sit on a golden throne, whether I am awarded the post of Indra or go to hell, there is no happiness anywhere without the worship of Kṛṣṇa."
Text 21
sadā sebā-abhilāṣa mane kari biśoyāsa
sarbakhāya haiyā nirbhaya
narottama dāsa bole paḍinū asat-bhole
paritrāṇa kara mahāśaya
sadā—always; sebā—service; abhilāṣa—desire; mane kari—in the mind; biśoyāsa with faith; sarbakhāya—by all respects; haiyā—being; nirbhaya—fearless; narottama dāsa—Narottama dāsa; bole—says; paḍinū—fell; asat-bhole—in the false conception; paritrāṇa—deliver; kara—please do; mahāśaya—O Lord.
In my mind, with firm faith and fearlessness, I always desire the service of Their Lordships in all respects. Narottama dāsa prays, “O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, most merciful Lord! I have fallen into miserable material illusion, please deliver me.”
Song 3 

Text 1
Surrender of the Self 
Ātma nivedana
tūmi ta dayāra sindhū adhama-janāra bandhu
more prabhu kara abadhāna
paḍinā asat-bhole kāma-timiṅgile gile
e nātha kara paritrāṇa
tūmi—you; ta—are; dayāra—of mercy; sindhū—ocean; adhama—fallen; janāra—person; bandhu—friend; more—to me; prabhu—O Lord; kara abadhāna—glance; paḍinā—fell; asat-bhole—in the misconception; kāma—lust; timiṅgile—whale; gile—swallow; e nātha—O Lord; kara paritrāṇa—protect me.
O Lord, You are the ocean of mercy, the friend of the poor. Please mercifully glance towards me. I have fallen into the ocean of illusion where whales in the form of lust are trying to swallow me. Please protect me, O Lord!
Text 2
jāvat janama mora aparadhe hainū bhora
niskapaṭe nā bhajinū tomā
tathāpi ha tūmi gati nā chaḍiha prāṇa-pati
mūñi sama nāhika adhamā
jāvat—as long as; janama—birth; mora—mine; aparadhe—with offenses; hainū—became; bhora—filled with; niskapaṭe—without duplicity; nā—not; bhajinū—worship; tomā—you; tathāpi-ha—nevertheless; tūmi—you; gati—destination; nā—not; chaḍiha—leave; prāṇa-pati—Lord of my life; mūñi—me; sama—equal; nāhika—not; adhamā—fallen.
Since my birth, I have committed unlimited offenses and have not worshiped You without duplicity. Nevertheless, You are my only shelter. O Lord of my life, please do not neglect me, there is none more fallen than me.
Text 3
patita-pābana nāma ghoṣaṇā tomāra śyāma
upekhile nāhi mora gati
jadi hai aparādhī tathāpiha tūmi gati
satya satya jena satī pati
patita-pābana—deliverer of the fallen souls; nāma—holy names; ghoṣaṇā—deliverers; tomāra—Your; śyāma—Lord Kṛṣṇa; upekhile—if You neglect; nāhi—not; mora—mine; gati—shelter; jadi—if; hai—be; aparādhī—offender; tathāpiha—yet; tūmi—You; gati—destination; satya satya—truly; jena—as; satī—chaste; pati—husband.
O Lord Śyāmasundara, You are known as the saviour of the fallen. If You neglect me, I have no alternative. Even if I be an offender, You are my only hope, just as the husband is the only hope for a chaste wife.
Text 4
tūmi ta parama debā nāhi more upekhibā
śuna śuna prāṇera īśvara
jadi karon aparādha tathāpiha tūmi nātha
sebā diyā kara anūcara
tūmi ta—You are; parama debā—Supreme Lord; nāhi—not; more—me; upekhibā—will neglect; śuna śuna—please hear; prāṇera īśvara—O Lord of my life; jadi—if; karon—do; aparādha—offense; tathāpiha—still; tūmi—You; nātha—Lord; sebā—service; diyā—by giving; kara—make; anūcara—servant.
O Lord of my heart, please hear my prayer. You are the Supreme Lord. Please do not reject me. Even if I commit offenses, still You are my only protector. Please give me some insignificant service and consider me Your own servant.
Text 5
kāme mora hata cita nāhi jāne nija hita
manera nā ghūce durbāsanā
more nātha aṅgī kūrū tumi bāñcha-kalpa-tarū
karūṇā dekhūka sarba-janā
kāme—with lust; mora—mine; hata—pierced; cita—heart; nāhi—do not; jāne—knows; nija—own; hita—benefit; manera—of the mind; nā—not; ghūce—vanquish; durbāsanā—material desires; more—to me; nātha—o my Lord; aṅgī kūrū—accept me; tumi—You; bāñcha—desire; kalpa-tarū—wish fulfilling tree; karūṇā—mercy; dekhūka—let them be; sarba-janā—everyone.
My heart is pierced by lusty desires and so I do not know what is beneficial for me. I cannot vanquish the material desires in my polluted mind. O my Lord, You are the wish fulfilling desire tree. Please accept and purify me and let everyone see Your mercy.
Text 6
mo-sama patita nāi tribhūvane dekha cāi
narottama-pāvana nāma dhara
ghūṣūka saṁsāre nāma patita-pāvana śyāma
nija-dāsa kara giridhara
mo-sama—like me; patita—fallen; nāi—not; tribhūvane—in the three worlds; dekha—look; cāi—carefully; narottama-pāvana—deliverer of Narottama dāsa; nāma—name; dhara—to be known; ghūṣūka—let it be; saṁsāre—in the world; nāma—holy names; patita-pāvana śyāma—Lord Śyāmasundara is the deliverer of the fallen; nija—own; dāsa—servant; kara—make me; giridhara—O lifter of Govardhana Hill.
O my Lord, please look throughout the three worlds, there is no one more fallen than me. Be celebrated as “the deliverer of Narottama.” Throughout the three worlds of birth and death, let it be known that Lord Śyāmasundara is the deliverer of the fallen souls. Therefore, O Giridhari, make me Your own servant. 
Text 7
narottama baḍa dūḥkhī nātha more kara sūkhī
tomāra bhajana saṅkīrtane
antarāya nāhi jāya ei ta parama bhaya
nivedana karoṅ anūkṣana
narottama—Narottama dāsa; baḍa—very much; dūḥkhī—unhappy; nātha—O Lord; more—me; kara—make; sūkhī—happy; tomāra—Your; bhajana—worship; saṅkīrtane—in the form of congregational chanting; aṅtarāya—obstacles; nāhi—not; jāya—goes; ei ta—this is the; parama bhaya—great fear; nivedana—pray; karoṅ—do; anūkṣana—constantly.
O Lord, Narottama is very unhappy. Please make me happy by inspiring me to perform saṅkīrtana. My greatest fear is that I will not be able to surpass the impediments on the path of devotional service. Hence, I pray to You constantly.
Song 4 

Text 1
Undivided Service to the Divine Couple
Yugala bhajana niṣṭha
āna kathā āna byathā nāhi jena jāña tathā
tomāra caraṇa smṛti-sājhe
abirata abikala tūyā guṇa kala-kala
gāi jena satera samājhe
āna kathā—mundane topics; āna byathā—mundane pains; nāhi—do not; jena—may; jāña—go; tathā—there; tomāra—Your; caraṇa smṛti—remembering the lotus feet; sājhe—decorate; abirata—without interruption; abikala—properly; tūyā—Your; guṇa—qualities; kala-kala—glorify; gāi—chant; jena—may I; satera—of the devotees; samājhe—in the society.
Wherever there are discussions on mundane topics, pains and pleasures, may I restrain myself from going there. Let the rememberance of Your lotus feet decorate my heart. May I properly chant Your transcendental qualities unceasingly in the society of devotees. 
Text 2
anya-brata anya-dāna nāhi karoṅ bastu-jñāna
anya-sebā anya-deba-pūjā
hā hā kṛṣṇa bali bali beḍāṅa ānanda kari
mane mora nahe jena dūjā
anya-brata—other vows; anya-dāna—other charities; nāhi—not; karoṅ—do; bastu—factor; jñāna—consider; anya-sebā—serving others; anya-deba-pūja—worshiping the demidgods; hā hā kṛṣṇa—O Lord Kṛṣṇa; bali bali—chanting; beḍāṅa—wonder; ānanda kari—happily; mane—in the mind; mora—mine; nahe—do not; jena—may I; dūjā—duality.
I will not give any importance to observing vows, giving in charity, serving materialistic people and worshipping demigods. Without any other thought, I will roam about in bliss, calling out “O Kṛṣṇa, O Kṛṣṇa!”
Text 3
jībane maraṇe gati rādhā-kṛṣṇa prāṇa-pati
dūṅhāra pirīti-rasa-sūkhe
jūgala bhajana jāṅrā premānanda bhāse tārā
ei kathā rahu mora būke
jībane maraṇe—in life and death; gati—destination; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rādhā; prāṇa-pati—life and soul; dūṅhāra—both; pirīti-rasa—loving mellows; sūkhe—with happiness; jūgala—Divine Couple; bhajana—worship; jāṅrā—those; premānanda—with ecstatic love; bhāse—float; tārā—Them; ei—this; kathā—fact; rahu—let it remain; mora—mine; būke—in my heart.
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are the Lords of my life. They are my only goal in life or death. Those who worship the Divine Couple, enjoy transcendental mellows and float always in the ocean of love of God. Let this fact ever remain in my heart.
Text 4
jūgala-caraṇa-sebā ei dhana more dibā
jūgalete manera pirīti
jūgala-kiśora-rūpa kāma-rati gaṇa-bhūpa
mane rahu o līlā-kirīti
jūgala—the Divine Couple; caraṇa-sebā—serving Their lotus feet; ei dhana—this treasury; more—to me; dibā—please give; jūgalete—in both; manera—of the mind; pirīti—love; jūgala-kiśora-rūpa—the beautiful form of the Young Couple; kāma-rati gaṇa-bhūpa—superior than Cupid and his wife, Ratī; mane—in the mind; rahu—let them remain; o līlā—those pastimes; kirīti—super excellent.
Please bestow upon me the treasure of service to Your lotus feet. Let Your divine forms and loving affairs be always manifest in my mind. Your beauty is far superior to that of Kāmadeva and his wife Ratī. Let Your superexcellent transcendental pastimes be ever present in my mind.
Text 5
daśanete tṛṇa dhari hā hā kiśora-kiśorī
carāṇabje nibedana kari
braja-rāja-kūmāra-śyāma bṛṣabhānū kūmārī nāma
śrī-rādhikā-nāma manohārī
daśanete—in the mouth; tṛṇa—straw; dhari—holdings; hā hā kiśora-kiśorī—O Young Couple; carāṇabje—unto the lotus feet; nibedana kari—offer prayers; braja-rāja-kūmāra-śyāma—Śyāma, the son of King of Braja; bṛṣabhānū kūmārī nāma—the name of daughter of King Bṛṣabhānū; śrī-rādhikā-nāma manohārī—the most enchanting Rādhikā.
O Divine Youthful Couple, O Śyāmasundara, the son of the King of Braja, O Rādhikā the beautiful enchanting daughter of King Bṛṣabhānu, taking a straw in my mouth, I pray to Your lotus feet.
Text 6
kanaka-ketakī rāi śyāma marakata kāi
darapa-darapa karu cūra
naṭa-bara-śikharinī naṭinīra śiromaṇī
dūṅhu-guṇe dūṅhun-mana jhūra
kanaka—golden; ketakī—the color of ketakī flower; rāi—Śrī Rādhikā; śyāma—Śrī Śyāmasundara; marakata-kāi—the color of blue sapphire; darapa-darapa—pride; karu cūra—defeat; naṭabara—the king of dancers; śikharinī—crest jewels; naṭinīra—of the dancers; śiromaṇī—topmost; dūṅhu-guṇe—by the qualities of each other; dūṅhun-mana—the minds of both; jhūra—overwhelmed.
Śrī Rādhikā resembles a golden pine flower, and Śrī Śyāmasundara resembles a blue sapphire. Their beauty defeats the pride of all. Śrī Rādhikā and Śrī Śyāma are the topmost dancers and entrance one another by Their jewel-like qualities.
Text 7
śrīmūkha sūndara bara hema nīla kāntidhara
bhāva bhūṣaṇa karu śobhā
nīla pīta-bāsadhara gaurī śyāma manohara
antarera bhāve dūṅhu lobhā
śrīmūkha—lotus face; sūndara bara—most beautiful; hema—golden; nīla—blue; kānti—complexion; dhara—possess; bhāva—the mood; bhūṣaṇa—decoration; karu-śobhā—beautifies; nīla—blue; pīta—yellow; bāsadhara—dresses; gaurī—the golden Śrī Rādhikā; śyāma—the blackish Kṛṣṇa; manohara—enchanting; antarera—internal; bhāve—in the mood; dūṅhe—both of Them; lobhā—attracted.
The enchanting faces of Śyāmasundara and Rādhikā are displaying Their ecstatic love. Their effulgent complexions are beautifully bluish and golden. They dress in yellow and deep blue garments and attract each other by Their innermoods of love.
Text 8
ābharaṇa manimaya prati aṅge abhinaya
tachū pāya dīna narottama dāsa
niśi dina guṇa gāṅa parama ānanda pāṅa
mane mora ei abhilāṣa 
ābharaṇa—ornaments; manimaya—jewelled; prati—each; aṅge—limbs; abhinaya—actings; tachū—his; pāya—lotus feet; dīna—poor; narottama dāsa—Narottama dāsa; niśi—night; dina—day; guṇa gāṅa—glorifying the qualities; parama—great; ānanda—happiness; pāṅa—receive; mane—in the mind; mora—mind; ei—this; abhilāṣa—desires.
Decorated with jewelled ornaments, Their limbs move with beautiful grace and drama. Narottama dāsa prays, “With great jubilation, I will glorify Your transcendental qualities, day and night. This is my only desire.”
Song 5 

Text 1
A Glimpse Into the Path of Loving Attachment
Rāgānugā bhakti rītī
rāgera bhajana-patha kahi ebe abhimata
loka-beda-sāra ei bānī
sakhīra anūgā hañā braje siddha-deha pāñā
ei bhābe jūḍābe parānī
rāgera—of the attachment; bhajana-patha—the path of worship; kahi—let me explain; ebe—now; abhimata—opinion; loka—worldly; beda—vedic; sāra—essence; ei—this; bānī—statements; sakhīra—of the sakhīs; anūgā—following; hañā—being; braje—in Braja; siddha-deha—spiritual body; pāñā—having received; ei bhābe—in this way; jūḍābe—cool down; parānī—the soul.
Now, I will explain the process of worshipping the Supreme Lord through the path of attachment (rāgānugā bhakti). These statements are the essence and in accordance with the Vedas and the pure devotees. * One should serve the Lord in Braja following in the footsteps of the sakhīs with a suitable spiritual body. In this way, one’s soul will be cooled and satisfied. 
Text 2
The Truth About Śrī Rādhikā and the Sakhīs
śrī rādhikāra sakhī jata tāhā bā kahiba kata
mūkhya sakhī kariye gaṇana
lalitā biśākhā tathā sūcitrā campakalatā
raṅgadevī sūdevī kathana
śrī rādhikāra—of Śrī Rādhikā; sakhī—the sakhīs; jata—all; tāhā bā—that; kahiba—will explain; kata—how much; mūkhya—principal; sakhī—the sakhīs; kariye—doing; gaṇana—counting; lalitā—Śrī Lalitā; biśākhā—Śrī Viśākhā; tathā—and; sūcitrā—Śrī Sūcitrā; campakalatā—Śrī Campakalatā; raṅgadevī—Śrī Raṅgadevī; sūdevī—Śrī Sūdevī; kathana—description.
The different types of sakhīs of Śrī Rādhikā are countless. Therefore, I will only describe the principal ones. Lalitā, Viśākhā, Sūcitrā, Champakalatā,Raṅgadevī, Sūdevī...
Text 3
tūṅgabidyā indūrekhā ei aṣṭa-sakhī lekhā
ebe kahi narma–sakhī gaṇa
ihoṅ sebā saha carī priya-preṣṭha nāma dhari
prema sebā kare anūkṣaṇa
 tūṅgabidyā—Śrī Tūṅgabidyā; indūrekhā—Śrī Indūrekhā; ei—this; aṣṭa-sakhī—eight sakhīs; lekhā—explaining; ebe—now; kahi—are known as; narma-sakhī gaṇa—most intimate sakhīs; ihoṇ-sebā—all these; saha carī—companions; priya-preṣṭha—most beloved; nāma—names; dhari—known as; prema sebā—loving devotional service; kare—do; anūkṣaṇa—constantly.
...Tuṅgavidyā, Indūrekhā are the eight principal sakhīs. They are the most beloved companions of Śrī Rādhikā and are constantly serving Their Lordships with profound love. They are most intimately associated with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Text 4
sama snehā biṣama snehā nā kariha dūi lekha
kahi mātra adhika snehā gaṇa
nirantara thāke sange kṛṣṇa kathā līlā range
narma sakhī ei sāba jana
sama snehā—equally affectionate; biṣama snehā—towards one group only; nā kariha—do not; dūi lekha—both as equal; kahi—describe; mātra—only; adhika—more; snehā gaṇa—the affectionate ones; nirantara—always; thāke—remain; saṅge—with; kṛṣṇa kathā—topics of Kṛṣṇa; līlā range—in the pastimes of; narma sakhī—most confidential sakhī; ei sāba jana—all these.
Some of the sakhīs are more affectionate towards Kṛṣṇa, and some are more affectionate towards Śrī Rādhikā. All of them remain constantly with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, engaged in singing Their pastimes. These sakhīs are called the most confidential sakhīs.
Text 5
śrī-rūpa-mañjarī sāra śrī-rati-mañjarī āra
labaṅga-mañjarī mañjūlalī
śrī-rasa-mañjarī-saṅge kasturikā-ādi raṅge
prema-sebā kare kūtūhalī
śrī-rūpa-mañjarī—Śrī Rūpā Mañjarī; sāra—essence; śrī-rati-mañjarī—Śrī Rati Mañjarī; āra—and; labaṅga-mañjarī—Śrī Labaṅgā Mañjarī; maṅjūnalī—Śrī Maṅjūlalī; śrī-rasa-mañjarī—Śrī Rasa Mañjarī; saṅge—along with; kasturikā—Kasturī Mañjarī; ādi—such as; raṅge—blissfully; prema-sebā—loving devotional service; kare—do; kūtūhalī—eagerness.
The most beloved Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī along with Śrī Rasa Mañjarī, Anaṇga Mañjarī, Maṅjūlalī, Śrī Rati Mañjarī and Kasturikā Mañjarī, eagerly perform loving service to Their Lordships.
Text 6
e-sabhara anūgā haiñā prema-sebā niba cāñā
iṅgite būjhiba saba kāje
rūpa gūṇa dagamagi sadā haba anūrāgī
basati kariba sakhī mājhe
e-sabhara—of these; anūgā—following; haiñā—being; prema-sebā—loving devotional service; niba cāñā—will beg; iṅgite—by gesture; būjiba—will understand; saba—all; kāje—services; rūpa gūṇa—with beauty and qualities; dagamagi—jubilant; sadā—always; haba—will be; anūrāgī—attached; basat—reside; kariba—will do; sakhī mājhe—among the sakhīs.
I will beg from these sakhīs the loving service to the Lord and understand the various required services simply by their gestures. I will be overwhelmed by the beauty and qualities of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, be always attached to Them and live amongst the sakhīs.
Text 7
bṛndābane dui jana cari-dike sakhī-gaṇa
samayera sebā rasa sūkhe
sakhīra iṅgita habe camara dhūlāba tabe
tāmbūla jogāba cāṅda-mūkhe
bṛndābane—in Vṛndāvana; dui jana—both of Them; cari-dike—all around; sakhī-gaṇa—the sakhīs; samayera—of the appropriate time; sebā rasa—loving service; sūkhe—happily; sakhīra—of the sakhī; iṅgita habe—will gesture; camara—the camara; dhūlāba—swinging; tabe—then; tāmbūla—betel nuts; jogāba—will supply; cāṅda-mūkhe—in the lotus mouth.
By the indication of the sakhīs, I will offer camara and betelnuts in the lotus mouths of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. The sakhīs, with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in their midst, are totally aware of the different services to be rendered at appropriate times. 
Text 8
jūgala-caraṇa sebi niraṇtara ei bhābi
aṇūrāge thākiba sadāya
sādhane bhābiba jāhā siddha-dehe pāba tāhā
rāga pathera ei se upāya
jūgala-caraṇa—the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; sebi—serving; niraṇtara—constantly; ei—this; bhābi—think; aṇūrāge—with attachment; thākiba—will remain; sadāya—always; sādhane—will practice; bhābiba—will think; jāhā—whatever; siddha-dehe—in the spiritual body; pāba—will receive; tāhā—that; rāga pathera—of the path of attachment; ei—this; se upāya—the process.
I will constantly desire to serve the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with loving attachment. Whatever I contemplate during the practice of devotional service, will certainly be achieved upon perfection in a spiritual body. This is the method on the path of attachment.
Text 9
sādhane je dhana cāi siddha-dehe tāhā pāi
pakwa pakwa mātra se bicāra
pākile se prema-bhakti apakwe sādhana rīti
bhakati-lakṣaṇa-tattva sāra
sādhane—while practicing; je dhana—the treasury; cāi—want; siddha-dehe—in the spiritual body; tāhā pāi—that will get; pakwa pakwa—matured and immatured; mātra—only; se—that; bicāra—consideration; pākile—immaturities; se—that; prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; apakwe—in immatured stage; sādhana riti—regulative devotional service; bhakati-lakṣaṇa—symptoms of devotion; tattva sāra—essence of the truth.
Whatever I aspire as a practitioner, I will surely receive in my spiritual body. It is only a consideration of immaturity or maturity. In the immature stage, it is called sādhana-bhakti or regulated devotional service. In the mature stage, it is called prema-bhakti or loving devotional service. This is the essence and truth of pure devotional service.
Text 10
narottama dāse kahe ei jena mora haye
braja-pūre aṇūrage bāsa
sakhī-gaṇa-gaṇanāte āmāre gaṇibe tāte
tabahuṅ pūriba abhilāṣa
narottama dāse—Narottama dāsa; kahe—says; ei jena—may this; mora haye—happens to me; braja-pūre—in Vṛndāvana; aṇūrage—feelings of love; bāsa—reside; sakhī-gaṇa—the sakhīs; gaṇanāte—counting; āmāre—me; gaṇibe—will count; tāte—among them; tabahuṅ—then; pūriba—will be purified; abhilāṣa—desire.
Narottama dāsa prays, “O my Lord, please allow me to live in Braja and count me as one of the sakhīs. Then only my desires will be fulfilled.”
Text 11
tathā hi-
sakhīnaṁ saṅginī-rūpām
atmānaṁ vāsanā-mayīm
ājñā-sevā-paraṁ tat-tat-
kṛpalankāra-bhusitām
tathā hi—furthermore; sakhīnaṁ—of the gopīs; saṅginī—of a friend; rūpām—the form; atmānaṁ—self; vāsanā-mayīm—full of desires; ājñā—according to the order; sevā—service; paraṁ—devoted; tat-tat—various; kṛpa—mercy; alankāra—with ornaments; bhusitām—decorated.
Furthermore, one should meditate in this way: “I am a companion of the sakhīs and always absorbed in loving devotional service under their guidance. My body is decorated with various ornaments to please the mind of Kṛṣṇa”
Text 12
kṛṣṇa smaran janaṁ cāsya
preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam
tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau
kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā
kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; smaran—thinking of; janaṁ—a devotee; ca—and; asya—of His; preṣṭham—very dear; nija-samīhitam—chosen by oneself; tat-tat-kathā—to those espective topics; ratas—attached; ca—and; asau—that; kuryāt—should do; vāsam—living; vraje—Vṛndāvana; sadā—always.
The devotee should always think of Kṛṣṇa within himself, and one should choose a very dear devotee who is a servitor of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. One should constantly engage in topics about that servitor and his loving relationship to Kṛṣṇa, and one should live in Vṛndāvana. However, if one is physically unable to go to Vṛndāvana, he should mentally live there. (Bhakti-rāsāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.294)
Song 6 

Text 1
Topics of Meditation for Arousing Prema-bhakti
jūgala-caraṇa-prītī parama-ānanda tati
rati-premā maya para-bandhe
kṛṣṇa-nāma-rādhā-nāma upāsana rasa-dhāma
caraṇe paḍiye parānande
jūgala-caraṇa—unto the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; prītī—love; parama—Supreme; ānanda—happiness; tati—Their; rati—attachment; premā maya—loving; para-bandhe—in the topics of; kṛṣṇa-nāma—the holy names of Kṛṣṇa; rādhā-nāma—the holy names of Rādhā; upāsana—worship; rasa-dhāma—abode of transcendental mellows; caraṇe—at the feet; paḍiye—falling; parānande—spiritual bliss.
In spiritual bliss, I will develop intense love for the youthful Divine Couple Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and hear the glorious topics of Their loving affairs. Worshiping and chanting the holy names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is the abode of all transcendental mellows. I will fall at Their lotus feet in ecstasy.
Text 2
manera smaraṇa prāṇa madhūra madhūra dhāma
jūgala bilāsa smṛti-sāra
sādhya sādhana ei ihā bai āra nāi
ei tattwa sarba-siddha-sāra
manera—of the mind; smaraṇa—remembrance; prāṇa——life; madhūra madhūra—very sweet; dhāma—abode; jūgala bilāsa—pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; smṛti—remembrance; sāra—essence; sādhya—goal; sādhana—process of achieving the goal; ei—this; ihā bai—without this; āra nāi—nothing else; ei tattwa—this truth; sarba-siddha-sāra—among all the prescription.
Remembrance of the Lord’s pastimes is the life and soul of the devotee. Remembering the sweet loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is the essence of all the processes. This is the goal of life and as well as the best means of achieving the goal.
Text 3
jalada-sūndara kāṅti madhūra madhūra bhāti
baidagadhi abadhi sūbeśa
pīta-basana-dhara ābharaṇa maṇi-bara
mayūra-candrikā karu keśa
jalada—clouds; sūndara—beautiful; kāṅti—effulgence; madhūra madhūra—sweet; bhāti—like; baidagadhi—expert in conjugal pastimes; abadhi—expert; sūbeśa—handsomely dressed; pīta—yellow; basana—dress; dhara—wearing; ābharaṇa—ornaments; maṇi-bara—jewels; mayūra—peacock; candrikā—feather; karu keśa—curly hairs.
The sweet Śyāma complexion of Kṛṣṇa is like the effulgent new rain clouds. He is wonderfully dressed and the most expert in performing conjugal pastimes. Jewelled ornaments adorn His yellow garments and a peacock feather decorates His curling Hair.
Text 4
mṛgamada candana kūṅkūma bilepana
mana mūrati tri-bhaṅga
nabīna-kūsūmābalī śrī-aṅge śobhaye bhāli
madhū-lābhe phire matta bhṛṅga
mṛgamada—musk; candana—sandalwood pulp; kūṅkūma—red ointment; bilepana—smear; mana—enchanting; mūrati—form; tri-bhaṅga—three-fold bending forms; nabīna—new; kūsūmābalī—flowers; śrī-aṅge—in His beautiful body; śobhaye—decorated; bhāli—great; madhū-lābhe—being greedy for honey; phire—wanders; matta—maddened; bhṛṅga—bees.
Sandalwood pulp mixed with saffron and musk is smeared upon His forehead. He stands in a most enchanting threefold bending form. His beautiful limbs are decorated with newly blossomed flowers which attract maddened bees for their honey.
Text 5
īṣata madhūra-smita baidagadhi-līlāmṛta
lūbadhala braja-badhū-bṛṇda
caraṇa-kamala-para maṇimaya nūpūra
nakha-maṇi jhalamala-candra
īṣata—little; madhūra—sweet; smita—smile; baidagadhi-līlāmṛta—expert in conjugal pastimes; lūbadhala—attracted; braja-badhū-bṛṇda—the damsels of Vṛndāvana; caraṇa-kamala-para—upon the lotus feet; maṇimaya—jewelled; nūpūra—ankle bells; nakha-maṇi—the jewel-like nails; jhalamala—shinning brightly; candra—the moon.
The sweet attractive smile of the Lord and His expertise in conjugal pastimes capture the minds of the damsels of Braja. Gem-studded ankle bells adorn His lotus feet, His jewel-like toe-nails shine brightly like the moon.
Text 6
Braja Parakiya Tattva
The Truth About Parakīyā Bhāva in Braja
nūpūra-mūrālī-dhwani kūla-badhū-marālinī
śuniyā rahite nāre ghare
hṛdaye bāḍaye rati jena mile pati satī
kūlera dharama jara dūre
nūpūra—ankle bells; mūrālī-dhwani—the sounds of flute; kūla-badhū—damsels of Braja; marālinī—goose; śuniyā—hearing; rahite—remain; nāre—do not; ghare—at home; hṛdaye—in their hearts; bāḍaye—increases; rati—lust; jena—just as; mile—meets; pati—husband; satī—chaste wife; kūlera—familiar; dharama—religious principles; jara dūre—transgressed.
Hearing the sweet sounds of His ankle bells, and His flute which is like the call of a male swan, the female swan Braja gopis cannot remain in their homes. Forgetting the transgression of mundane morality in their hearts, their attraction for Kṛṣṇa increases unlimitedly and they run to Him like chaste wives meeting their husbands.
Text 7
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Vigrahe Nityatva 
The Truth About the Eternal Form of Kṛṣṇa 
gobinda-śarīra nitya taṅhāra sebaka satya
bṛndābana-bhūmi tejomaya
tāhāte jamunā-jala kare nitya jhalamala
tāra tīre aṣṭa kūṅja haya
gobinda—Lord Govinda; śarīra—body; nitya—eternal; taṅhāra—His; sebaka—servant; satya—eternal; bṛndābana-bhūmi—the land of Vṛndāvana; tejomaya—effulgent; tāhāte—in that land; jamunā-jala—the waters of Yamunā; kare—does; nitya—eternal; jhalamala—shining brightly; tāra tīre—on the bank of; aṣṭa—eight; kūṅja—groves; haya—is.
The transcendental body of Govinda is eternal. His servants are eternal. The abode of Vṛndāvana is effulgent. The water of the Yamunā is crystal clear. There are eight kuñjas or groves on the banks of Yamunā.
Text 8
śītala-kiraṇa-kara kalpa-tarū-guṇa-dhara
taru-latā saḍa ṛtū-śobā
purna-candra-sama jyoti cidānanda-maya mūrti
mahālīlā-darśana-lobha
śītala—cooling; kiraṇa-kara—moonshines; kalpa-tarū—desire tree; guṇa-dhara—quality; taru—trees; latā—creepers; saḍa ṛtū—the six seasons; śobā—beauty; purna-candra—full moon; sama—equal; jyoti—effulgence; cidānanda-maya—full of bliss and knowledge; mūrti—form; mahālīlā—great pastimes; darśana—to see; lobha—greedy.
The groves of Vṛndāvana are charming with soothing moonbeams. The six seasons beautify the forests wherein the trees fulfill all desires. The blissful personality of Kṛṣṇa is more effulgent than the full moon, and one should be eager to have a glimpse of His wonderful pastimes.
Text 9
gobinda ānandamaya nikaṭe banitā-caya
bihare madhūra ati śobhā
duṅhu preme dagamagi duṅhu doṅha anūragī
duṅhu rūpa duṅhu mana lobhā
gobinda—Lord Govinda; ānandamaya—most blissful; nikaṭe—near; banitā-caya—the damsels; bihare—enjoys; madhūra—sweet; ati—very; śobhā—beautiful; duṅhu—both of Them; preme—with love; dagamagi—overwhelmed; duṅhu—both of Them; doṅha—towards each other; anūragī—attached; duṅhu—both; rūpa—with beauty; duṅhu—both; mana—mind; lobhā—attracted.
Śrī Govinda is personified bliss. He is surrounded by the gopīs and enjoys various sweet pastimes. They are overwhelmed by love, attracted and attached to each other’s beauty.
Text 10
braja-pūra-banitāra caraṇa āśraya sāra
kara mana ekānta kariyā
anya bola gaṅdu-gola nā śuniha uttarola
rākha prema hṛdaye bhariyā
braja-pūra—of Braja; banitāra—the damsels; caraṇa—the lotus feet; āśraya—the shelter; sāra—essence; kara—do; mana—mind; ekānta—without deviation; kariyā—doing; anya—other; bola—topics; gaṅdu-gola—gossiping; nā—not; śuniha—hear; uttarola—urge; rākha—keep; prema—love; hṛdaye—in the heart; bhariyā—filled.
O my mind, take shelter of the lotus feet of the damsels of Braja without deviation. Do not hear useless gossips, instead fill my heart with Kṛṣṇa’s prema. 
Text 11
External Renunciation for Internal Realization
pāpa-puṅya-maya deha sakali anitya ehi
dhana jana saba michā dhanda
marile jāibe kothā nā pāo tāhāte byathā
tabū niti kara karjya manda
pāpa-puṅya-maya—mix with sin and piety; deha—the owner of the body; sakali—all; anitya—temporary; ehi—this; dhana—wealth; jana—followers; saba—all; michā—false; dhanda—conception; marile—after death; jāibe—will go; kothā—where; nā—not; pāo—get; tāhāte—in that; byathā—pain; tabū—still; niti—repeatedly; kara—do; karjya manda—sinful activities.
O my mind, you should know this for certain that the dualities of sin and piety are all temporary. Wealth and followers are all false. You do not know where you will go after death. You do not feel pain about this and still you continue with your sinful activities.
Text 12
rājāra je rājya-pāṭa jena natūjāra nāṭa
dekhite dekhite kichū naya
hena māyā kare jei parama īśwara sei
tāṅre mana sadā kara bhaya
rājāra—of the king; je—that; rājya-pāṭa—the kingdom; jena—as if; natūjāra nāṭa—act of play; dekhite dekhite—gradually; kichū naya—as if nothing; hena—such; māyā—illusory; kare—does; jei—whoever; parama īśwara—the Supreme Lord; sei—his; tāṅre—to him; mana—O my mind; sadā—always; kara bhaya—be afraid of.
The state and administration of a king is just like an act of a play. It gradually vanquishes in due course of time. O my mind, it is He, the Supreme Lord who causes this show by His illusory energy. Be always afraid of falling under its control.
Text 13
pāpe nā kariha mana adhama se pāpī-jana
tāre mana dūre parihari
pūṅyaje sūkhera dhāma tāra nā laio nāma
pūṅya mukti dui tyaga kari
pāpe—in sinful activities; nā—not; kariha—do; mana—mind; adhama—fallen; se—he; pāpī-jana—a sinner; tāre—to him; mana—O my mind; dūre—far away; parihari—give up; pūṅya—piety; je—that which; sūkhera—of happiness; dhāma—abode; tāra—that; nā—do not; laio—take; nāma—name; pūṅya—piety; mukti—liberation; dui—both; tyāga kari—give up.
O mind, do not indulge in sinful activities because sinners are most fallen. Give up bad association from a distance. Although piety is the abode of material happiness, do not strive for it, rather give up the desire for piety and liberation.
Text 14
prema-bhakti-sūdha-nidhi tāhe dūba nirabadhi
āra jata kṣara nidhi prāya
niraṅtara sūkha pābe sakala saṅtapa jābe
para-tattwa karile upāya
prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; sūdha-nidhi—ocean of nectar; tāhe—in that; dūba—drowned; nirabadhi—constantly; āra jata—all others; kṣara nidhi—ocean of salt; prāya—almost; niraṅtara—always; sūkha—happiness; pābe—will receive; sakala—all; saṅtapa—the threefold miseries; jābe—will go away; para-tattwa—the supreme truth; karile—I have thus explained; upāya—process.
Loving devotional service is the ocean of nectar. Be always drowned in that ocean. Everything else is like an ocean of salt. If you follow this process, you will achieve eternal bliss and all your lamentations will go away. 
Text 15
anyera paraśa jena nāhi kadācit hena
ihāte haibe sabādhāna
rādhā-kṛṣṇa nāma gāna ei se parama dhyāna
āra nā kariha paramāṇa
anyera—of others; paraśa—touch; jena—even; nāhi—do not; kadācit—seldom; hena—happens; ihāte—in this; haibe—will be; sabādhāna—cautious; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Śrī Rādhikā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa; nāma gāna—chant Their names; ei—this; se—that; parama—supreme; dhyāna—meditation; āra—more; nā—not; kariha—do; paramāṇa—goal.
Never associate with non-devotees. Be very careful about them. Chanting the names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is the highest form of meditation. Do not accept any other process as the goal of life.
Text 16
karmī jñānī miśra-bhakta nā habe tāya anūrakta
śuddha-bhajanete kara mana
braja-janera jei mata tāhe habe anugata
ei se parama tattwa-dhana
karmī—the performers of fruitive activities; jñānī—impersonalists; miśra-bhakta—mixed devotees; nā—do not; habe—will be; tāya—in that; anūrakta—attached; śuddha—pure; bhajanete—in worshipping the Lord; kara mana—engage your mind; braja-janera—of the residents of Braja; jei mata—the opinion; tāhe—in that; habe—will be; anugata—follow; ei se—this is the; parama tattwa—supreme truth; dhana—wealth.
Do not mingle with fruitive workers, mental speculators and mixed devotees. Instead engage yourself in pure devotional service under the guidance of the residents of Braja. This is the highest treasure.
Text 17
prārthanā karibe sadā śuddha-bhāve prema-kathā
nāma-maṅtre kariyā abheda
āṣṭika kariyā mana bhaja rāṅgā śrī-caraṇa
granthi-pāpa habe pariccheda
prārthanā—pray; karibe—will do; sadā—always; śuddha-bhāve—purely; prema-kathā—loving topics; nāma-maṅtre—with holy names and mantras; kariyā—considering; abheda—non-different; āstika—purify; kariyā—doing; mana—mind; bhaja—worship; rāṅgā—relished; śrī-caraṇa—lotus feet; granthi—knots; pāpa—sinful activities; habe—will be; pariccheda—unfolded.
I will always desire to glorify the transcendental topics of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, considering the holy names and mantras as non-different from Them. I will fix my mind in worshipping the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Then the knots of sinful desires within my heart will be undone.
Text 18
rādhā-kṛṣṇa śrī-caraṇa tāte saba samarpaṇa 
śrī-caraṇe balihāri jāṅa
dūṅhu nāma śuni śuni bhakta mūkhe pūni pūni 
parama ānanda sūkha-pāñā 
rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; śrī-caraṇa—lotus feet; tāte—in that; saba—everything; samarpaṇa—surrender; śrī-caraṇe—unto the lotus feet; balihāri jāṅa—great; dūṅhu—both; nāma—the holy names; śuni śuni—repeatedly hearing; bhakta mūkhe—through the mouths of the devotees; pūni pūni—again and again; parama ānanda—great happiness; sūkha-pāñā—will be satisfied.
I surrender myself unto the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and take Their merciful shelter. I will repeatedly hear the names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa from the mouths of pure devotees and attain great happiness and satisfaction.
Text 19
hema-gauri-tanū rāi āṅkhi daraśana cāi
rodana kariba abhilāṣe
jaladhara dhara dhara aṅga ati manohara
rūpe guṇe bhūbana prakāśe
hema-gauri—molten gold; tanū—body; rāi—Śrī Rādhā; āṅkhi—eyes; daraśana cāi—want to see; rodana kariba—will cry; abhilāṣe—with a desire; jaladhara—the clouds; dhara dhara—newly; aṅga—the limbs; ati manohara—most enchanting; rūpe—in beauty; guṇe—in qualities; bhūbana prakāśe—illuminates the whole world.
I will desire to see the golden complexioned Rādhā with my own eyes. I will cry to see the enchanting form and qualities of Kṛṣṇa whose complexion is like the new clouds.
Text 20
sakhī-gaṇa cāri-pāśe sebā kare abhilāṣe
parama se sebā-sūkha dhare
ei bhaṇe mane mora ei rase hañā bhora
narottama sadā-i bihare
sakhī-gaṇa—the sakhīs; cāri-pāśe—on four sides; sebā kare—serve; abhilāṣe—according to their desire; parama—supreme; se—that; sebā—service; sūkha—happiness; dhare—yields; ei bhaṇe—this desire; mane mora—in my mind; ei rase—in this mellows; hañā bhora—being absorbed; narottama—Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura; sadāi—always; bihare—enjoys.
The sakhīs surround Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa on all four sides, and while serving Them, feel ecstatic bliss in their hearts. Narottama dāsa desires such service being absorbed in loving transcendental mellows. 
Song 7 

Text 1
The Characteristics of an Unalloyed Devotee
rādhā-kṛṣṇa karoṅ dhyāna swapane nā bala āna
prema binā āna nāhi cāṅu
jūgala-kiśora-prema lakṣa-bāṇa jena hema
ārati-pirīti-rase dhyāña
rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. karoṅ dhyāna—meditate; swapane—in the dream; nā—do not; bala—speak; āna—mundane topics; prema—love of God; binā—without; āna—anything else; nāhi—not; cāṅu—hanker; jūgala-kiśora—the Divine Couple; prema—love; lakṣa-bāṇa—refined a million times; jena hema—like gold; ārati—eagerly; pirīti-rase—in transcendental mellows; dhyāña—meditate.
I will meditate on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I will not speak about any other topics even in my dreams. I will not hanker for anything else except loving service to the Divine Youthful Couple. The loving sentiments of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are like gold refined a million times. Therefore, O my mind, please constantly meditate on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa as your only loveable object.
Text 2
jala binū jena mīna dūḥkha pāya āyū hīna
prema binū sei-mata bhakta
cātaka jalada-gati e-mati ekānta-rāti
jāne jei sei anūrakta
jala binū—without water; jena—as; mīna—the fish; dūḥkha pāya—suffers; āyū hīna—dies; prema—love; binū—without; sei-mata—like that; bhakta—the devotee; cātaka—cātaka bird; jalada—rain; gati—solace; e-mati—such; ekānta-rāti—unalloyed devotional service; jāne jei—one who knows; sei—he; anūrakta—pure devotee.
Just as a fish out of water feels great distress and dies, similarly the devotee feels distressed without love of God. As a cātaka bird drinks only rain water, similarly unalloyed devotees relish only love of God.
Text 3
maranda-bhramara jena cakora-candrikā tena
pati-bratā janera yena pati
anyatra nā cale mana jena daridrera dhana
ei-mata prema-bhakti-rīti
maranda—honey; bhramara—bumblebee; jena—is for; cakora—a patridge; candrikā—rays of the moon; tena—just like; pati-bratā janera—of a chaste wife; yena—just like; pati—husband; anyatra nā cale—does not deviate; mana—the mind; jena—like; daridrera dhana—the wealth of a poor man; ei—this; mata—way; prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; rīti—characteristics.
Just as a bumblebee is attached to honey, a cakora bird is attached to the nectar of the moon, a chaste wife is attached to her husband, and a poor man is attached to wealth, similarly the minds of devotees are attached to the loving service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Text 4
viṣaya garala-maya tāhe māna sūkha-caya
se nā sūkha dūḥkha kari māna
gobinda-biṣaya-rasa saṅga kara tāṅra dāsa
prema-bhakti satya kari jāna
viṣaya—material sense objects; garala-maya—poisonous; tāhe—in that; māna—consider; sūkha-caya—happiness; se—that; nā—not; sūkha—happiness; dūḥkha—misery; kari māna—accept; gobinda-biṣaya-rasa—the nectarean topics of Govinda; saṅga kara—associate; tāṅra—his; dāsa—servant; prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; satya kari—eternal and factual; jāna—accept.
Material enjoyments are full of poison, but you consider them pleasing. Do not think of them as a source of happiness, but understand them as distress. Be absorbed in full thought of Govinda, associate with His devotees and conclude that loving devotional service is the goal of life.
Text 5
madhye madhye āche dūṣṭa dṛṣṭi kari haya rūṣṭa
gūṇake biguṇa kari māne
gobinda-bimūkha-jane sphūrti nahe hena dhane
laukika kariyā saba jāne
madhye madhye—sometimes; āche—there are; dūṣṭa—mischievous people; dṛṣṭi kari—by seeing; haya—is; rūṣṭa—annoyed; gūṇake—the qualities; biguṇa—disqualification; kari māne—consider; gobinda—Lord Govinda; bimūkha—averse; jane—persons; sphūrti—inspiration; nahe—not; hena—such; dhane—wealth; laukika—worldly; kariyā—as; saba—all; jāne—knows.
Sometimes the mischievous people become angry by seeing the dealings of devotees. They accept the good qualities of devotees as bad qualities. The wealth of loving devotional service does not manifest in the hearts of those who are averse to Govinda because they consider this wealth as mundane. 
Text 6
ajñāna abhāgyā jata nāhi laya sata-mata
ahaṅkare nā jāne āpanā
abhimānī bhakti-hīna jaga-mājhe sei dīna
bṛthā tāra aśeṣa bhābanā
ajñāna—ignorant; abhāgyā—unfortunate; jata—all; nāhi—do not; laya—take; sata-mata—the path of the devotees; ahaṅkare—with false ego; nā jāne—do not know; āpanā—themselves; abhimānī—proud; bhakti-hīna—devoid of devotional service; jaga-mājhe—in this world; sei—he; dīna—poor; bṛthā—useless; tāra—his; aśeṣa—unlimited; bhābanā—desires.
Those who are overwhelmed with nescience do not take to the path of devotion. Such persons are full of false ego, pride and innumerable useless desires. They are most fallen in this world and are devoid of devotional service.
Text 7
āra saba parihari parama īśwara hari
seva mana kari prema-āśa
eka-braja-rāja-pūra gobinda rasika-bara
karaha sadāi abhilāṣa
āra saba—everything else; parihari—giving up; parama—supreme; īśwara—the controller; hari—Lord Hari; seva—serve; mana—O mind; kari—having; prema-āśa—the desire to achieve love of God; eka-braja-rāja-pūra—only in Braja; gobinda—Lord Govinda; rasika-bara—He who is expert in conjugal pastimes; karaha—do; sadāi—constantly; abhilāṣa—desire.
O my mind, abandon everything and serve the Supreme Controller Lord Hari, with a desire to attain love of God. Only hanker for the service of Govinda, the reservoir of all pleasure in Braja.
Text 8
narottama dāsa kahe sadā mora prāṇa dahe
hena bhakta-saṅga nā pāiyā
abhāgyera nāhi ora michāja-hailū bhora
dūḥkha rahe antare jāgiyā
narottama dāsa—Narottama dāsa ; kahe—says; sadā—always; mora—mine; prāṇa—life; dahe—burning; hena—such; bhakta—devotee; saṅga—association; nā—not; pāiyā—receiving; abhāgyera—misfortune; nāhi—there is not; ora—limit; michāja—false conception; hailū—became; bhora—absorbed; dūḥkha—distress; rahe—remains; aṅtare—in the heart; jāgiyā—awakened.
Narottama dāsa says, “My mind is constantly burning without the association of pure devotees. There is no end to my misfortune as I am absorbed in misconceptions and my heart is filled with distress.”
Song 8 

Text 1
Fixed Loving Devotional Service
bacanera agocara bṛndābana līlā-stala
swaprakāśa premānanda-ghana
jāhāte prakaṭa sūkha nāhi jarā-mṛtyū-dūḥkha
kṛṣṇa-līlā-rasa anūkṣaṇa
bacanera—words; agocara—beyond; bṛndābana—the abode of Vṛndāvana; līlā-stala—various places of pastimes; swaprakāśa—self manifest; premānanda—ecstatic love; ghana—intense; jāhāte—in which; prakaṭa—manifested; sūkha—happiness; nāhi—does not exist; jarā—old age; mṛtyū—death; dūḥkha—distress; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; līlā-rasa—the nectarean pastimes; anūkṣaṇa—always.
Śrī Vṛndāvana, the place of the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, is indescribable. It is self-manifest and full of ecstatic love. Happiness is eternally present there. It is devoid of the miseries of old age and death. The pastimes of Kṛṣṇa are constantly performed there.
Text 2
rādhā-kṛṣṇa dūṅhū prema lakṣa-bāna yena hema
jāhāra hillole rasa-sindhū
cakora nayana-prema kāma-rati kare dhyāna
pirīti sūkhera dūṅhe bandhu
rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Śrī Rādhikā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa; dūṅhū—both; prema—love; lakṣa-bāna—purified for a million times; yena hema—like gold; jāhāra—whose; hillole—waves; rasa-sindhū—ocean of transcendental mellows; cakora—cakora bird; nayana-prema—lovely eyes; kāma—Cupid; rati—Cupid’s wife; kare dhyāna—meditates; pirīti—of love; sūkhera—of happiness; dūṅhe—both; bandhu—friends.
The loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are like purified gold. They are the waves in the ocean of transcendental mellows. The eyes of the Divine Couple are like the cakora birds that drink sweet nectar. Cupid with his wife always meditate to achieve this love of God.
Text 3
rādhikā preyasī-barā bāma dike manoharā
kanaka-keśara-kānti dhare
anūrage-rakta śāḍī nīla-paṭṭa manohārī
maṇimoya ābharaṇa pare 
rādhikā—Śrī Rādhikā; preyasī-barā—the dearmost; bāma—left; dike—side; manoharā—enchanting; kanaka—gold; keśara—filament of flower; kāṅti—complexion; dhare—possess; anūrage—intense attachment; rakta śāḍī—red sari; nīla-paṭṭa—blue shawl; manohārī—enchanting; maṇimoya—enchanting; ābharaṇa—ornaments; pare—wears. 
The golden complexioned Śrī Rādhikā is the topmost and dearmost. She is most enchanting and seated on the left of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She wears a red sari out of intense attachment and puts a blue shawl on top of that sari. She is beautifully decorated with jewelled ornaments.
Text 4
karaye locana pāṇa rūpa-līlā dūṅhu dhyāna
ānande magana sahacarī
beda-bidhi-agocara ratana-bedīra para
seba niti kiśora-kiśorī
karaye—do; locana—eyes; pāṇa—drink; rūpa-līlā—beauty and pastimes; dūṅhu—both; dhyāna—meditation; ānande—in ecstacy; magana—absorbed; sahacarī—companions; beda-bidhi—the Vedic injunctions; agocara—unknown; ratana—jewel; bedīra para—on the altar; seba—serve; niti—constantly; kiśora-kiśorī—the Divine Young Couple.
All the sakhīs and their companions happily drink the sweet beauty of the Divine Couple through their eyes and meditate upon Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They eternally serve the Young Couple, who are seated on a jewelled altar, unapproachable by the Vedas.
Text 5
dūrlabha janama hena nāhi bhaja hari kena
ki lāgiyā mara bhava baṅdhe
chāḍa anya kriyā karma nāhi dekha veda-dharma
bhakti kara kṛṣṇa-pada-dwandwa
dūrlabha—rare; janama—human form of life; hena—such; nāhi—do not; bhaja—worship; hari—Lord Hari; kena—why; ki lāgiyā—for what reason; mara—suffer; bhaba baṅdhe—bondage of material life; chāḍa—give up; anya—other; kriyā karma—pious and sinful deeds; nāhi dekha—do not see; veda-dharma—occupational duties mentioned in the Vedas; bhakti kara—engage in devotional service; kṛṣṇa-pada-dwandwa—unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.
O my mind, service to Śrī Hari is rarely achieved. Why then do you not worship Him? You are simply suffering due to material bondage. Abandon all fruitive activities and religious duties prescribed in the Vedas and serve the lotus feet of the Lord with devotion.
Text 6
biṣaya biṣama-gati nāhi bhaja braja-pati
śrī-nanda nandana sūkha-sāra
swarga āra apabarga saṁsāra naraka-bhoga
sarba-nāśa janama-bikāra
biṣaya—material sense objects; biṣama—dangerous; gati—results; nāhi—do not; bhaja—worship; braja-pati—the Lord of Braja; śrī-nanda nandana—the son of Nanda Mahārāja; sūkha-sāra—the abode of bliss; swarga—heaven; āra—and; apabarga—liberation; saṁsāra—material existence; naraka—hell; bhoga—enjoy; sarba-nāśa—ruins everything; janama—human form of life; bikāra—wasted.
The result of material enjoyments are dangerous. Why do you not worship Śrī Nandanandana, the Lord of Braja and the abode of ecstatic bliss? Desires for heavenly planets, liberation and enjoying the material world are hellish. They ruin one’s human form of life.
Text 7
dehe nā kariha āṣṭhā sannikate jama śāsta 
dūḥkhera samūdra karma-gati
dekhiya śuniya bhaja sādhū-śāstra-mata yaja
jūgala-caraṇe kara rati
dehe—in material body; nā kariha—do not; āṣṭhā—keep faith; sannikate—near; jama—Yamarāja; śasta—one who punishes; dūḥkhera—of misery; samūdra—ocean; karma-gati—the fruits of activities; dekhiya śuniya—by carefully considering; bhaja—worship; sādhū—the devotees; śāstra—the scriptures; mata—according to; yaja—worship; jūgala—the Divine Couple; caraṇe—unto the lotus feet; kara rati—be attached.
Do not put faith in this temporary material body, because Yamarāja, the lord of death, is waiting next to you. The flow of karma is just like the ocean of sorrow. Consider this properly and worship the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with attachment under the guidance of sādhu and śāstra.
Text 8
karma-khānda jñāna-khānda kevala biṣera bhānda
amṛta baliyā jebā khāya
nānā joni sadā phire kadar jya bhakṣaṇa kare
tāra janma adhaḥ-pāte jāya
karma-khānda—fruitive activities; jñāna-khānda—mental speculations; kebala—only; biṣera—poison; bhānda—pot; amṛta—nectar; baliyā—thinking; jebā—whoever; khāya—drinks; nānā joni—various species; sadā—always; phire—changes; kadarjya—abominable items; bhakṣaṇa—eat; kara—does; tāra—his; janma—life; adhaḥpāte—spoiled; jāya—goes.
Fruitive activities and mental speculation are like pots of poison. Those who drink this poison, thinking it to be nectar, fall into the cycle of repeated birth and death. Such persons eat abominable things and their human form of life is spoiled.
Text 9
rādhā-kṛṣṇe nāhi rati anya jane bale pati
prema-bhakti rīti nāhi jāne
nāhi bhaktira sandhāna bharame karaye dhyāna
bṛthā tāra se chāra jībane
rādhā-kṛṣṇe—in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; nāhi—do not; rati—attachment; anya jane—to another person; bale—says; pati—the Lord; prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; rīti—characteristics; nāhi jāne—do not know; nāhi—do not; bhaktira—of devotional service; sandhāna—trace; bharame—in illusion; karaye dhyāna—meditate; bṛthā—useless; tāra—his; se—that; chāra—insignificant; jībane—life.
Those who have not developed attachment for Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, not knowing the process of loving devotional service, consider others as their lord and protector. Such people do not inquire about devotional service, rather they engage in pseudo meditation. Their lives are useless and insignificant.
Text 10
jñāna karma kare loka nāhi jāne bhakti-yoga
nānā-mate haiyā ajñāna
tāra kathā nāhi śuni paramārtha-tattwa jāni
prema-bhakti bhakta-gaṇa-prāṇa
jñāna karma—fruitive activities and mental speculation; kare—do; loka—people; nāhi—do not; jāne—know; bhakti-yoga—the process of devotional service; nānā—various; mate—opinion; haiyā—being; ajñāna—misguided; tāra—is; kathā—statements; nāhi—do not; śuni—hear; paramārtha-tattwa—the absolute truth; jāni—know; prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; bhakta-gaṇa—of devotees; prāṇa—life and soul.
The less intelligent people engage in pious activities and speculative knowledge. They do not know the process of devotional service, because they are misguided by various opinions. Do not listen to them, but know it for certain that transcendental devotional service is the life and soul of the devotees.
Text 11
jagat-byāpaka hari aja-bhava ājñā-kārī
madhūra mūrati līlā-kathā
ei tattwa jāne jei parama uttama sei
tāra saṅga kariba sarbathā
jagat—world; byāpaka—pervading; hari—Lord Hari; aja—Lord Brahmā; bhava—Lord Śiva; ājñā-kārī—order carriers; madhūra—sweet; mūrati—form; līlā-kathā—topics of pastimes; ei—this; tattwa—truth; jāne—knows; jei—one who; parama uttama—highest; sei—he; tāra—his; saṅga—association; kariba—will do; sarbathā—by all respects.
Although Lord Hari is all-pervading, and Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva are His order carriers, nevertheless His form and pastimes are full of sweetness. One who knows this science, is a topmost devotee and I will always associate with him.
Text 12
parama nāgara kṛṣṇa tāṅhe hao satṛṣṇa
bhaja tāṅre braja-bhāva lañā
rasika-bhakata saṅge rahiba pirīti-raṅge
braja-pūre basati kariyā
parama—supreme; nāgara—paramour; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; tānhe—to whom; hao—become; satṛṣṇa—eager; bhaja—worship; tāṅre—Him; braja-bhāva—in the mood of Braja; lañā—attain; rasika-bhakata—devotees who appreciate loving devotional mellows; saṅge—in the association; rahiba—will remain; pirīti-raṅge—in ecstatic love; braja-pūre—in Braja; basati kariyā—reside in.
Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Paramour. Therefore, be always attached to Him, and worship Him in the mood of Braja. Reside in Braja and associate with devotees who appreciate loving devotional service.
Text 13
śrī-guru-bhakata-jana tānhāra caraṇe mana
āropiyā kathā-anūsāre
sakhīra sarbathā mata haiyā tāṅhara jūtha
sadāi bihare braja-pūre
śrī-guru—the spiritual master; bhakata-jana—the devotees; tānhāra—their; caraṇe—unto the lotus feet; mana—the mind; āropiyā—fix; katha—topics; anūsāre—according to; sakhīra—of the sakhīs; sarbathā—by all respect; mata—of opinion; haiyā—being; tāṅhara—their; jūtha—group; sadāi—always; bihare—enjoys; braja-pūre—in raja.
Fix your mind at the lotus feet of the spiritual master and the devotees. According to their instructions and the guidance of the sakhīs, always live and serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Braja.
Text 14
līlā-rasa-kathā gaṇa jūgala-kiśora prāṇa
prārthanā kariba abhilāse
jībane maraṇe ei āra kichū nāhi cāi
kahe dīna narottama-dāsa
līlā-rasa-kathā—the topics of transcendental pastimes; gaṇa—sing; jūgala-kiśora—the Divine Couple; prāṇa—life; prārthanā—pray; kariba—will do; abhilāse—with desire; jībane maraṇe—in life and death; ei—this; āra kichū—nothing else; nāhi—do not; cāi—want; kahe—says; dīna—poor; narottama-dāsa—Narottama dāsa.
I will always prayfully with desire, sing the amorous pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in life or death. This is my only hope and nothing else do I want, says poor Narottama dāsa.
Song 9 

Text 1
The Ultimate Instructions
āna kathā nā baliba āna kathā nā śuniba
sakali kahiba paramārtha
prārthanā kariba sadā lālasā abhīṣṭa-kathā
ihā binā sakali anartha
āna kathā—worldly talks; nā baliba—will not speak; āna kathā—mundane topics; nā śuniba—will not hear; sakali—all; kahiba—will say; paramārtha—absolute truth; prārthanā—pray; kariba—will do; sada—always; lālasā—eagerness; abhīṣṭa kathā—topics regarding goal of life; ihā binā—without this; sakali—everything; anartha—unwanted.
I will neither indulge in useless mundane topics nor hear them. I will only engage in spiritual cultivation. I will always pray to eagerly discuss the topics of my worshipable Lord, because everything else is simply unwanted.
Text 2
īśwarera tattwa jata tāhā bā kahiba kata
ananta apāra kebā jāne
braja-pūra-prema nitya ei se parama satya
bhaja bhaja anūrāga-mane
īśwarera—of the Supreme Lord; tattwa—science; jata—everything; tāhā—that; bā—or; kahiba—will explain; kata—how much; ananta—unlimited; apāra—insurmountable; kebā—who; jāne—knows; braja-pūra—in Braja; prema—loving dealings; nitya—eternal; ei—this; se—that; parama satya—supreme truth; bhaja bhaja—worship; anurāga—with attachment; mane—the mind.
How much can I explain the science of the Supreme Lord, for it is unlimited and unfathomable? However, the loving dealings of Braja are eternal and nectarean. O my mind, please worship this Supreme Truth with deep attachment.
Text 3
gobinda gokūlacandra parama ānanda-kanda
paribāra-gopa-gopī saṅge
nandīśwara jāra dhāma giridhārī jāṅra nāma
sakhī-saṅge tāre bhaja raṅge
gobinda—Lord Govinda; gokūlacandra—the moonlike personality of Gokula; parama—great; ānanda—happiness; kanda—source; paribāra—entourage; gopa-gopī—the cowherd boys and girls; saṅge—in the association; nandīśwara—Nandagram; jāṅra—whose; dhāma—residence; giridhārī—the lifter of Govardhana Hill; jāra—whose; nāma—name; sakhī-saṅge—in the association of the sakhīs; tāre—Him; bhaja—worship; raṅge—happily.
Śrī Govinda, the moonlike personality of Gokūla, the lifter of Govardhana Hill, the reservoir of all transcendental happiness, is accompanied by the gopālas and the gopīs and is living in Nandagram. Serve Him happily in association with the sakhīs.
Text 4
prema-bhakti-tattwa ei tomāre kahinū bhāi
āra dūrbasanā parihari
śrī-guru-prasāde bhāi e saba bhajana pāi
prema-bhakti sakhī anūcarī
prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; tattwa—science; ei—this; tomāre—to you; kahinū—I have thus explained; bhāi—O brothers; āra—all others; dūrbasanā—material desires; parihari—by giving up; śrī-guru-prasāde—by the mercy of the spiritual master; bhāi—O brother; e saba—all these; bhajana—process of worship; pāi—receive; prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; sakhī anūcari—the companion of the sakhīs.
O brother, I have thus described the science of devotional service to you. Please, give up all material desires. You can perform loving devotional service by the mercy of the spiritual master and in the perfected stage, you will be counted as a maidservant of the sakhīs.
Text 5
sārthaka bhajana-patha sādhu-saṅge abirata
smaraṇa bhajana kṛṣṇa-kathā
prema-bhakti haya jadi tabe haya manaḥ śuddhi
tabe jāya hṛdayera byathā
sārthaka—perfection; bhajana-patha—the path of worship; sādhu-saṅge—in the association of the devotees; abirata—always; smaraṇa—remembrance; bhajana—worship; kṛṣṇa-kathā—discussing the topics of Kṛṣṇa; prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; haya—is; jadi—if; tabe—than; haya—is; manaḥ śuddhi—purification of the mind; tabe—than; jāya—go away; hṛdayera—of the heart; byathā—pain.
The most successful method of devotional service is to constantly remember the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in the association of devotees. When one attains loving devotional service, then his mind will be fully purified and the distress of his heart will be vanquished.
Text 6
biṣaya bipatti jāna saṁsāra swapana māna
nara-tanū bhajanera mūla
anūrāge bhaja sadā prema-bhābe līlā-kathā
āra jata hṛdayera śūla
biṣaya—material sense objects; bipatti—danger; jāna—please know; saṁsāra—material existence; swapana—dream; māna—accept; nara-tanū—human form of life; bhajanera mūla—the root of worshiping the Lord; anūrāge—with attachment; bhaja—worship; sadā—always; prema-bhābe—with love; līlā-kathā—the topics of various pastimes; āra jata—everything else; hṛdayera—of the heart; śūla—pain.
Consider material sense objects as dangerous, and material life as a dream. The human form of life is most suitable for worshiping Kṛṣṇa. Always sing about the loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. All other topics causes distress to the heart.
Text 7
Śrī Rādhikāśraya 
The Shelter of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī
rādhikā-caraṇa-renū bhūṣana kariyā tanū
anāyāse pābe giridhārī
rādhikā-caraṇāśraya ye kare se mahāśaya
tāṅre mūñi jāi balihāri
rādhikā-caraṇa-renū—the dust of the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā; bhūṣana kariyā—decorate; tanū—body; anāyāse—easily; pābe—will receive; giridhārī—the lifter of Govardhana Hill; rādhikā-caraṇāśraya—taking shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā; ye kare—one who does so; se mahāśaya—is a great person; tāre—to him; mūñi—I; jāi balihāri—glorify.
Decorate your body with the dust from the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā. Then, you will achieve the full grace of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the lifter of Govardhana Hill. One who takes shelter of the lotus feet of Rādhikā, I glorify him as a great person.
Text 8
jaya jaya rādhā-nāma bṛndābana yāṅra dhāma
kṛṣṇa-sūkha-bilāsera nidhi
hena rādhā-guṇa-gāna nā śunila mora kāna
baṅcita karila more bidhi
jaya jaya—all glories; rādhā-nāma—the holy names of Rādhā; bṛndābana—Vṛndāvana; yāra—whose; dhāma—abode; kṛṣṇa-sūkha—pleasing Kṛṣṇa; bilāsera nidhi—the ocean of enjoyment; hena rādhā—such Rādhā; guṇa-gāna—glorifying Her qualities; nā śunila—did not hear; mora kāna—my ears; baṅcita—deceived; karila—did; more—to me; bidhi—the creator.
All glories to the holy names of Śrī Rādhā, who eternally resides in Vṛndāvana. She is the ocean of Kṛṣṇa’s happiness. I have been cheated by Providence because I have not heard about the glorification of Rādhā.
Text 9
tāṅra bhakta-saṅga sadā rasa-līlā-prema-kathā
je kahe se pāya ghanaśyāma
īhāte bimūkha jei tāra kabhū siddhi nāi
nāhi jena śuni tāra nāma
tāṅra—Her; bhakta-sanga—associates with the devotees; sadā—always; rasa-līlā—nectarean pastimes; prema-kathā—the topics of love; je kahe—one who chants; se pāya—he receives; ghanaśyāma—the dark-colored Śyāmasundara; īhāte—in this; bimūkha—against; jei—whoever; tāra—his; kabhū—never; siddhi—perfection; nāi—not; nāhi—not; jena śuni—may hear; tāra nāma—his name.
One who associates with the devotees of Śrī Rādhā and discusses the loving pastimes of Rādhā certainly meets Śyāmasundara. Anyone averse to this never attains perfection and I do not wish to even hear the name of such a person.
Text 10
kṛṣṇa-nāma-gāne bhāi rādhikā-caraṇa pāi
rādhā-nāma-gāne kṛṣṇacandra
saṅkṣepe kahila kathā ghūcāo manera byathā
dūḥkha-maya anya kathā-dwandwa
kṛṣṇa-nāma—the holy names of Kṛṣṇa; gāne—by chanting; bhāi—O dear brothers; rādhikā-caraṇa—the lotus feet of Śrī Radhikā; pāi—attain; rādhā-nāma—the holy name of Rādhā; gāne—by chanting; kṛṣṇacandra—the moonlike Kṛṣṇa; saṅkṣepe—in brief; kahila kathā—I have thus explained; ghūcāo—destroy; manera byathā—pains of the mind; dūḥkha-maya—full of miseries; anya kathā—mundane topics; dwandwa—duality.
O brother, simply by chanting the names of Kṛṣṇa, one can receive the lotus feet of Rādhikā, and by chanting the names of Rādhikā, one can receive the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Thus, I have briefly explained everything by which you will be relieved from the pains of your heart. All other topics are full of miseries and dualities.
Text 11
ahaṅkāra abhimāna asat-saṅga asaj-jñāna
chāḍi bhaja guru-pāda-padma
kara ātma-nibedana deha-geha-parijana
guru-bākya parama mahattwa
ahaṅkāra—false ego; abhimāna—pride; asat-saṅga—association with non-devotees; asaj-jñāna—useless knowledge; chāḍi—by giving up; bhaja—worship; guru-pāda-padma—the lotus feet of the spiritual master; kara ātma-nibedana—surrender fully; deha—the body; geha—the house; parijana—the family members; guru-bākya—the words of the spiritual master; parama—supremely; mahattwa—important.
Give up false ego and pride. Giving up bad association and endeavoring for useless material knowledge, worship the lotus feet of the spiritual master. Surrender your body, home and family members unto him. The words from the lotus mouth of the spiritual master are supremely important.
Text 12
Śrī Gaura Upasana Kathāvyatha 
The Neccesity of Worshiping Śrī Gaurāṅga
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanyadeba rati-mati bhabe seba
prema-kalpa-taru-dātā
braja-rāja-nandana rādhikā-jībana-dhana
aparūpa ei saba kathā
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanyadeba—Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya; rati-mati bhabe—with attachment and attention; seba—serve; prema-kalpa-taru—the desire tree of love of God; dātā—the giver; braja-rāja-nandana—the son of King of Braja; rādhikā-jībana-dhana—the life and treasure of Śrī Rādhikā; aparūpa—wonderful; ei—this; saba—all; kathā—topics.
Please serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanyadeva with attachment and determination, because He is the desire-tree for bestowing love of God. He is non-different from the son of the King of Braja and the life and soul of Śrī Rādhīka. This is simply wonderful.
Text 13
nabadwīpe abatari rādhā-bhava angī kari
tāṅra kānti aṅgera bhūṣana
tina bānchā abhilāsī śacī-garbhe parakāśi
sange lañā pariṣada-gaṇa
nabadwīpe—in Navadvīpa; abatari—by incarnating; rādhā-bhava—the mood of Rādhā; angī kari—by accepting; tāra kānti—Her complexion; angera—of the limbs; bhūṣana—decoration; tina bānchā—three desires; abhilāsī—to fulfill; śacī-garbhe—in the womb of Śacī; parakāśi—appeared; saṅge—with Him; lañā—taking; pariṣada-gaṇa—associates.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanyadeva has appeared in Navadvīpa in the mood of Śrī Rādhā and has decorated Himself with the complexion of Rādhā. In order to fulfill three wishes, He has appeared in the womb of Mother Śacī along with His associates.
Text 14
gaura-hari-abatari premera bādara kari
sādhilā manera nija kāja
rādhikāra prāṇa-pati kiba bhabe kānde niti
ihā būjhe bhakata-samāja
gaura-hari—Lord Gaurāṅga; abatari—after descending; premera—of love of God; bādara kari—showering like rain; sādhilā—fulfilled; manera—of His mind; nija—own; kāja—work; rādhikāra—of Śrī Rādhikā; prāṇa-pati—life and soul; kiba bhabe—how; kānde—cries; niti—always; ihā—this; būjhe—understand; bhakata-samāja—the society of devotees.
Śrī Gaurahari has appeared and showered love of God. In this way, He has fulfilled His inner desires. He is the life and soul of Śrī Rādhikā. Only the devotees understand the Lord’s cries and lamentation.
Text 15
Rāgānugyo Sādhana 
The Process of Loving Attachment
gopate sādhile siddhi sādhana nabadhā bhakti
prārthanā kariba dainye sadā
kari hari-saṅkīrtana sadāi bibhola mana
iṣṭa-lābha binū saba bādhā
gopate—secretly; sādhile—will practise; siddhi—the goal of life; sādhana—the process; nabadhā bhakti—the nine types of bhakti; prārthanā kariba—will pray; dainye—with humility; sadā—always; kari—performing; hari-saṅkīrtana—congregational chanting of the holy names of Hari; sadāi—always; bibhola—absorbed; mana—the mind; iṣṭa-lābha—attaining the goal of life; binū—without; saba—everything; bādhā—impediments.
One should be absorbed internally in the thought of Śrī Kṛṣṇa while externally practicing the nine processes of devotional service, always praying with humility. One should chant the names of Hari without deviation. Without the achievement of this goal of life, everything is wasted.
Text 16
Manaḥ Śikṣā 
Instructions To the Mind
saṁsāra bātojāre kāma-phāṅse bāndhi māre
phūkāra karaha haridāsa
karaha bhakata-saṅga prema-kathā-rasa-raṅga
tabe haya bipada bināśa
saṁsāra—the material world; bātojāre—plundering; kāma—lusty desires; phāṅse—with the hopes; bāndhi—binding; māre—killing; phūkāra karaha—lament; haridāsa—O servant of Śrī Hari; karaha bhakata-saṅga—associate with devotees; prema-kathā—topics of loving dealings; rasa-raṅga—nectarean pastimes; tabe—than; haya—is; bipada—danger; bināśa—vanquishes.
The material world is cheating you. Lusty desires are killing you by hanging you with ropes. Lament, O servant of Hari. Associate with devotees and engage in discussing the topics of love of God. Then, all your dangers will be vanquished.
Text 17
strī-pūtra bālaka kata mari jāra śata śata
āpanāke hao sābadhāna
mūñi se biṣaye hata nā bhajinū hari-pada
mora āra nāhi paritrāṇa
strī—wife; pūtra—son; bālaka—children; kata—so many; mari jāra—die; śata śata—hundreds; āpanāke—yourself; hao—become; sābadhāna—careful; mūñi—I am; se—that; biṣaye hata—killed by material desires; nā—not; bhajinū—worshiped; hari-pada—the lotus feet of Hari; mora—mind; āra nāhi—no other; paritrāṇa—deliverance.
Hundreds of wives and children have been born and died, yet still I am not careful. I am frustrated with material sense objects and have not worshipped the lotus feet of Hari. Therefore, I have no protection and deliverance.
Text 18
Rasika Bhakta Saṅga Niṣṭha 
The Eagerness For Associating With Rasika Devotees
rāmacandra kabirāja sei saṅge mora kāja
tāṅra sanga binū saba śunya
haya janma jadi punaḥ tāṅra saṅga haya jena
tabe haya narottama dhanya
rāmacandra kabirāja—Śrī Rāmacandra Kavirāja; sei saṅge—with his association; mora—mine; kāja—concern; tāṅra saṅga—his association; binū—without; saba—everything; śunya—empty; haya janma—rebirth; jadi—if; puna—again; tāṅra saṅga—his association; haya jena—may I receive; tabe—than; haya—is; narottama—Narottama dāsa; dhanya—glories.
My only wish is to have the association of Rāmachandra Kavirāja. Without him, everything looks empty. If I am to be born again, may I get his association. Then the life of Narottama dāsa will be successful.
Text 19
āpana bhajana-kathā nā kahiba jathā tathā
ihāte haiba sābadhāna
nā kariha keha roṣa nā laiha mora doṣa
praṇāmaha bhaktera caraṇe
āpana—own; bhajana-kathā—method of worship; nā kahiba—will not disclose; jathā tathā—here and there; ihāte—in this matter; haiba—I will be; sābadhāna—careful; nā kariha—do not; keha—anyone; roṣa—angry; nā laiha—do not take; mora doṣa—my offense; praṇāmaha—I offer my respectful obeisances; bhaktera caraṇe—unto the lotus feet of the devotees.
I will not disclose my path of worshiping the Lord to anyone and everyone. I will be extremely careful about it. Please do not get angry with me or take offense. I offer my respectful humble obeisances unto the lotus feet of the devotees.
Text 20
śrī-gaurāṅga prabhū more je bolāna bānī
tāhā kahi bhāla manda kichūi nā jāni
śrī-gaurānga prabhu—Lord Gaurāṅga; more—to me; je—that which; bolāna—make me speak; bānī—statement; tāhā kahi—I am speaking only that; bhāla manda—good and bad; kichūi nā—nothing; jāni—know.
Whatever message Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu has spoken to me, that I have related here. Actually I do not know what is right or wrong.
Text 21
lokanātha prabhupāda hṛdeye bilāsa
prema-bhakti-candrikā kahe narottama dāsa
lokanātha prabhūpada—the lotus feet of Śrīla Lokanātha Gosvāmī; hṛdeye bilāsa—place in my heart; prema bhakti-candrikā—the rays of the moonlight of loving devotion; kahe—says; narottama dāsa—Narottama dāsa.
Placing the lotus feet of Śrīla Lokanātha Prabhu in my heart, I, Narottama dāsa described “Śrī Prema Bhakti-chandrikā.”
