Folio Archives
Śaraṇāgati
“Surrendered to the Lord’s Shelter”

Part 0 Introduction
Song 1
Text 1
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu jīve doyā kori’
swa-pārṣada swīya dhāma saha avatari’
śrī-kṛṣṇa-chaitanya–Śrī Gaurasundar; prabhu–Lord; jīve–to the conditioned souls; dayā–mercy; kari’–doing; sva-pārṣada–His own associates; svīya–His own; dhāma–abode; saha–with; avatari’–descending. [1]
Text 1 Being merciful to the souls, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Chaitanya Mahāprabhu descends with His associates and abode.
Text 2
atyanta durlabha prema koribāre dāna
śikhāya śaraṇāgati bhakatera prana
atyanta–extremely; durlabha–rare, precious, difficult to obtain; prema– divine love; karibāre–in order to do; dāna–distribution; śikhāya–teaches; śaraṇāgati–surrender; bhakatera–of the devotees; prāṇa–the life. [2] 
Text 2 To distribute the most rare form of prema, He teaches śaraṇāgati, which is the life of the devotees.
Text 3
dainya, ātma-nivedana, goptṛtve varaṇa
‘avaśya rakṣībe kṛṣṇa’—viśvāsa, pālana
dainya–humility; ātma–self; nivedana—submission; goptṛtve–of guardian¬ship; varaṇa–acceptance; avaśya–certainly; rakṣibe–will protect; kṛṣṇa–the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viśvāsa–faith; pālana–maintenance.[3]  
Text 3 Humility, self-submission, embracing the Lord’s guard¬ianship, maintaining the faith that ‘Kṛṣṇa will certainly protect me’… 
Text 4
bhaki-anukūla-mātra kāryera svīkara
bhakti-pratikūla-bhāva varjanāṅgikāra
bhakti–to devotion; anukūla–favourable; mātra–only; kāryera–of actions; svīkāra–acceptance; bhakti–to devotion; pratikūla–unfavourable; bhāva– nature, disposition; varjana–rejection; aṅgīkāra–acceptance. [4] 
Text 4 Engaging only in activities which are favourable to devotion, and rejecting everything unfavourable to devotion. 
Text 5
ṣaḍ-aṅga śaraṇāgati hoibe jāhāra
tāhāra prārthanā śune śrī-nanda-kumāra
ṣaḍ–six; aṅga (prakāra aṅgera dvārā)–aspects (by way of these); śaraṇāgati (prapatti)–surrender; ha-ibe–will be; yā̐hāra–whose; tā̐hāra–his; prārthanā– prayers; śune–hears; śrī-nanda-kumāra–Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāj. [5] 
Text 5 Śrī Nanda Kumar hears the prayers of one who surrenders in this six-fold way.
Text 6
rūpa-sanātana-pade dante tṛṇa kori’
bhakativinoda poḍe duhuṅ pada dhori’
rūpa–Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī Prabhu; sanātana–Śrīla Sanātan Goswāmī Prabhu; pade–at the feet of; dante–in the teeth; tṛṇa–piece of straw; kari’– doing; bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; paḍe–falls; duhu̐–both; pada–feet; dhari’–clasping. [6] 

Text 6 Bhakti Vinod places a straw between his teeth and falls before Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī Prabhu and Śrīla Sanātan Goswāmī Prabhu, clasping their feet. 
Text 7
kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā bole āmi to’ adhama
śikhāye śaraṇāgati koro he uttama
kā̐diyā–crying; kā̐diyā–and crying; bale–says; āmi–I; ta’–certainly; adhama–fallen, lowest; śikhāye–by teaching; śaraṇāgati–surrender; karahe– please make; uttama–elevated, beyond the darkness of illusion. [7]
Text 7 Crying incessantly, he prays, “I am so lowly! Please elevate me by teaching me śaraṇāgati.” 
Part 1 Humility


Song 1
Text 1
bhuliyā tomāre, saṁsāre āsiyā,
peye nānā-vidha byathā
tomāra caraṇe,  āsiyāchi āmi,
bolibo duḥkhera kathā
bhuliyā–forgetting; tomāre–about You; saṁsāre–in the material world; āsiyā–coming; peye–experiencing; nānā–various; vidha–forms; vyathā–of suffering; tomāra–Your; charaṇe–at the feet; āsiyāchhi–have come; āmi–I; baliba–will say; duḥkhera–of distress; kathā–tale. [1]
Text 1 Forgetting You and coming to the material world, I have undergone all sorts of suffering. Now I have come before Your feet and will express my tale of distress
Text 2
jananī-jaṭhare,  chilāma jakhona,
biṣama bandhana-pāśe
eka-bāra prabhu!  dekhā diyā more,
vañcile e dīna dāse
jananī–of my mother; jaṭhare–in the womb; chhilāma–I was; yakhana– when; viṣama–terrible; bandhana–binding; pāśe–with the ropes; eka–one; bāra–time; prabhu!–O Lord!; dekha–sight; diyā–giving; more–to me; vaṣchile–deprived; e–this; dīna–poor; dāse–to this servant. [2] 
Text 2 While I was bound in the terrible confines of my mother’s womb, You once revealed Yourself to me, O Lord! Yet since then You have deprived this poor servant. 
Text 3
takhona bhāvinu,  janama pāiyā,
koribo bhajana tava
janama hoilo,  poḍi’ māyā-jāle,
nā hoilo jñāna-lava 
takhana–then; bhāvinu–I thought; janama–birth; pāiyā–obtaining; kariba–I will do; bhajana–service; tava–Your; janama–birth; ha-ila–happened; paḍi’– falling; māyā (māyāra)–of Māyā; jāle (phā̐ de)–into the net (trap); nā–not; ha-ila–became; jṣāna (jṣānera)–of knowledge; lava (leśa)–a fraction (trace). [3] 
Text 3 At that moment I thought I would engage in Your service after taking birth. Yet when I was born, I fell into māyā’s trap, and not a trace of such consciousness remained. 
Text 4
ādarera chele,  swa-janera kole,
hāsiyā kāṭānu kāla
janaka-jananī-  snehete bhuliyā,
saṁsāra lāgilo bhālo
ādarera–of adoring parents; chhele–a son; svajanera–of relatives; kole–in the lap; hāsiyā–smiling, laughing; kāṭānu–I passed; kāla–time; janaka–of my father; jananī–of my mother; snehete–due to the affection; bhuliyā–forget¬ting; saṁsāra–family life, the material world; lāgila–felt; bhāla–good. [4] 
Text 4 As a son of adoring parents, I spent my time in their laps, smiling and laughing. Because of my mother and father’s af¬fection, I forgot You and took pleasure in family life (material existence). 
Text 5
krame dina dina,  bālaka hoiyā,
khelinu bālaka-saha
āra kichu dine,  jñāna upajilo,
pāṭha poḍi ahar-ahaḥ
krame–gradually; dina–day; dina–day; bālaka–a boy; ha-iyā–becoming; khelinu–I played; bālaka–boys; saha–with; āra–more; kichhu–some; dine– after days; jṣāna–faculty of knowledge; upajila (udita ha-ila)–arose; pāṭha– lessons; paḍi–I study; ahar-ahaḥ (dina dina, sarva-kṣaṇa)–day after day (all the time). [5] 
Text 5 Day by day I grew into a young boy and played with other young boys. Later on my intellect developed, and I studied my lessons day in and day out. 
Text 6
vidyāra gaurave,  bhrami’ deśe deśe,
dhana uparjana kori
swa-jana pālana,  kori eka-mane,
bhulinu tomāre, hari!
vidyāra–of learning; gaurave–on the strength; bhrami’–travelling; deśe–in coun¬try; deśe–in (another) country; dhana–wealth; upārjana–earning; kari’–doing; svajana–relatives; pālana–maintenance; kari–I do; eka–single; mane–with a mind; bhulinu–I forgot; tomāre–about You; hari!–O Lord! [6]

Text 6 Then on the strength of my learning, I travelled from place to place, earned money, and maintained my family with undivided attention. I forgot You, O Lord! 
Text 7
bārdhakye ekhona,  bhakativinoda,
kāṅdiyā kātara ati
nā bhajiyā tore,  dina bṛthā gelo,
ekhona ki habe gati?
vārddhakye–in old age; ekhana–now; bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; kā̐diyā–crying; kātara–distressed; ati–very; nā–not; bhajiyā–serving; tore–to You; dina–days; vṛthā–vain; gela–passed; ekhana–now; ki–what?; habe–will be; gati–destination. [7]
Text 7 Now aged, Bhakti Vinod cries in great distress, “Not serving You, I have passed my days in vain. What will be my fate now?”  
Song 2
Text 1
vidyāra vilāse,  kāṭāinu kāla,
parama sāhase āmi
tomāra caraṇa,  nā bhajinu kabhu,
ekhona śaraṇa tumi
vidyāra–of learning; vilāse–in the pleasures; kāṭāinu–I passed; kāla–the time; parama–great; sāhase–with confidence; āmi–I; tomāra–Your; charaṇa–feet; nā– not; bhajinu–I served; kabhu–ever; ekhana–now; śaraṇa–shelter; tumi–You. [1]
Text 1 I spent my time absorbed in the pleasures of learning with great confidence. I never served Your feet. Now You are my shelter.
Text 2
poḍite poḍite,  bharasā bārilo,
jñāne gati habe māni’
se āśā biphala,  se jñāna durbala,
se jñāna ajñāna jāni
paḍite–studying; paḍite–and studying; bharasā–confidence; bāḍila– increased; jṣāne–through knowledge; gati–goal; habe–will be attained; māni’–considering; se–that; āśā–hope; biphala–fruitless; se–that; jṣāna– knowledge; durbala–powerless; se–that; jṣāna–knowledge; ajṣāna–ignorance; jāni–I know. [2] 
Text 2 Studying continuously, my confidence that I would attain the fulfilment of life through knowledge increased. Yet that hope was futile, and that knowledge was useless. I now know such ‘knowledge’ to be ignorance. 
Text 3
jaḍa-vidyā jata,  māyāra vaibhava,
tomāra bhajane bādhā
moha janamiyā,  anitya saṁsāre,
jīvake koraye gādhā
jaḍa–material; vidyā–learning; yata–all; māyāra–of the illusory energy; vaibhava–the opulence; tomāra–Your; bhajane–in the service; bādhā–an obstacle; moha–infatuation; janamiyā–bringing about; anitya–non-eternal; saṁsāre– in the material world; jīvake–to the soul; karaye–makes; gādhā–an ass. [3]
Text 3 All mundane learning is an exhibition of māyā and an obsta¬cle to Your service. It brings about infatuation for the temporary world and makes an ass of the soul. 
Text 4
sei gādhā ho’ye,  saṁsārera bojhā,
bahinu aneka kāla
bārdhakye ekhona,  śaktira abhāve,
kichu nāhi lāge bhālo
sei–that very; gādhā–ass; ha’ye–becoming; saṁsārera–of material existence, of family life; bojhā–the burden; bahinu–I carried; aneka–much; kāla–time; vārddhakye–in old age; ekhana–now; śaktira–of ability; abhāve–in the absence; kichhu–something; nāhi–not; lāge–strikes; bhāla–good. [4] 
Text 4 I became such an ass and bore the burden of my household for so long. Now aged and devoid of strength, nothing brings me any pleasure. 

Text 5
jīvana jātanā,  hoilo ekhona,
se vidyā avidyā bhelo
avidyāra jwālā,  ghaṭilo biṣama,
se vidyā hoilo śelo
jīvana–life; yātanā–agony; ha-ila–became; ekhana–now; se–that; vidyā– learning; avidyā–ignorance; bhela–became; avidyāra–of ignorance; jvālā–the burning pain; ghaṭila–became; viṣama–torturous; se–that; vidyā–learning; ha-ila–became; śela (marma-bhedī astra viśeṣa)–a heart-piercing spear. [5] 
Text 5 Now My life has become agony. My learning has proven to be ignorance, and the burning pain of that ignorance has become unbearably torturous. My ‘learning’ has turned into a spear (that has pierced my heart). 
Text 6
tomāra caraṇa,  binā kichu dhana,
saṁsāre nā āche āra
bhakativinoda,  jaḍa-vidyā chāḍi,’
tuwā pada kore sāra
tomāra–Your; charaṇa–feet; vinā–apart from; kichhu–any; dhana–treasure; saṁsāre–in the material world; nā–not; āchhe–is; āra–other; bhakati-vinoda– Bhakti Vinod; jaḍa–material; vidyā–learning; chhāḍi’–abandoning; tuyā– Your; pada–feet; kare–makes; sāra–the essence. [6] 
Text 6 O Lord! There is nothing of value in this material world other than Your feet. Bhakti Vinod abandons all mundane learning and accepts Your feet as his be-all and end-all.
Song 3
Text 1
jauvane jakhona,  dhana-upārjane,
hoinu vipula kāmī
dharama smariyā,  gṛhinīra kara,
dhorinu takhona āmi
yauvane–in youth; yakhana–when; dhana–wealth; upārjane–in earning; ha-inu–I became; vipula–greatly; kāmī–desirous; dharama–religion; smariyā– remembering; gṛhiṇīra–of a wife; kara–the hand; dharinu–took; takhana– then; āmi–I. [1] 

Text 1 When I was young I became greatly desirous of earning money. Remembering my religious duty, I took the hand of a wife.
Text 2
saṁsāra pātā’ye,  tāhāra sahita,
kāla-khoy koinu koto
bahu suta-sutā,  janama lobhilo,
marame hoinu hato
saṁsāre–to household life, material existence; pātā’ye–setting out; tāhāra– her; sahita–with; kāla–of time; kṣaya–destruction; kainu–did; kata–so much; bahu–many; suta–sons; sutā–and daughters; janama–birth; labhila–attained; marame–in my core; ha-inu–I became; hata–distressed. [2] 
Text 2 I established a household with her and wasted so much time. We had many sons and daughters, and I became distressed at heart. 
Text 3
saṁsārera bhāra,  bāḍe dine dine,
acala hoilo gati
bārdhakya āsiyā,  gherilo āmāre,
asthira hoilo mati
saṁsārera–of household life; bhāra–the burden; bāḍe–increasing; dine–day; dine–by day; achala–immobile; ha-ila–became; gati–my path, destination; vārddhakya–old age; āsiyā–coming; gherila–besieged; āmāre–to me; asthira– unsteady, restless; ha-ila–became; mati–mind. [3]
Text 3 The burden of my household increased day by day, and my progress towards attaining the goal of life came to a standstill. As old age came and besieged me, my mind became disturbed.
Text 4
pīḍāya asthira,  cintāya jwarita,
abhāve jwalita cita
upāya nā dekhi,  andhakāra-moya,
ekhona ho’yechi bhīta
pīḍāya–with disease; asthira–unsteady; chintāya–with anxiety; jvarita–fever¬ish; abhāve–in want, in privation; jvalita–burning; chita–heart; upāya–way out; na–not; dekhi–I see; andhakāra–blinding darkness; maya–filled with; ekhana–now; hayechhi–I have become; bhīta–frightened. [4] 
Text 4 Restless with disease and feverish with anxiety, my heart burns with unfulfilled desire. I see no way out of this darkness and have now become fearful.
Text 5
saṁsāra-taṭanī-  srota nahe śeṣa,
maraṇa nikaṭe ghora
saba samāpiyā,  bhojibo tomāya,
e āśā biphala mora
saṁsāra–of household life, of material existence; taṭinī (nadī)–the river; srota–the current; nahe–does not; śeṣa–end; maraṇa–death; nikaṭe–near; ghora–terrible; saba–everything; samāpiyā–concluding; bhajiba–will serve; tomāya–You; e–this; āśā–hope; biphala–fruitless; mora–of mine. [5]
Text 5 There is no end to the torrent of the river of household life, and fearsome death always looms nearby. “After finishing all of this, I will serve You”—this hope of mine has proven vain.
Text 6
ebe śuno prabhu!  āmi gati-hīna,
bhakativinoda koya
tava kṛpā binā,  sakali nirāśā,
deho’ more padāśroya
ebe–now; śuna–please listen; prabhu!–O Lord!; āmi–I; gati–means of deliverance; hīna–devoid of; bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; kaya–says; tava– Your; kṛpā–mercy; vinā–without; sakali–everything; nirāśā–hopeless; deha’– please bestow; more–upon me; pada–of Your feet; āśraya–the shelter. [6]
Text 6 Now please listen, O Lord! I am utterly helpless. Bhakti Vinod prays, “Without Your mercy, everything is hopeless. Please give me the shelter of Your feet.”
Song 4
Text 1
āmāra jīvana,  sadā pāpe rata,
nāhiko punyera leṣa
parere udvega,  diyāchi je koto,
diyāchi jīvere kleśa
āmāra–my; jīvana–life; sadā–always; pāpe–in sin; rata–engaged; nāhika– there is not; puṇyera–of piety; leśa–a trace; parere–to others; udvega–agita¬tion; diyāchhi–I have given; ye–which; kata–so much; diyāchhi–I have given; jīvere–to other souls; kleśa–afflictions. [1] 
Text 1 My life is always engrossed in sin; there is not a trace of piety within it. I have caused others so much anxiety and trouble.
Text 2
nija sukha lāgi’,  pāpe nāhi ḍori,
doyā-hīna swārtha-paro
para-sukhe duḥkhī,  sadā mithya-bhāṣī,
para-duḥkha sukha-karo
nija–my own; sukha–happiness; lāgi’–for the sake; pāpe–in sin; nāhi–do not; ḍari–I fear; dayā–mercy; hīna–devoid of; svārtha–self-interest; para– intent upon; para–of others; sukhe–by the happiness; duḥkhī–distressed; sadā–always; mithyā–lies; bhāṣī–speaking; para–of others; duḥkha–distress; sukha–happiness; kara–producing. [2]
Text 2 I am never afraid to engage in sinful activities for the sake of my own happiness. I am merciless and selfish. I am distressed by the happiness of others, I am a perpetual liar, and the distress of others pleases me.
Text 3
aśeṣa kāmanā,  hṛdi mājhe mora,
krodhī, dambha-parāyana
mada-matta sadā,  viṣaye mohita,
hiṁsā-garva vibhūṣana
aśeṣa–unlimited; kāmanā–sinful desires; hṛdi–in the heart; mājhe–in the interior; mora–my; krodhī–angry; dambha–arrogance; parāyaṇa–filled with; mada–vanity; matta–intoxicated; sadā–always; viṣaye–by mundanity; mohita–infatuated; hiṁsā–malice, jealousy, violence; garva–pride, egotism; vibhūṣaṇa–ornaments. [3]
Text 3 There are unlimited sinful desires within the core of my heart. I am angry and arrogant, always maddened with vanity, infatuated with mundanity, and ornamented with malice and pride.
Text 4
nidrālasya hata,  sukārye virata,
akārye udyogī āmi
pratiṣṭha lāgiyā,  śāṭhya-ācaraṇa,
lobha-hata sadā kāmī
nidrā–by sleep; alasya–laziness; hata–subdued; sukārye–to good deeds; virata–averse; akārye–for sinful deeds; udyogī–eager; āmi–I; pratiṣṭhā (sammāna)–fame (exaltation); lāgiyā–for; śāṭhya (vaṣchanā)–deceitful; ācharaṇa–behaviour; lobha–by greed; hata–attacked, destroyed, conquered; sadā–always; kāmī–covetous. [4]
Text 4 I am subdued by laziness and sleep, averse to performing good deeds, and eager to perform sinful deeds. I engage in deceitful behaviour in pursuit of prestige. I am ruined by greed and constantly covetous.
Text 5
e heno durjana,  saj-jana-varjita,
aparādhi nirantara
śubha-kārya-śūnya,  sadānartha-manāḥ,
nānā duḥkhe jara jara
e–this; hena–such as; durjana–bad person; sajjana–by devotees; varjita– rejected; aparādhī–an offender; nirantara–incessantly; śubha–good; kārya– motive; śūnya–devoid of; sadā–always; anartha–evil; manā–minded; nānā– various; duḥkhe–by miseries; jara–worn; jara–and torn. [5]
Text 5 Such a sinner as I is shunned by devotees, and is a constant offender. I am devoid of virtuous motives, always intent upon evil, and racked by various miseries.
Text 6
bārdhakye ekhona,  upāya-vihīna,
tā’te dīna akiñcana
bhakativinoda,  prabhura caraṇe,
kore duḥkha nivedana
vārddhakye–in old age; ekhana–now; upāya–means; vihīna–devoid (of any other); tā’te–thereby; dīna–distressed; akiṣchana (saṅgati-śūnya)–poor (without means); bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; prabhura–of the Lord; charaṇe–at the feet; kare–makes; duḥkha–sorrow; nivedana–submission. [6]
Text 6 Now aged, I am devoid of any means of deliverance, and thus destitute and distressed. Bhakti Vinod submits this remorseful confession at the feet of the Lord.
Song 5
Text 1
(prabhu he!) śuno mor duḥkher kāhinī
viṣaya-halāhala,  sudhā-bhāne piyaluṅ,
āb avasāna dinamaṇi
prabhu–Lord; he!–oh!; śuna–please listen; mora–my; duḥkhera–of distress; kāhinī–tale; viṣaya–of mundanity; halāhala (garala, viṣa)–mortal poison (poisonous venom); sudhā–nectar; bhāṇe (bhrame)–as though enacting a drama (by mistake); piyalu̐ (pān karilāma)–I drank; āba (ekhana)–now; avasāna–the disappearance; dinamaṇi (sūrya)–jewel of the day (sun). [1]
Text 1 O Lord! Please listen to my tale of distress. Mistaking it for nectar, I drank the terrible poison of mundanity, and now the sun is setting (my life is coming to an end).
Text 2
khelā-rase śaiśava,  poḍhaite kaiśora,
gowāoluṅ, nā bhelo vivek
bhoga-baśe yauvane,  ghara pāti’ bosiluṅ,
suta-mita bāḍhalo anek
khelā–of play; rase–in the pleasure; śaiśava–childhood; paḍaite (pāṭha karite)–in studying; kaiśora–adolescence; go̐yāolu̐ (ativāhita karilāma)– I spent; nā–did not; bhela (ha-ila)–became; viveka–conscience; bhoga–of enjoyment; vaśe–under the control; yauvane–in my youth; ghara–a home; pāti–arrange; vasilu̐–I sat; suta–children; mita (mitra)–friends; bāḍala (vṛddhi prāpta ha-ila)–increased; aneka–many. [2]
Text 2 I spent my childhood immersed in the pleasures of play and my adolescence in study. My conscience never developed. Cap¬tivated by worldly enjoyment in my youth, I established myself within household life, and my children and friends multiplied. 

Text 3
vṛddha-kāla āolo,  saba sukha bhāgalo,
pīḍā-baśe hoinu kātar
sarvendriya durbala,  kṣīna kalevara,
bhogābhāve duḥkhita antar
vṛddha–old; kāla–age; āola (āsila)–came; saba–all; sukha–happiness; bhāgala (palāyana karila)–fled; pīḍā–of disease vaśe–under the control of; ha-inu–I became; kātara–distressed; sarvendriya–all of my senses; durbala–incapaci¬tated; kṣīṇa–emaciated; kalevara–body; bhoga–enjoyment; abhāve–for want of; duḥkhita–sorrowful; antara–interior. [3]
Text 3 Then old age came, and all happiness fled. Subjugated by disease, I became distressed. All of my senses became incapaci¬tated, and my body became emaciated. For want of enjoyment, my heart became sorrowful.
Text 4
jñāna-lava-hīna,  bhakti-rase vañchita,
āra mora ki habe upāy
patita-bandhu, tuhuṅ,  patitādhama hāma,
kṛpāya uṭhāo tava pāy
jṣāna–of knowledge; lava–a trace; hīna–devoid of; bhakti–of devotion; rase–in the nectar; vaṣchita–deprived of; āra–else; mora–my; ki–what?; habe–will be; upāya–means; patita–of the fallen; bandhu–friend; tuhu̐ (tumi)–You; patita–fallen; adhama–lowly; hāma (āmi)–I; kṛpāya–by Your mercy; uṭhāo–please pick up; tava–Your; pāya–to the feet. [4]
Text 4 Now I am devoid of even a trace of actual knowledge and deprived of the nectar of devotion. What will be my means of deliverance? You are the friend of the fallen, and I am the lowest of the fallen; please mercifully uplift me to Your feet.
Text 5
vicārite ābahi,  guna nāhi pāobi,
kṛpā koro, choḍato vicār
tava pada-paṅkaja-  sīdhu pibāoto,
bhakativinoda karo pār
vichārite–to judge; āobi (āsibe)–will come; guṇa–good qualities; nāhi–not; pāobi (pāibe)–will get; kṛpā–mercy; kara–please do; chhoḍata (chhāḍa)– abandoning; vichāra–judgment; tava–Your; pada–feet; paṅkaja–lotus; sīdhu (madhu)–nectar (flower nectar); pibāota (pāna karāiyā)–causing to drink; bhakati-vinode–of Bhakti Vinod; kara’–please do; pāra–deliverance. [5] 
Text 5 If You come to judge me, you will not find any good quali¬ties. So, mercifully forgo judgement and induce me to drink the nectar of Your lotus feet. Deliver this Bhakti Vinod.
Song 6
Text 1
(prabhu he!) tuwā pade e minati mor
tuwā pada-pallava,  tyajato maru-mana,
viṣama viṣaye bhelo bhor
prabhu–Lord; he!–oh; tuyā (tomāra)–Your; pade–at the feet; e–this; minati (anunaya)–prayer (entreaty); mora–my; tuyā–Your; pada–feet; pallava–tender new sprigs; tyajata (tyāga kariyā)–abandoning; maru-ma¬na (maru-bhūmira nyāya mana)–(my) desert-like heart; viṣama (ghora)– terrible; viṣaye–in mundanity; bhela (ha-ila)–became; bhora (magna)–deeply absorbed (submerged). [1] 
Text 1 O Lord! This is my prayer at Your feet. Abandoning Your tender feet, my desert-like heart has become deeply submerged in the terrors of mundanity.
Text 2
uṭhayite tākata,  puna nāhi milo-i,
anudina korohuṅ hutāś
dīna-jana-nātha,  tuhuṅ kahāyasi,
tumāri caraṇa mama āś
uṭhayite (uṭhite)–to get up; tākata (śakti, bala, sāmarthya, tāgad)–power, strength, ability, capacity; punaḥ–again; nāhi–not; mila-i (militechhe)– I am finding; anudina (sarvadā)–daily (always, constantly); karahu̐ (karitechhi)–I am doing; hutāśa–dismay; dīna–fallen; jana–souls; nātha– Lord; tuhu̐–to You; kahāyasi (kathita hao, balāiyā thāka)–are known (it is said); tohāri (tomāra-i)–of only You; charaṇa–feet; mama–my; āśa–hope. [2]
Text 2 I cannot find the strength to rise again, and thus I constantly lament. You are known as the Lord of the fallen; Your feet are my only hope. 

Text 3
aichana dīna-jana,  kohi nāhi milo-i,
tuhuṅ more koro parasād
tuwā jana-saṅge,  tuwā kathā-raṅge,
chāḍahuṅ sakala paramād
aichana (airūpa)–such (something of that kind); dīna–fallen; jana–soul; ka̐hi (kothāo, kona-sthāne)–anywhere, in any place; nāhi–not; mila-i–I find; tuhu̐–You; more–to me; kara–please do; parasāda (prasāda, anugraha, kṛpā)– grace, favour, mercy; tuyā–Your; jana–people; saṅge–in the company; tuyā– of You; kathā–of discussion; raṅge–in ecstasy; chhāḍahu̐–I abandon; sakala– all; paramāda–illusion. [3]
Text 3 Such a fallen soul as I cannot be found anywhere. Please bestow Your mercy upon me. Then in the company of Your devotees, in the ecstasy of discussion about You, I will leave behind all illusion.
Text 4
tuwā dhāma-māhe,  tuwā nāma gāoto,
gowāyabuṅ divā-niśi āś
tuwā pada-chāyā,  parama suśītala,
māge bhakativinoda dās
tuyā–Your; dhāma–abode; māhe (mājhe)–within; tuyā–Your; nāma–Name; gāota (gāhiyā)–singing; go̐yāyabu̐ (yāpana kariba)–I will pass; divā–the days; niśi–and nights; āśa–hope, desire; tuyā–Your; pada–of feet; chhāyā–the shade; parama–supremely; suśītala–cooling; māge–begs; bhakati-vinoda– Bhakti Vinod; dāsa–Your servant. [4] 
Text 4 I will spend my days and nights in Your abode sing¬ing Your Name. Your servant, Bhakti Vinod, prays for the supremely cooling shade of Your feet.
Song 7
Text 1
(prabhu he!)
emona durmati,  saṁsāra bhitore,
poḍiyā āchinu āmi
tava nija-jana,  kono mahājane,
pāṭhāiyā dile tumi
emana–such; durmati–evil-hearted; saṁsāra–material world; bhitare–within; paḍiyā–falling; āchhinu–am; āmi–I; tava–Your; nija-jana (pārṣada)–own person (eternal, personal associate); kona–who; mahājane (āchārya śrī-gurudeva)–great soul (exemplary teacher, spiritual master); pāṭhāiyā–sending; dile–gave; tumi–You. [1]
Text 1 I am a most sinful-hearted person and have fallen into this material world, but You have sent a great soul, Your own asso¬ciate (to rescue me).
Text 2
doyā kori’ more,  patita dekhiyā,
kohilo āmāre giyā
ohe dīna-jana,  śuno bhālo kathā,
ullasita ha’be hiyā
dayā–mercy; kari’–doing; more–to me; patita–fallen; dekhiyā–seeing; kahila–said; āmāre–to me; giyā–going; ohe–oh!; dīna–humble; jana–person; śuna–please listen; bhāla–good; kathā–word; ullasita–elated; habe–will be; hiyā–heart. [2]
Text 2 Seeing my fallen condition and being merciful to me, he came to me and said, “O humble soul, listen to this wonderful message and your heart will rejoice.
Text 3
tomāre tārite,  śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya,
navadwīpe avatār
tomā heno koto,  dīna hīna jane,
korilena bhava-pār
tomāre–to you; tārite–to deliver; śrī-kṛṣṇa-chaitanya–Śrīman Mahāprabhu; navadvīpe–in Nabadwīp; avatāra–descent; tomā–you; hena–similar; kata–so many; dīna–poor; hīna–lowly; jane–to persons; karilena–did; bhava–of the material existence; pāra–deliverance. [3]
Text 3 “‘Śrī Kṛṣṇa Chaitanya has descended in Nabadwīp to deliver you. He has safely conducted many humble and fallen souls like you across the ocean of material existence.
. 
Text 4
vedera pratijñā,  rākhibāra tare,
rukma-varna vipra-suta
mahāprabhu nāme,  nadīyā mātāya,
saṅge bhāi avadhūta
vedera–of the Vedas; pratijṣā–the prophecies; rākhibāra–to maintain; tare– for; rukma-varṇa (gaura-varṇa, puraṭa sundara dyuti)–golden-coloured (beautiful golden radiance); vipra–of a brāhmaṇ; suta–a son; mahāprabhu– ‘Mahāprabhu’; nāme–Named; nadīyā–Nadia, the whole world; mātāya– intoxicated; saṅge–in the company; bhāi–brother; avadhūta–Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu. [4] 
Text 4 “‘To fulfil the prophecies of the Vedas, He has appeared with a golden complexion as a brāhmaṇ’s son bearing the name ‘Mahāprabhu’ and driven all of Nadia mad with prema in the company of His brother Nityānanda.
Text 5
nanda-suta jini,  caitanya gosāi,
nija-nāma kori’ dān
tārilo jagat,  tumi-o jāiyā,
loho nija-paritrān
nanda–of Nanda Mahārāj; suta–the son (Kṛṣṇa); yini–who; chaitanya– Chaitanya; gosāṣi–great personage; nija–own; nāma–Name; kari’–doing; dāna–gift; tārila–delivered; jagat–the world; tumio–you also, too; yāiyā– going; laha–accept; nija–own; paritrāṇa–deliverance. [5] 
Text 5 “‘Śrī Chaitanya Gosāṣi, who is Nanda Suta Himself, has delivered the universe by distributing His Name. You too should go and accept your deliverance.’”
Text 6
se kathā śuniyā,  āsiyāchi, nātha!
tomāra caraṇa-tale
bhakativinoda,  kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā,
āpana-kāhinī bole
se–this; kathā–message; śuniyā–hearing; āsiyāchhi–I have come; nātha!–O Lord!; tomāra–Your; charaṇa–feet; tale–beneath; bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; kā̐diyā–crying; kā̐diyā–and crying; āpana–personal; kāhinī (kathā)– tale (narrative); bale–speaks. [6] 
Text 6 O Lord! Hearing this message, I have come before Your feet. Crying incessantly, Bhakti Vinod tells the story of his life.
Part 2 Dedication of the Self


Song 1
Text 1
nā koroluṅ karama,  geyāna nāhi bhelo,
nā sevilun caraṇa tohār
jaḍa-sukhe mātiyā,  āpanaku vañca-i,
pekhahuṅ caudiśa āndhiyār
nā–not; karalu̐ (karilāma)–I did; karama (karma)–pious deeds; geyāna (jṣāna)–knowledge; nāhi–not; bhela–happened; nā–not; sevilu̐ (sevilāma)– I served; charaṇa–feet; tohāra (tomāra)–Your; jaḍa–material; sukhe–by pleasures; mātiyā–being intoxicated; āpanaku (āpanake)–to myself; vaṣcha-i (vaṣchanā kariyā)–cheating; pekhahu̐ (dekhitechhi)–I see; chaudiśa (chāridik)– in the four directions; āndhiyāra (andhakāra)–blinding darkness. [1]
Text 1 I have never performed any good works. I have never acquired any knowledge. I have never served Your feet. Mad¬dened by mundane pleasures, cheating my own self, I see darkness in all directions.
Text 2
tuhuṅ nātha! karunā-nidān
tuwā pada-paṅkaje,  ātma samarpiluṅ,
more kṛpā korobi vidhān
tuhu̐–You; nātha!–Lord!; karuṇā–of mercy; nidāna (ākara)–ocean (source); tuyā–Your; pada–feet; paṅkaje–at the lotus; ātma–self; samarpilu̐ (samarpaṇa karilāma)–I fully offered; more–to me; kṛpā–mercy; karabi– please make; vidhāna (vyavasthā)–arrangements. [2]
Text 2 O Lord! You are the source of all mercy. I have fully sur¬rendered myself at Your lotus feet; please make arrangements to bestow Your mercy upon me.
Text 3
pratijñā tohāra oi,  jo hi śaraṇāgata,
nāhi so jānabo paramād
so hāma duṣkṛti,  gati nā hera-i āna,
āb māgoṅ tuwā parasād
pratijṣā–promise; tohāra (tomāra)–Your; ai–that; yohi–who; śaraṇāgata– a surrendered soul; nāhi–not; so (sei)–he; jānaba–will know; paramāda– illusion; so–he; hāma–I; duṣkṛti–misbehaviour; gati–shelter; nā–not; hera-i– I see; āna–another; āb–now; māgo̐ (māgitechhi)–I beg; tuyā–Your; parasāda (prasāda)–mercy. [3]
Text 3 Your promise is that one who is surrendered will never know illusion. I am most sinful and see no other shelter but You; I now pray for Your mercy.
Text 4
āna mano-ratha,  niḥśeṣa choḍato,
kab hāma haubuṅ tohārā
nitya-sevya tuhuṅ,  nitya-sevaka mui,
bhakativinoda bhāva sārā
āna (anya)–other; manoratha (abhilāṣa)–wishes (desires); niḥśeṣa (sampūrṇa-rūpe)–completely (fully); chhoḍata–abandoning; kab–when?; hām–I; ha-ubhu̐ (ha-iba)–will be; tohārā–Your; nitya–eternally; sevya–who is to be served; tuhu̐–You; nitya–eternal; sevaka–servant; muṣi–I; bhakati-vinoda–of Bhakti Vinod; bhāva–of the heart; sārā (sāra, athavā samasta)–es¬sence (substance, or everything). [4] 
Text 4 When will I completely abandon all other desires and become Yours? You are my eternal Lord, and I am Your eternal servant. This is the essence of Bhakti Vinod’s heart. 

Song 2
Text 1
(prāneśwar!) kohobuṅ ki sarama ki bāt
aichana pāp nāhi,  jo hāma nā koraluṅ,
sahasra sahasra beri nāth
prāṇa–of my heart; īśvara!–O Lord!; kahabu̐–I will tell; ki–what?; sarama– shame; ki–what?; bāta–explanation; aichhana (airūpa)–such (that kind); pāpa–sin; nāhi–not; yo–which; hām–I; nā–not; karalu̐–did; sahasra–thou¬sands; sahasra–and thousands; beri (bāra)–of times; nātha–O Lord! [1] 
Text 1 O Lord of my heart! How can I explain my shame? O Lord! There is no sin I have not committed thousands and thousands of times.
Text 2
sohi karama-phala,  bhave moke peśa-i,
dokha deobo āb kāhi
takhonaka parinām,  kachu nā bicāraluṅ,
āb pachu taraite cāhi
sohi (sei)–those; karama–actions; phala–results; bhave (saṁsāre)–in the material world; moke (āmāke)–to me; peśa-i (peṣaṇa kare)–crush; dokh (doṣa)–fault; deoba (diba)–I will give; āba–now; kāhi (kāke)–to whom? takhanaka (takhana)–then; pariṇāma–the results; kachhu (kichhu)–some; nā–not; vichāralu̐–I considered; āb–now; pachhu (pichhe)–afterwards; tara-ite (uttīrṇa ha-ite)–to be delivered; chāhi–I want. [2] 
Text 2 The consequences of those sinful actions crash down upon me in this material world. Who shall I now blame? Previously I did not consider the consequences, yet now I want to be exonerated.
Text 3
dokha vicāra-i,  tuṅhu danḍa deobi,
hāma bhoga korabuṅ saṁsār
karato gatāgati,  bhakata-jana-saṅge,
mati rohu caraṇe tohār
dokha–faults; vichāra-i (vichāra kariyā)–judging; tuhu̐–You; daṇḍa–punish¬ment; deobi (dibe)–will give; hāma–I; bhoga–experience; karabu̐–will do; saṁsāra–the material world; karata (karite karite)–while doing; gatāgati– coming and going; bhakata–of devotees; jana–persons; saṣe–in the associa¬tion; mati–heart; rahu̐ (thākuka)–may remain; charaṇe–at the feet; tohāra– Your. [3]
Text 3 Judging my sins, You will punish me, and I will endure the sufferings of this material world. Yet as I come and go (revolve within the cycle of perpetual birth and death), please let me remain in the association of Your devotees, my heart fixed upon Your feet.

Text 4
āpana caturpana,  tuwā pade soṅpaluṅ,
hṛdoya-garava dūre gelo
dīna-doyā-moya,  tuwā kṛpā niramala,
bhakativinoda āśā bhelo
āpana–my own; chaturapaṇa (buddhimattā)–intelligence; tuyā–Your; pade–at the feet; so̐palu̐–I place in the care of; hṛdaya–of the heart; garava (garva)–pride; dūre–far away; gelā–went; dīna–to the fallen; dayā–mercy; maya–full of; tuyā–Your; kṛpā–mercy; niramala (nirmala)–spotless, pure; bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; āśā–desire; bhelā (ha-ila)–became. [4]
Text 4 I offer my intelligence at Your feet; the pride in my heart has gone away. You are merciful to the fallen, and Your pure mercy has become the desire of Bhakti Vinod.
Song 3
Text 1
mānasa, deho, geho, jo kichu mor
arpiluṅ tuwā pade, nanda-kiśor!
mānasa (mana)–mind; deha–body; geha (gṛha)–home; yo–which; kichhu– something; mora–mine; arpilu̐ (arpaṇa karilāma)–I offered; tuyā (tomāra)– Your; pade–at the feet; nanda–of Nanda Mahārāj; kiśora–adolescent son. [1]
Text 1 I have offered my mind, my body, my household, and whatever else may be mine at Your feet, O Nanda Kiśor!
Text 2
sampade vipade, jīvane-maraṇe
dāy mama gelā, tuwā o-pada varaṇe
sampade–in happiness, good fortune, affluence, health; vipade–in distress, danger, poverty, sickness, misfortune; jīvane–in life; maraṇe–in death; dāya (dāyitva)–responsibility, anxiety; mama–my; gelā–went; tuyā–Your; o–those; pada–feet; varaṇe–by accepting, choosing. [2]
Text 2 In good times and in bad, in life and in death, all responsi¬bility has gone away by embracing Your feet.
Text 3
mārobi rākhobi jo icchā tohāra
nitya-dāsa prati tuwā adhikāra
mārabi (māribe)–You may kill; rākhabi–You may protect; yo (ye)–which; ichchha–desire; tohārā–Your; nitya–eternal; dāse–to Your servant; prati– towards; tuyā–Your; adhikāra–authority. [3]
Text 3 You may kill me or protect me as You wish. You have full authority over Your eternal servant.
Text 4
janmāobi moe icchā jadi tor
bhakta-gṛhe jani janma hau mor
janmāobi–You may cause to take birth; moye–to me; ichchhā–desire; yadi– if; tora–Your; bhakta–(of a) devotee; gṛhe–in the home; jani (yena)–so that; janma–birth; ha-u (ha-uka)–let be; mora–my. [4]
Text 4 If it is Your desire that I take birth again, let me do so in the home of Your devotee.
Text 5
kīṭa-janma hau jathā tuwā dās
bahir-mukha brahmā-janme nāhi āś
kīṭa–a worm, insect; janma–birth; ha-u–may be; yathā–as long as; tuyā– Your; dāsa–servant; bahir–outward; mukha–facing; brahma–as Brahmā, the universal creator; janme–such a birth; nāhi–not; āśa–desire. [5]
Text 5 Let me be born again even as a worm, so long as I can remain Your servant. I have no desire to be born even as Brahmā, if I will be averse to You.
Text 6
bhukti-mukti-spṛhā vihīna je bhakta
labhaite tāṅko saṅga anurakta
bhukti–mundane enjoyment, exploitation; mukti–liberation, renunciation; spṛhā–desire; vihīna–without; ye–who; bhakta–devotees; labha-ite (lābha karite)–to obtain; tā̐’ka (tā̐dera)–their; saṅga–association; anurakta (anurāga)–attachment (loving attachment). [6]
Text 6 I am always eager to attain the association of devotees who are completely devoid of all desire for mundane enjoyment and liberation.

Text 7
janaka, jananī, dayita, tanay
prabhu, guru, pati—tuhū sarva-moy
janaka–father; jananī–mother; dayita (priya)–beloved; tanaya–son; prabhu–Lord; guru–spiritual master; pati–husband; tuhu̐–You; sarva–all; maya– consist of. [7]
Text 7 Father, mother, lover, son, Lord, Guru, husband—You are everywhere.
Text 8
bhakativinoda kohe, śuno kāna!
rādhā-nātha! tuhuṅ hāmāra parāna
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; kahe–says; śuna–please listen; kāna! (kānāi!)–O Kṛṣṇa; rādhānātha!–O Lord of Rādhā; tuhu̐–You; hāmāra–my; parāṇa–life, soul (the sole focus of my loving attachment). [8] 
Text 8 Bhakti Vinod says, “Please listen, O Kān! O Rādhānāth! You are my life and soul.”
Song 4
Text 1
`ahaṁ mama’-śabda-arthe jāhā kichu hoy
arpiluṅ tomāra pade, ohe doyā-moy!
‘aham’–‘I’; ‘mama’–‘mine’; śabda–of the words; arthe–by the meaning; yāhā– which; kichhu–anything; haya–happens; arpilu̐–I offered; tomāra–Your; pade–at the feet; ohe–oh!; dayā–mercy; maya–made of. [1]
Text 1 O merciful Lord! I have surrendered all that is meant by the words ‘I’ and ‘mine’ at Your feet.
Text 2
`āmāra’ āmi to’ nātha! nā rohinu ār
ekhona hoinu āmi kevala tomār
‘āmāra’–‘my’; āmi–I; ta’–certainly; nātha!–O Lord!; nā–does not; rahinu– I remained; āra–more; ekhana–now; ha-inu–became; āmi–I; kevala–only; tomāra–Yours. [2]
Text 2 O Lord! I no longer remain ‘mine’. I have now become Yours exclusively.
Text 3
`āmi’ śabde dehī jīva ahaṁtā chāḍilo
twadīyābhimāna āji hṛdoye paśilo
‘āmi’–‘I’; śabde–by the word; dehī–animator of the material body; jīva–the life, the soul; ahaṁtā–the conception of ‘I’, false egotism; chhāḍila–aban¬doned; tvadīya–Your own; abhimāna–ego; āji–today; hṛdaye–in the heart; paśila (praveśa karila)–entered. [3]
Text 3 I now understand that the word ‘I’ means the soul who ani¬mates the material body and have thus abandoned all false egotism. Today the ego of being ‘Your own’ has entered my heart.
Text 4
āmār sarvasva—deho, geho anucar
bhāi, bandhu, dārā, suta, dravya, dwāra, ghar
āmāra–my; sarvasva–the whole of my wealth; deha–body; geha–home; anuchara–servants; bhāi–brothers; bandhu–friends and relatives; dārā– wife; suta–children; dravya–possessions; dvāra–door; ghara–house.[4]
Text 5
se saba hoilo tava, āmi hoinu dās
tomāra gṛhete ebe āmi kori bās
se– them; saba–all; ha-ila–became; tava–Yours; āmi–I; ha-inu–became; dāsa–servant; tomāra–Your; gṛhete–in Your house; ebe–now; āmi–I; kari–do; vāsa–residence. [5] 
Text 6
tumi gṛha-swāmī, āmi sevaka tomār
tomāra sukhete ceṣṭā ekhona āmār
tumi–You; gṛha–of the house; svāmī–the master; āmi–I; sevaka–servant; tomāra–Your; tomāra–Your; sukhete–for Your pleasure; cheṣṭā–endeavours; ekhana–now; āmāra–my. [6]
Text 6 You are the master of the house, and I am Your servant. All my endeavours are now for Your satisfaction.
Text 7
sthūla-liṅga-dehe mora sukṛta duṣkṛta
āra mora nahe, prabhu! āmi to’ niṣkṛta
sthūla–gross; liṅga–subtle; dehe–with the bodies; mora–my; sukṛta–good deeds; duṣkṛta–bad deeds; āra–any more; mora–mine; nahe–not; prabhu!–O Lord!; āmi–I; ta’–certainly; niṣkṛta–free, liberated. [7]
Text 7 Whatever good or bad deeds are performed by my gross and subtle bodies are no longer mine, O Lord! I am free.
Text 8
tomāra icchāya mora icchā miśāilo
bhakativinoda āja āpane bhulilo
tomāra–Your; ichchhāya–with desire; mora–my; ichchhā–desire; miśāila– mixed; bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; āja–today; āpane–himself; bhulila– forgot. [8] 
Text 8 My desires have merged with Your desires. Today, Bhakti Vinod has forgotten himself.
Song 5
Text 1
`āmāra’ bolite prabhu! āre kichu nāi
tumi-i āmāra mātra pitā-bandhu-bhāi
‘āmāra’–‘mine’; balite–to consider; prabhu!–O Lord!; āra–another; kichhu– something; nāi–is not; tumi-i–You alone; āmāra–my; mātra–only; pitā– father; bandhu–friend; bhāi–brother. [1]
Text 1 O Lord! Nothing else is to be considered ‘mine’. You alone are my father, my friend, and my brother.
Text 2
bandhu, dārā, suta, sutā—tava dāsī dās
sei to’ sambandhe sabe āmāra prayās
bandhu–friends; dārā–wife; suta–sons; sutā–daughters; tava–Your; dāsī– maidservants; dāsa–servants; sei–that; ta’–certainly; sambandhe–in relation¬ship; sabe–with all; āmāra–my; prayāsa–endeavours. [2]
Text 2 My friends, wife, sons, and daughters are all Your serv¬ants and maidservants. All my endeavours are based on that relationship.
Text 3
dhana, jana, gṛha, dāra `tomāra’ boliyā
rakhā kori āmi mātro sevaka hoiyā
dhana–wealth; jana–people; gṛha–household; dvāra–gateway; tomāra–Yours; baliyā–considering; rakṣā–protection; kari–do; āmi–I; matra–only; sevaka– servant; ha-iyā–being. [3]
Text 3 Considering my wealth, relatives, and household to be ‘Yours’, only as Your servant do I maintain them.
Text 4
tomāra kāryera tore uparjibo dhan
tomāra saṁsāre-vyaya koribo vahan
tomāra–Your; kāryera–of the duty; tare–for; upārjiba–I will earn; dhana– money; tomāra–Your; saṁsāra–of the household; vyaya–expenses; kariba– I will do; vahana–bearing. [4]
Text 4 In order to maintain what is Yours, I will earn money and bear the expenses of Your household.
Text 5
bhālo-manda nāhi jāni sevā mātro kori
tomāra saṁsāre āmi viṣaya-praharī
bhāla–good; manda–bad; nāhi–not; jāni–I know; sevā–service; mātra–only; kari–I do; tomāra–Your; saṁsāre–in the household; āmi–I; viṣaya–property; praharī–watchman. [5]
Text 5 I do not know what is good or what is bad; I only serve. I am simply a guardian of the property within Your household.
Text 6
tomāra icchāya mora indriya-cālanā
śravana, darśana, ghrāna, bhojana-vāsanā
tomāra–Your; ichchhāya–by the desire; mora–my; indriya–of the senses; chālanā–direction; śravaṇa–hearing; darśana–seeing; ghrāṇa–smelling; bhojana–eating; vāsanā–desires. [6]
Text 6 I direct my senses—my desires for hearing, seeing, smell¬ing, tasting, and so forth—in accordance with Your will.
Text 7
nija-sukha lāgi’ kichu nāhi kori ār
bhakativinoda bole, tava sukha-sār
nija–own; sukha–happiness; lāgi’–for (the sake of); kichhu–something; nāhi–not; kari–I do; āra–more; bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; bale–declares; tava–Your; sukha–happiness; sāra–the essence. [7]
Text 7 I no longer endeavour for my own happiness. Bhakti Vinod understands, “Your satisfaction is the essence.”
Song 6
Text 1
bastutaḥ sakali tava, jīva keho noy
`aham’-`mama’-bhrame bhromi’ bhoge śoka-bhoy
vastutaḥ–actually; sakali–everything; tava–Yours; jīva–the individual soul; keha–someone; naya–is not; ‘aham’–‘I’; ‘mama’–‘mine’; bhrame–mistaken by; bhrami’–wandering; bhoge–experiences; śoka–lamentation; bhaya–fear. [1]
Text 1 In reality, everything is Yours; nothing belongs to the soul. However, wandering (throughout material existence), bewildered by misconceptions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’, the soul laments and fears.
Text 2
ahaṁ-mama-abhimāna ei-mātro dhan
baddha-jīva nija boli’ jāne mane man
‘aham’–‘I’; ‘mama’–‘mine’; abhimāna–misconceptions; ei–these; mātra– only; dhana–wealth; baddha–bound; jīva–individual souls; nija–own; bali’– considering; jāne–knows; mane–in their mind; mana–mind. [2]
Text 2 Deep within, the conditioned soul considers his miscon¬ceptions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ to be his only wealth.
.
Text 3
sei abhimāne āmi saṁsāre poḍiyā
hābuḍubu khāi bhava-sindhu sāṅtāriyā
sei–this; abhimāne–by the conception; āmi–I; saṁsāre–in the material world; paḍiyā–falling; hābuḍubu–bobbing up and down; khāi–I experience; bhava–of mundanity, repeated birth and death; sindhu–the ocean; sā̐tariyā– swimming. [3]
Text 3 Having fallen into this world due to such misconception, I flounder as I try to swim within this ocean of material existence.
Text 4
tomāra abhoya-pade loiyā śaraṇ
āji āmi korilāma ātma-nivedan
tomāra–Your; abhaya–fearless; pade–at the feet; laiyā–taking; śaraṇa–shelter; āji–today; āmi–I; karilāma–did; ātma–self; nivedana–submission. [4]
Text 4 Taking shelter at Your feet, which are the abode of fearless¬ness, I have submitted myself unto You today.
Text 5
`ahaṁ’-`mama’-abhimāna chāḍilo āmāy
ār jeno mama hṛde stāna nāhi pāy
‘aham’–‘I’; ‘mama’–‘mine’; abhimāna–conceptions; chhāḍila–aban¬doned; āmāya–to me; āra–again; yena–so that; mama–my; hṛde–in the heart; sthāna–place; nāhi–not; pāya–obtain.[5]
Text 5 Those misconceptions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ have now left me. O Lord! So that they will never attain a place within my heart again.
Text 6
ei mātro bala prabhu! dibe he āmāre
ahaṁtā-mamatā dūre pāri rākhibāre
ei–this; mātra–only; bala (śakti)– strength (ability); prabhu!–O Lord!; dibe–will give; he–oh; āmāre–to me; ahaṁtā–false egotism, ‘I’; mamatā–possessiveness, ‘mine’; dūre–far away; pāri–I am able; rākhibāre–to keep. [6]
Text 6 Please give me just this one ability: that I may be able to keep all false egotism and possessiveness far away.
Text 7
ātma-nivedana-bhāva hṛde dṛḍha roy
hasti-snāna sama jeno khanika nā hoy
ātma–self; nivedana–submission; bhāva–mood; hṛde–in the heart; dṛḍha– firm; raya–stays; hasti–elephant; snāna–bath; sama–same; yena–like; kṣaṇika (sāmayika mātra)–momentarily (only temporarily); nā–not; haya–be. [7] 
Text 7 May the mood of self-submission remain steadfast within my heart. May it not remain only momentarily, like the clean¬liness of an elephant.
Text 8
bhakativinoda prabhu nityānanda pāy
māge parasāda, jāhe abhimāna jāy
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; prabhu–Lord; nityānanda–Nityānanda; pāya–feet; māge–begs; parasāda–mercy; yāhe–by which; abhimāna–miscon¬ceptions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’; yāya–go. [8] 
Text 8 At Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu’s feet, Bhakti Vinod prays for the mercy by which the misconceptions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ are dispelled forever.
Song 7
Text 1
nivedana kori prabhu! tomāra caraṇe
patita adhama āmi, jāne tri-bhuvane
nivedana–submission; kari–I do; prabhu!–O Lord!; tomāra–Your; charaṇe– at the feet; patita–fallen; adhama–low; āmi–I; jāne–know; tribhuvane–in the three worlds. [1] 

Text 1 O Lord! I submit myself at Your feet. It is known through¬out the three worlds that I am fallen and lowly.
Text 2
āmā-sama pāpī nāhi jagat-bhitore
mama sama aparādhī nāhiko saṁsāre
āmā–like me; sama–equal; pāpī–sinner; nāhi–is not; jagat–the world; bhitare–within; mama–my; sama–equal; aparādhī–offender; nāhika–is not; saṁsāre–in the world. [2]
Text 2 There is no sinner within this world so sinful as I. There is no offender within this material world so offensive as I.
Text 3
sei saba pāpa āra aparādha, āmi
parihāre pāi lajjā, saba jāno’ tumi
sei–these; saba–all; pāpa–sins; āra–and; aparādha–offences; āmi–I; parihāre (kṣamāpane)–in giving up (in begging forgiveness); pāi–I feel; lajjā– shame; saba–all; jāna–know; tumi–You. [3]
Text 3 I feel ashamed to beg for forgiveness for all my sins and offences. You know all of this.
Text 4
tumi binā kā’ra āmi loibo śaraṇ?
tumi sarveśvareśvara, brajendra-nandan!
tumi–You; vinā–without; kā’ra–of whom?; āmi–I; la-iba–will take; śaraṇa– shelter; tumi–You; sarva–of all; īśvara–Lords; īśvara–the Lord; vraja–of Vṛndāvan; indra–of the king; nandana–darling son, Kṛṣṇa. [4]
Text 4 Yet of whom shall I take shelter other than You? You are the Lord of all Lords, Vrajendra Nandan.
Text 5
jagat tomāra nātha! tumi sarva-moy
tomā prati aparādha tumi koro’ kṣoy
jagata–universe; tomāra–Your; nātha!–O Lord!; tumi–You; sarva–every¬thing; maya–consisting of; tomā–of You; prati–towards; aparādha–offences; tumi–You; kara–do; kṣaya–destroy. [5]
Text 5 The world is Yours, O Lord! You are present everywhere, and You destroy all offences committed against You.
Text 6
tumi to’ skhalita-pada janera āśroy
tumi binā āra kibā āche, doyā-moy!
tumi–You; ta’–certainly; skhalita–fallen; pada–feet; janera–of the people; āśraya–shelter; tumi–You; vinā–without; āra–else; kibā–what; āchhe–there is; dayā–mercy; maya–full of. [6] 
Text 6 You alone are the shelter of those who have fallen. What else is there besides You, O merciful Lord?
Text 7
sei-rūpa tava aparādhī jana jata
tomāra śaraṇāgata hoibe satata
sei–that; rūpa–form; tava–Your; aparādhī–offensive; jana–persons; yata–all (whom); tomāra–Your; śaraṇāgata–coming to the shelter; ha-ibe–will be; satata–always. [7]
Text 7 In this way, everyone who has been offensive towards You will eventually come to Your shelter.
Text 8
bhakativinoda ebe loiyā śaraṇ
tuwā pade kore āj ātma-samarpan
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; ebe–now; la-iyā–taking; śaraṇa–shelter; tuyā–Your; pade–at the feet; kare–does; āja–today; ātma–self; samarpaṇa– full offering. [8]
Text 8 Now taking shelter, Bhakti Vinod today fully offers himself at Your feet.
Song 8
Text 1
ātma-nivedana,  tuwā pade kori’,
hoinu parama sukhī
duḥkha dūre gelo,  cintā nā rohilo,
caudike ānanda dekhi
ātma–self; nivedana–submission; tuyā–Your; pade–at the feet; kari’–doing; ha-inu–I became; parama–supremely; sukhī–happy; duḥkha–distress; dūre– far away; gela–went; chintā–thought, anxiety; nā–did not; rahila–remained; chaudike–in the four directions; ānanda–ecstasy; dekhi–I see. [1] 
Text 1 By surrendering myself at Your feet, I have become supremely happy. All my distress has gone away, I have no more anxiety, and I see ecstasy in all directions.
Text 2
aśoka-abhoya,  amṛta-ādhāra,
tomāra caraṇa-dwaya
tāhāte ekhona,  viśrāma labhiyā
chāḍinu bhavera bhoya
aśoka–of sorrowlessness; abhaya–of fearlessness; amṛta–of immortality; ādhāra–reservoir; tomāra–Your; charaṇa–feet; dvaya–two; tāhāte–in them; ekhana–now; viśrāma–rest; labhiyā–obtaining; chhāḍinu–I abandoned; bhavera–of material existence, cyclic birth and death; bhaya–fear. [2]
Text 2 Your feet are the abode of sorrowlessness, fearlessness, and immortality. Receiving shelter beneath them, I have abandoned all fear of material existence.
Text 3
tomāra saṁsāre,  koribo sevana,
nāhibo phalera bhāgī
tava sukha jāhe,  koribo jatana,
ho’ye pade anurāgī
tomāra–Your; saṁsāre–in the household; kariba–I will do; sevana–service; nahiba–I will not become; phalera–of the fruits; bhāgī–shareholder; tava– Your; sukha–happiness; yāhe–by which; kariba–I will do; yatana–careful en¬deavour; ha’ye–being; pade–to Your feet; anurāgī–deeply, lovingly attached. [3] 
Text 3 I will render service in Your household and will not be¬come an enjoyer of the results. Lovingly attached to Your feet, I will carefully endeavour for whatever pleases You.
Text 4
tomāra sevāya,  duḥkha hoya jato,
se-o to’ parama sukha
sevā-sukha-duḥkha,  parama sampada,
nāśaye avidyā-duḥkha
tomāra–Your; sevāya–in service; duḥkha–distress; haya–happens; yata–all; se–that; o–also; ta’–certainly; parama–supreme; sukha–happiness; sevā– service; sukha–happiness; duḥkha–and distress; parama–supreme; sampada– fortune; nāśaye–destroy; avidyā–of ignorance; duḥkha–distress. [4] 
Text 4 All the distress I encounter in Your service is also my great¬est happiness. Both the distress and the happiness that come from engagement in Your service are my greatest fortune; they both destroy the distress of ignorance.
Text 5
pūrva itihāsa,  bhulinu sakala,
sevā-sukha pe’ye mane
āmi to’ tomāra,  tumi to’ āmāra,
ki kāja apara dhane
pūrva–previous; itihāsa–history; bhulinu–I forgot; sakala–all; sevā–service; sukha–happiness; peye–obtaining; mane–in the heart; āmi–I; ta’–certainly; tomāra–Yours; tumi–You; ta’–certainly; āmāra–mine; ki–what; kāja–neces¬sity; apara–any other; dhane–for wealth. [5] 
Text 5 Feeling the happiness of Your service in my heart, I have completely forgotten all past history. I am Yours, and You are mine. What need is there for any other wealth?
Text 6
bhakativinoda,  ānande ḍubiyā,
tomāra sevāra tare
saba ceṣṭā kore,  tava icchā-mato,
thākiyā tomāra ghare
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; ānande–in ecstasy; ḍubiyā–plunging; tomāra– Your; sevāra–of service; tare–on account of; saba–all; cheṣṭā–endeavours; kare–does; tava–Your; ichchhā–desire; mata–according to; thākiyā–staying; tomāra–Your; ghare–in the house. [6] 
Text 6 Diving in the ecstasy of Your service, Bhakti Vinod performs all his endeavours in accordance with Your will, residing within Your home.
Part 3 Acceptance of the Lord as Sole Maintainer


Song 1
Text 1
ki jāni ki bale,  tomāra dhāmete,
hoinu śaraṇāgata
tumi doyā-moy,  patita-pāvana,
patita-tāraṇe rata
ki–what?; jāni–I know; ki–what; bale–by force; tomāra–Your; dhāmete–in the abode; ha-inu–I became; śaraṇāgata–surrendered; tumi–You; dayā–mercy; maya–full of; patita–fallen; pāvana–saviour; patita–fallen; tāraṇe–in delivering; rata–ever engaged. [1]
Text 1 I do not know by what force I have taken shelter within Your abode. You are the merciful saviour of the fallen, who is ever engaged in delivering them.
Text 2
bharasā āmāra,  ei mātra nātha!
tumi to’ karunā-moy
tava doyā-pātra,  nāhi mora sama,
avaśya ghucābe bhoy
bharasā–hope; āmāra–my; ei–this; mātra–only; nātha!–O Lord!; tumi– You; ta’–certainly; karuṇā–mercy; maya–full of; tava–Your; dayā–mercy; pātra–recipient; nāhi–there is not; mora–my; sama–equal; avaśya–certainly; ghuchābe–will dispel; bhaya–fear. [2] 
Text 2 O Lord! You are merciful. This is my sole hope. There is no candidate for Your mercy like me; certainly You will dispel all my fear.
Text 3
āmāre tārite,  kāhāro śakati,
avanī-bhitore nāhi
doyāla ṭhākura!  ghoṣanā tomāra,
adhama pāmare trāhi
āmāre–to me; tārite–to deliver; kāhāro–someone; śakati–power; avanī– Earth; bhitare–upon; nāhi–there is not; dayāla–merciful; ṭhākura–Lord; ghoṣaṇā–declaration; tomāra–Your; adhama–low; pāmare–to the sinners; trāhi (trāṇa kara)–You deliver. [3]
Text 3 There is no one on Earth who has the power to deliver me. O merciful Lord! It is Your declaration that You deliver the lowest, most sinful persons.
Text 4
sakala chāḍiyā,  āsiyāchi āmi,
tomāra caraṇe nātha!
āmi nitya-dāsa,  tumi pālayitā,
tumi goptā, jagannātha!
sakala–everything; chhāḍiyā–abandoning; asiyāchhi–have come; āmi–I; tomāra–Your; charaṇe–at the feet; nātha!–O Lord!; āmi–I; nitya–eternal; dāsa–servant; tumi–You; pālayitā–maintainer; tumi–You; goptā (pālana-kartā)–protector; jagannātha!–O Lord of the universe! [4]
Text 4 Abandoning everything, I have come to Your feet, O Lord! I am Your eternal servant, and You are my maintainer and protector, O Lord of the universe!
Text 5
tomāra sakala,  āmi mātra dāsa,
āmāra tāribe tumi
tomāra caraṇa,  korinu varaṇa,
āmāra nāhi to’ āmi
tomāra–Yours; sakala–everything; āmi–I; mātra–only; dāsa–a servant; āmāre–to me; tāribe–will deliver; tumi–You; tomāra–Your; charaṇa–feet; karinu–I did; varaṇa (avalambana-rūpe grahaṇa)–embrace (accept as my support); āmāra–mine; nāhi–not; ta’–certainly; āmi–I. [5] 
Text 5 Everything is Yours. I am only a servant. Certainly You will deliver me. I have embraced Your feet and no longer belong to myself.
Text 6
bhakativinoda,  kāṅdiyā śaraṇa,
lo’yeche tomāra pāy
kṣami’ aparādha,  nāme ruci diyā,
pālana korohe tāy
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; kā̐diyā–crying; śaraṇa–shelter; la’yechhe–has taken; tomāra–Your; pāya–feet; kṣami’–forgiving; aparādha–offences; nāme– for Your Name; ruchi (anurāga)–taste (deep loving attachment); diyā–giving; pālana–protection; karahe–please do; tāya–him. [6] 
Text 6 Crying, Bhakti Vinod has taken shelter at Your feet. Forgiv¬ing his offences and granting him taste for Your Name, please maintain him.
Song 2
Text 1
dārā-putra-nija-deho-kuṭumba-pālane
sarvadā vyākula āmi chinu mane mane
dārā–wife; putra–children; nija–own; deha–body; kuṭumba–relatives; pālane–in the maintenance of; sarvadā–always; vyākula–anxious; āmi–I; chhinu–was; mane–in mind; mane–in mind. [1]
Text 1 Deep within, I was always anxious about the maintenance of my wife, children, body, and relatives.
Text 2
kemone arjibo artha, yaśa kise pābo
kanyā-putra-vivāha kemone sampādibo
kemane–how?; arjibaḥ–I will earn; artha–money; yaśa–fame; kise–by what means?; pāba–I will attain; kanyā–of daughters; putra–of sons; vivāha– marriage; kemane–how?; sampādiba–I will arrange. [2]
Text 2 “How shall I earn money? How shall I attain fame? How will I arrange the marriages of my sons and daughters?”
Text 3
ebe ātma-samarpane cintā nāhi ār
tumi nirvāhibe prabhu, saṁsāra tomār
ebe–now; ātma–myself; samarpaṇe–by fully offering; chintā–anxiety; nāhi–not; āra–any more; tumi–You; nirvāhibe–will maintain; prabho!–O Lord!; saṁsāra–household; tomāra–Yours. [3] 
Text 3 Now that I have fully offered myself, I have no more anxiety. You will maintain Your household, O Lord!
Text 4
tumi to’ pālibe more nija-dāsa jāni’
tomāra sevāya prabhu boḍo sukha māni
tumi–You; ta’–certainly; pālibe–will protect; more–me; nija–Your own; dāsa–servant; jāni’–knowing; tomāra–Your; sevāya–in the service; prabhu!– O Lord!; baḍa–great; sukha–happiness; māni–I find. [4]
Text 4 You will certainly maintain me, knowing me to be Your servant. O Lord! In Your service I feel the greatest joy.
Text 5
tomāra icchaya prabhu sab kārya hoy
jīva bole,—`kori āmi’, se to’ satya noy
tomāra–Your; ichchhāya–by the desire; prabhu–O Lord; saba–all; kārya– activity; haya–happens; jīva–the conditioned souls; bale–consider; kari–do; āmi–I; se–that; ta’–certainly; satya–truth; naya–is not. [5]
Text 5 All activity happens according to Your will, O Lord, yet souls think, “I do”. This is not at all true.
Text 6
jīva ki korite pare, tumi nā korile?
āśā-mātra jīva kore, tava icchā-phale
jīva–the soul; ki–what?; karite–to act; pāre–can; tumi–You; na–do not; karile–if act; āśā–desire; mātra–only; jīva–souls; kare–do; tava–Your; ichchhā–will; phale–manifests. [6]
Text 6 What are the souls able to do if You do not act? The souls can only desire. It is Your will alone that comes to pass.
Text 7
niścinta hoiyā āmi sevibo tomāy
gṛhe bhālo-manda ho’le nāhi mora dāy
niśchinta–devoid of anxiety; ha-iyā–being; āmi–I; seviba–will serve; tomāya–unto You; gṛhe–in the house; bhāla–good; manda–bad; ha’le–when happens; nāhi–not be; mora–my; dāya–responsibility. [7]
Text 7 Free from all anxiety, I will serve You. Whatever hap¬pens in Your household, be it good or bad, will not be my responsibility.
Text 8
bhakativinoda nija-swātantrya tyajiyā
tomāra caraṇa seve’ akiñcana hoiyā
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; nija–own; svātantrya–independence; tyajiyā–abandoning; tomāra–Your; charaṇa–feet; seve’–serves; akiṣchana– detached; ha-iyā–being. [8]
Text 8 Completely detached, Bhakti Vinod abandons his independence and serves Your feet.
Song 3
Text 1
sarvasva tomār,  caraṇe saṁpiyā,
poḍechi tomāra ghare
tumi to’ ṭhākur,  tomāra kukur,
boliyā jānaho more
sarvasva–everything; tomāra–Yours; charaṇe–at the feet; sa̐piyā–offering; paḍechhi–I have fallen; tomāra–Your; ghare–in the house; tumi–You; ta’– certainly; ṭhākura–the master; tomāra–Your; kukkura–dog; baliyā–consider¬ing; jānaha–please know; more–to me. [1]
Text 1 I have offered everything at Your feet and taken shelter in Your home. You are my Master; please consider me Your dog.
Text 2
bāṅdhiyā nikaṭe,  āmāre pālibe,
rohibo tomāra dwāre
pratīpa-janere,  āsite nā dibo,
rākhibo gaḍera pare
bā̐ndhiyā–tying up; nikaṭe–nearby; āmāre–to me; pālibe–will maintain; rahiba–will keep; tomāra–Your; dvāre–at the door; pratīpa (pratikūla, guru-vaiṣṇava-dveṣī)–adverse (unfavourable, inimical to the spiritual master and the devotees); janere–persons who are; āsite–to come; nā–not; diba–I will allow; rākhiba–I will keep; gaḍera (durgā, parikhā)–of the moat (impassable ditch); pāre–on the other side. [2]
Text 2 You will tie me up nearby and maintain me. I will remain at Your doorstep. I will not allow any inimical persons to enter; I will keep them on the far side of Your moat.
Text 3
tava nija-jana,  prasād seviyā,
ucchiṣṭa rākhibe jāhā
āmāra bhojan,  parama-ānande,
prati-din ha’be tāhā
tava–Your; nija–own; jana–person; prasāda (anugraha, ekhāne anugraha pūrvaka pradatta vastu)–the remnants of offerings of food unto You (mercy; in this instance meaning items mercifully bestowed); seviyā–serving; uchchhiṣṭa–remnants; rākhibe–will leave behind; yāhā–whatever; āmāra–my; bhojana–eating; parama–great; ānande–with joy; prati–every; dina–day; habe–will be; tāhā–that. [3]
Text 3 Whatever remnants Your devotees leave behind after hon¬ouring Your prasād I will eat every day with great joy.
Text 4
bosiyā śuiyā,  tomāra caraṇa,
cintibo satata āmi
nācite nācite,  nikaṭe jāibo,
jakhona ḍākibe tumi
basiyā–sitting up; śuiyā–lying down; tomāra–Your; charaṇa–feet; chintiba– will think; satata–always; āmi–I; nāchite–dancing; nāchite–and dancing; nikaṭe–nearby; yāiba–I will go; yakhana–when; ḍākibe–will call; tumi–You. [4]
Text 4 While sitting up or lying down, I will always think of Your feet. I will come to You whenever You call me, dancing all the way.
Text 5
nijera poṣana,  kabhu nā bhāvibo,
rohibo bhāvera bhore
bhakativinoda,  tomāre pālaka,
boliyā varaṇa kore
nijera–of my own; poṣaṇa–maintenance, nourishment; kabhu–ever; nā– not; bhāviba–I will think; rahiba–I will remain; bhāvera–of loving attach¬ment; bhare–in the shelter; bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; tomāre–to You; pālaka–protector; baliyā–considering; varaṇa–choose; kare–does. [5]
Text 5 I will never think about my own maintenance; I will always remain within the shelter of loving attachment for You. Bhakti Vinod embraces You as his maintainer.
Song 4
Text 1
tumi sarveśvareśvara, brajendra-kumāra!
tomāra icchāya viśve sṛjana saṁhāra
tumi–You; sarveśvareśvara–the Lord of all Lords; vrajendra–of the king of Vraja; kumāra–the son, Kṛṣṇa; tomāra–Your; ichchhāya–by the will; viśve–in the universe; sṛjana–creation; saṁhāra–annihilation. [1] 
Text 1 You are the Lord of all Lords, O Vrajendra Kumār! In accordance with Your will, creation and annihilation take place within the universe.
Text 2
tava icchā-mato brahmā korena sṛjana
tava icchā-mato viṣnu korena pālana
tava–Your; ichchhā–will; mata–according to; brahmā–the universal crea¬tor; karena–does; sṛjana–creation; tava–Your; ichchhā–will; mata–according to; viṣṇu–the maintainer of the material nature; karena–does; pālana– maintenance. [2] 
Text 2 In accordance with Your will, Brahmā creates the universe. In accordance with Your will, Viṣṇu maintains the universe.
Text 3
tava icchā-mate śiva korena saṁhāra
tava icchā-mate māyā sṛje kārāgāra
tava–Your; ichchhā–will; mata–according to; śiva–the topmost Vaiṣṇava who serves Kṛṣṇa in a wide variety of ways; karena–does; saṁhāra–annihilation; tava–Your; ichchhā–will; mate–according to; māyā–the goddess of illusion; sṛje–creates; kārāgāra–prison. [3]
Text 3 In accordance with Your will, Śiva annihilates the universe. In accordance with Your will, Māyā Devī creates her prisonhouse.
Text 4
tava icchā-mate jīver janama-maraṇa
samṛddhi-nipāte duḥkha sukha-saṁghaṭana
tava–Your; ichchhā–will; mata–according to; jīvera–of the individual souls; janama–birth; maraṇa–death; samṛddhi (unnati)–increase (prosperity); nipāta (avanati)–decline (degradation); duḥkha–distress; sukha–happiness; saṁghaṭana–occurrence. [4]
Text 4 In accordance with Your will, the souls take birth and die. In accordance with Your will, they experience prosperity and ruin, happiness and distress.
Text 5
miche māyā-baddha jīva āśā-pāśe phire’
tava icchā binā kichu korite nā pare
michhe–vainly; māyā–goddess of illusion; baddha–bound; jīva–the individ¬ual souls; āśā-pāśe–all around; phire–wander; tava–Your; ichchhā–will; vinā– without; kichhu–anything; karite–to do; nā–not; pāre–able. [5]
Text 5 Bound by Māyā, the souls vainly wander about. Unless it is Your will, they are not able to do anything.
Text 6
tumi to’ rākhaka ār pālaka āmāra
tomāra caraṇa binā āśā nāhi āra
tumi–You; ta’–certainly; rakṣaka–the protector; āra–and; pālaka–main¬tainer; āmāra–my; tomāra–Your; charaṇa–feet; vinā–apart from; āśā–hope, desire; nāhi–not; āra–another. [6]
Text 6 You are my protector and maintainer. I aspire for nothing other than Your feet.
Text 7
nija-bala-ceṣṭā-prati bharasā chāḍiyā
tomāra icchāya āchi nirbhara koriyā
nija–own; bala–strength; cheṣṭā–endeavours; prati–upon; bharasā–reli¬ance; chhāḍiyā–abandoning; tomāra–Your; ichchhāya–according to will; āchhi–I am; nirbhara–dependence; kariyā–doing. [7]
Text 7 Abandoning reliance on my own strength and endeavour, I depend upon Your will.
Text 8
bhakativinoda ati dīna akiñcana
tomāra icchāya tā’r jīvana maraṇa
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; ati–very; dīna–surrendered; akiṣchana– detached; tomāra–Your; ichchhāya–according to will; tā’ra–his; jīvana–life; maraṇa–death. [8] 
Text 8 Bhakti Vinod is completely surrendered and detached. He lives and dies in accordance with Your will.
Part 4 Faith in Kṛṣṇa as Protector


Song 1
Text 1
ekhona bujhinu prabhu! tomāra caraṇa
aśokābhoyāmṛta-pūrna sarva-khana
ekhana–now; bhujinu–I have understood; prabhu!–O Lord!; tomāra–Your; charaṇa–feet; aśoka–sorrowlessness; abhaya–fearlessness; amṛta–nectar; pūrṇa–full of; sarva–all; kṣaṇa–moments. [1]
Text 1 O Lord! Now I have understood that Your feet are always replete with sorrowlessness, fearlessness, and immortality.
Text 2
sakala chāḍiyā tuwā caraṇa-kamale
poḍiyāchi āmi nātha! tava pada-tale
sakala–everything; chhāḍiyā–abandoning; tuyā–Your; charaṇa–feet; kamale–at the lotus; paḍiyāchhi–have fallen; āmi–I; nātha!–O Lord!; tava–Your; pada–feet; tale–beneath. [2]
Text 2 I have relinquished everything at Your lotus feet and fallen before them, O Lord!
Text 3
tava pāda-padma nāth! rokhibe āmāre
ār rakhā-kartā nāhi e bhava-saṁsāre
tava–Your; pāda–feet; padma–lotus; nātha!–O Lord!; rakṣibe (rakṣā karibe)– will protect; āmāre–to me; āra–other; rakṣā–protection; kartā–doer; nāhi–is not; e–this; bhava–of birth and death; saṁsāre–in this world. [3]
Text 3 O Lord! Your lotus feet will protect me. There is no other protector in this world of birth and death.
Text 4
āmi tava nitya-dāsa—jāninu e-bāra
āmāra pālana-bhāra ekhona tomāra
āmi–I; tava–Your; nitya–eternal; dāsa–servant; jāninu–I have understood; e–this; bāra–time; āmāra–my; pālana–protection; bhāra–responsibility; ekhana–now; tomāra–Your. [4]
Text 4 Now I have understood that I am Your eternal servant. The responsibility of maintaining me is now Yours.
Text 5
baḍo duḥkha pāiyāchi swatantra jīvane
duḥkha dūre gelo o pada-varaṇe
baḍa–great; duḥkha–distress; pāiyāchhi–I have experienced; svatantra (anāśrita)–independent (unsheltered); jīvane–in life; saba–all; duḥkha–dis¬tress; dūre–far away; gela–went; o–those; pada–feet; varaṇe–by accepting. [5]
Text 5 I experienced only great distress in my independent life. All my distress has gone away by embracing Your feet.
Text 6
je-pada lāgiyā ramā tapasya korilā
je-pada pāiyā śiva śivatwa lobhilā
ye–whose; pada–feet; lāgiyā–for attaining; ramā–the goddess of fortune Lakṣmī Devī; tapasyā–austerity; karila–did; ye–whose; pada–feet; pāiyā– obtaining; śiva–the chief of the demigods and topmost devotee, Mahādev; ‘śivatva’–auspiciousness, the status of being ‘Śiva’; labhila–obtained.[6]
Text 6 Those feet which Lakṣmī Devī performed austeri¬ties to attain; those feet from which Śiva artained the quality of śivatva, auspiciousness.
Text 7
je-pada labhiyā brahmā kṛtārtha hoilā
je-pada nārada muni hṛdoye dhorilā
ye– whose; pada–feet; labhiyā–obtaining; brahmā–the universal creator; kṛtārtha– fulfilled; ha-ila–became; ye–whose; pada–feet; nārada muni–Devarṣi Nārad, the son of Brahmā and Guru of Vedavyās; hṛdaye–in the heart; dharila– embraced.[7]
Text 7 Those feet by which Brahmā became fulfilled; those feet which Nārad Muni embraced in his heart.
Text 8
sei se abhoya pada śirete dhoriyā
parama-ānande nāci pada-guna gāiyā
sei–those very; se–those; abhaya–fearless; pada–feet; śirete–on the head; dhariyā–holding; parama–great; ānande–with joy; nāchi–I dance; pada–of the feet; guṇa–the qualities; gāiyā–singing. [8]
Text 8 Holding upon my head those very feet, which are the abode of fearlessness, I dance with great joy, chanting their glories.

Text 9
saṁsāra-vipada ho’te avaśya uddhār
bhakativinoda, o-pada koribe tomār
saṁsāra–of this material world; vipada–dangers; ha’te–from; avaśya–certainly; uddhāra–deliverance; bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; o–those; pada–feet; karibe–will do; tomāra–Your. [9] 
Text 9 Your feet will surely deliver Bhakti Vinod from the dangers of material existence.
Song 2
Text 1
tumi to’ māribe jāre,  ke tāre rākhite pāre,
icchā-baśa tribhuvan
brahmā-ādi deva-gaṇa,  tava dāsa aganaṇa,
kore tava ājñāra pālan
tumi–You; ta’–certainly; māribe–will kill; yāre–whom; ke–who?; tāre–him; rākhite–to protect; pāre–can; tava–Your; ichchhā–will; vaśa–under the con¬trol; tribhuvana–the three worlds—Svarga, Martya, and Pātāl (heaven, earth, and hell); brahmā–the universal creator; ādi–and so forth; deva–of demigods; gaṇa–the group; tava–Your; dāsa–servants; agaṇana–numberless; kare–do; tava–Your; ājṣāra–of the orders; pālana–following. [1] 
Text 1 Who can protect one whom You will kill? The three worlds are subservient to Your will. Brahmā and the countless demigods are Your servants and carry out Your orders.
Text 2
tava icchā-mate jata,  graha-gaṇa avirata,
śubhāśubha phala kore dān
roga-śoka-mṛti-bhoy,  tava icchā-mate hoy,
tava ājñā sadā balavān
tava–Your; ichchhā–will; mate–in accordance with; yata–all; graha–planets; gaṇa–the group of; avirata–uninterruptedly; śubha–auspicious; aśubha– inauspicious; phala–results; kare–do; dāna–grant; roga–disease; śoka–lamentation; mṛti (maraṇa)–death; bhaya–fear; tava–Your; ichchhā–will; mate– in accordance with; haya–happen; tava–Your; ājṣā–orders; sadā–always; balavān–powerful. [2] 
Text 2 In accordance with Your will, all the planets perpetually exert their auspicious and inauspicious influences. Disease, lamentation, death, and fear all occur in accordance with Your will. Your orders are always predominant.
Text 3
tava bhoye vāyu boy,  candra sūrya samudoy,
swa-swa niyamita karya kore
tumi to’ parameśwar,  para-brahma parātpar,
tava bāsa bhakata-antare
tava–of You; bhaye–out of fear; vāyu–the wind; vaya–blows; chandra–the moon; sūrya–and the sun; samudaya–all the celestial bodies; sva–own; sva–respective; niyamita–prescribed; kārya–duties; kare–do; tumi–You; ta’– certainly; parama–supreme; īśvara–controller; parabrahma–the supreme; Absolute; parātpara (asamorddhva)–greater than the greatest (unparalleled); tava–Your; vāsa–residence; bhakata–the devotees; antare–within. [3] 
Text 3 Out of fear of You, the wind blows, and the moon, the sun, and all the celestial bodies perform their respective duties. You are the Supreme Lord, the unparalleled Supreme Absolute. You reside in the hearts of Your devotees.
Text 4
sadā-śuddha siddha-kāma,  `bhakata-vatsala’ nāma,
bhakata-janera nitya-swāmī
tumi to’ rākhibe jāre,  ke tāre mārite pāre,
sakala vidhira vidhi tumi
sadā–eternally; śuddha–pure; siddha–fulfilled; kāma–desire; bhakata– devotees; vatsala–affectionate; nāma–name; bhakata–devotees; janera– of the persons; nitya–eternal; svāmī–Master; tumi–You; ta’–certainly; rākhibe–will protect; yāre–whom; ke–who?; tāre–him; mārite–to kill; pāre– can; sakala–all; vidhira–of destinies, laws, providence; vidhi–determining element; tumi–You. [4] 
Text 4 You are eternally pure. Your desires are always fulfilled. You are known as Bhakta-vatsal, He who is affectionate to His devotees. You are the eternal master of Your devotees. Who can kill one whom You will protect? You are the author of all destinies.
Text 5
tomāra caraṇe nātha!  koriyāche pranipāta,
bhakativinoda tava dās
vipada hoite swāmī!  avaśya tāhāre tumi,
rakṣibe,—tāhāra e viśvās
tomāra–Your; charaṇe–at the feet; nātha!–O Lord!; kariyāchhe–have done; praṇipāta–obeisance; bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; tava–Your; dāsa– servant; vipada–danger; ha-ite–from; svāmī!–Master!; avaśya–surely; tāhāre– him; tumi–You; rakṣibe–will protect; tāhāra–his; e–this; viśvāsa–faith. [5] 
Text 5 O Lord! Your servant Bhakti Vinod has offered his obeisance at Your feet. O Master! You will certainly protect him from all danger—this is his faith.
Song 3
Text 1
ātma-samarpane gelā abhimān
nāhi korobuṅ nija rakhā-vidhān
ātma–myself; samarpaṇe–by fully offering; gelā–went; abhimāna (svasāmarthya-buddhi)–false egotism (conception of self-sufficiency); nāhi–not; karabu̐–I will make; nija–own; rakṣā–protection; vidhāna–arrangements. [1]
Text 1 By fully offering myself unto You, my false egotism has gone away. I will no longer make any arrangements to protect myself.
Text 2
tuwā dhana jāni’ tuhuṅ rākhobi, nāth!
pālya godhana jñāna kori’ tuwā sāth
tuyā–Your; dhana–property; jāni’–knowing; tuhu̐–You; rākhabi–will protect; nātha!–O Lord!; pālya–to be protected; go–cow; dhana–property; jāni–knowing; kari’–doing; tuyā–Your; sātha–company. [2]
Text 2 O Lord! Knowing me to be Your property, You will main¬tain me and keep me with You as one of Your protected cows.
Text 3
carāobi mādhava! jāmuna-tīre
baṁśī bājāoto ḍākobi dhīre
charāobi (paśu chāraṇa karibe)–You will herd (You will tend Your cows); mādhava!–O Kṛṣṇa!; yāmunā–of the river Yamunā; tire–on the bank; vaṁśī– flute; bājāota (bājāiyā)–sounding; ḍakabi–You will call; dhīre–gently. [3]
Text 3 O Mādhava! You will herd me along the bank of the Yamunā. You will play Your flute and call me gently.
Text 4
agha-baka mārato rakhā-vidhān
korobi sadā tuhuṅ gokula-kān!
agha-baka (vraja-bhajanera vividha vighna svarūpa)–the python demon, Agha, and the crane demon, Baka (various obstacles to the practice of pure devotion in the mood of Vraja); mārata (māriyā)–killing; rakṣā–protection; vidhāna–arrangements; karabi–will do; sadā–always; tuhu̐–You; gokula–of Gokul; kāna!–O Kṛṣṇa! [4]
Text 4 By killing Aghāsura, Bakāsura, and so on, You will always make all arrangements for my protection, O Kān of Gokul!
Text 5
rakhā korobi tuhuṅ niścoy jāni
pāna korobuṅ hāma jāmuna-pāni
rakṣā–protection; karabi–will do; tuhu̐–You; niśchaya–certainly; jāni– I know; pāna–drink; karabu̐–will do; hāma–I; yāmuna–of the river Yamunā; pāni–the water. [5]
Text 5 Knowing that You will certainly protect me, I will drink the water of the Yamunā (regardless of the fact that it is poisoned by the serpent Kālīya).
Text 6
kāliya-dokha korobi vināśā
śodhobi nadī-jala, bāḍāobi āśā
kālīya–of Kālīya; dokha (doṣa)–fault (sin); karabi–You will do; vināśā– destruction; śodhabi–You will purify; nadī–of the river; jala–water; bāḍāobi– You will increase; āśā–hope. [6]
Text 6 You will absolve Kālīya’s offences, purify the Yamunā’s waters, and thus increase my faith.
Text 7
piyato dāvānala rākhobi mo’y
`gopāla’, `govinda’ nāma tava hoy
piyata (pāna kariyā)–swallowing; dāva–forest; anala–fire; rakhabi–You will protect; moya (āmāke)–to me; ‘gopāla’–‘He who maintains the cows’; ‘govinda’–‘He who pleases the cows’; nāma–names; tava–Your; hoya (haya)– happen. [7]
Text 7 By swallowing the forest fire, You will protect me and thus become known as ‘Gopāl’ and ‘Govinda’.
Text 8
sura-pati-durmati-nāśa vicāri’
rākhobi varṣane, giri-vara-dhāri!
surapati (indra)–king of the demigods (‘Indra’); durmati–wicked-hearted; nāśa–destruction; vichāri’ (vichāra kariyā)–deciding; rākhabi–You will pro¬tect; varṣaṇe–from the rains; giri–of all mountains; vara–the best (Girirāj Govardhan); dhāri–lifter. [8]
Text 8 Deciding to level the pride of Devarāj Indra, You will protect me from his rains, O Lifter of Girirāj Govardhan!
Text 9
catur-ānana korabo jab cori
rakhā korobi mujhe, gokula-hari!
chaturānana–Brahmā (‘He who possesses four faces’); karaba–will do; yava–when; chori (churi)–steals; rakṣā–protection; karabi–You will do; moye–me; gokula–of Gokul; hari!–O Lord! [9]
Text 9 When Brahmā will abduct me, You will rescue me, O Lord of Gokul!
Text 10
bhakativinoda—tuwā gokula-dhan
rākhobi keśava! korato jatan
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; tuyā–Your; gokula–in Gokul; dhana–prop¬erty (cow); rākhabi–You will protect; keśava!–O Kṛṣṇa!; karata–doing; yatana–care. [10] 
Text 10 Bhakti Vinod is one of Your cows in Gokul. O Keśava! Surely you will carefully protect him.
Song 4
Text 1
choḍato puruṣa-abhimān
kiṅkorī hoiluṅ āji, kān!
chhoḍata–abandoning; puruṣa–male; abhimāna (puruṣavat bhoktṛtvābhimān)–ego (the ego of being a male enjoyer); kiṅkarī–a maidservant; ha-ilu̐–I will be; āji–today; kāna!–O Kṛṣṇa! [1]
Text 1 Abandoning the false ego of a male enjoyer, today I have become a maidservant, O Kān!
Text 2
baraja-bipine sakhī-sāth
sevana korobuṅ, rādhā-nāth!
varaja (vraja)–of Vraja; vipine (kānane)–in the forest; sakhī–of girl¬friends; sātha–in the company; sevana–service; karabu̐–I will do; rādhā-nātha!–O Lord of Rādhā! [2]
Text 2 In the groves of Vraja, under the guidance of Rādhā’s girl¬friends, I will engage in service, O Lord of Rādhā!
Text 3
kusume gāṅthobuṅ hār
tulasī-maṇi-mañjarī tār
kusume–with flowers; gā̐thabu̐ (gā̐thiba)–I will string; hāra–garland; tulasī–tulasī; maṇi–jewels; maṣjarī (ukta kusuma hārera madhye madhyesaṁyukta)–flower spikes (with tulasī flower spikes set between the flowers of the garland); tāra–along the garland. [3]
Text 3 I will make flower garlands with tulasī-maṣjarīs arranged like jewels in between the flowers.
Text 4
jatane deobuṅ sakhī-kare
hāte laobo sakhī ādare
yatane–with care; deobu̐ (diba)–I will give; sakhī–of a girlfriend; kare–in the hands; hāte–in the hands; laoba (la-ibe)–will take; sakhī–the girlfriend; ādare–with love. [4]
Text 4 I will carefully place those garlands in the hands of one of Rādhā’s girlfriends, and she will lovingly accept them in her hands.
Text 5
sakhī dibo tuwā duhuk gale
dūrato herobuṅ kutūhale
sakhī–girlfriend; diba (dibe)–will give; tuyā–Your; duhu̐ka (du-janera)– both (Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa); gale–on the necks; dūrata (dūra ha-ite)–from afar; herabu̐–I will behold; kutūhale–in wonder. [5]
Text 5 Rādhā’s girlfriend will place those garlands around the necks of You both. From afar, I will behold this in wonder.

Text 6
sakhī kahabo,—“śuno sundarī!
rahobi kuñje mama kiṅkorī
sakhī–girlfriend; kahaba–will say; śuna–please listen; sundarī–O beauti¬ful girl; rahabi (rahibe)–you will stay; kuṣje–in this forest grove; mama–my; kiṅkarī–maidservant. [6]
Text 6 Rādhā’s girlfriend will then say to me, “O beautiful girl, please stay in this forest grove as my maidservant.

Text 7
                gāthabi mālā manohāriṇī 
                niti rādhā-kṛṣṇa-vimohinī 
niti rādhā-kṛṣṇa-vimohinī gā̐ thobi–you will string; mālā–garlands; mano–heart; hāriṇī–stealer; niti (nitya)–daily; rādhā-kṛṣṇa–the Divine Couple; vimohinī–completely enchant. [7]
Text 7 “String beautiful garlands every day that will completely enchant Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Text 8
tuwā rakhana-bhāra hāmārā
mama kuñja-kuṭīra tohārā
tuyā–Your; rakṣaṇa–protection; bhāra–responsibility; hāmārā–of me; mama–my; kuṣja–forest; kuṭīra–cottage; tohārā–yours. [8]
Text 8 “I will take full responsibility for your maintenance. My forest cottage is yours.
Text 9
rādhā-mādhava-sevana-kāle
rahobi hāmāra antarāle
rādhā-mādhava–of the Divine Couple; sevana–of service; kāle–at the time; rahabi–you will stay; hāmāra–my; antarāle (pārśve)–behind (near). [9]
Text 9 “When I serve Rādhā and Mādhav, you will stay right behind me.
Text 10
tāmbula sāji’ karpūra āni’
deobi moe āpana jāni’ ”
tāmbula–betel leaves, pān; sāji’ (sajjita kariyā)–preparing (with śupārī (are¬ca nut), lime, khayer (catechu, an extract from Indian acacia trees), cinna¬mon, clove, and various other ingredients); karpūra–camphor; āni’–bringing; deobi–you will give; moye–to me; āpana–your own; jāni’–knowing. [10]
Text 10 “You will prepare betel leaves, fetch camphor, and hand them to me, knowing me to be your intimate friend.”
Text 11
bhakativinoda śuni’ bāt
sakhī-pade kare pranipāt
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; śuni’–hearing; bāta (vākya)–expression, order; sakhī–of the girlfriend; pade–at the feet; kare–does; praṇipāta– obeisance. [11]
Text 11 Hearing her expression, Bhakti Vinod offers obeisance to the feet of Rādhā’s girlfriend.
Part 5 Renunciation of Conduct Unfavorable to Pure Devotion


Song 1
Text 1
keśava! tuwā jagata vicitra
karama-vipāke,  bhava-vana bhrama-i,
pekhaluṅ raṅga bahu citra
keśava!–O Kṛṣṇa!; tuyā–Your; jagata–material world; vichitra–variegated, strange; karama–of my actions; vipāke (karma-chakre)–according to the results (in the cycle of action and reaction); bhava–the mundane world of repeated birth and death; vana–in the forest; bhrama-i (bhramaṇa kariyā)–wandering; pekhalu̐ (dekhilāma)–I saw; raṅga (tāmāśā)–hoax (trick, joke); bahu (nānā)–many (various); chitra (rakama)–types. [1]
Text 1 O Keśava! Your material creation is extremely variegated. I have wandered throughout this forest of birth and death according to the consequences of my actions and seen so many kinds of hoaxes.
Text 2
tuwā pada-vismṛti,  ā-mara jantranā,
kleśa-dahane dohi’ jāi
kapila, patañjali,  gautama, kanabhojī,
jaimini, bauddha āowe dhāi’
tuyā–Your; pada–feet; vismṛti–forgetfulness; ā-mara (maraṇa avadhi)–un¬til death; yantraṇā–tortures; kleśa–of suffering; dahane (jvālāya)–in the fire; dahi’ (dagdha ha-iyā)–burning; yāi–I go; kapila–teacher of atheistic Sāṁkhya philosophy (systematic analysis of the material elements) who ap¬peared in the lineage of Agnidev; pataṣjali–famous ṛṣi who authored the Yoga-sūtra (guidelines for aṣṭaṅga-yoga practice); gautama–author of the Nyāya-sūtra (principles of logic); kaṇabhojī–Kaṇāda, the author of Vaiśeṣika-darśan (atomic theory); jaimini–the author of Pūrva-mīmāṁsā (theory based on the idea that karma is an absolute principle, unassailable even by God); bauddha–Buddhists; āoye (āise)–come; dhāi (dhāiyā)–running. [2]
Text 2 As a result of forgetting Your feet, I am being tortured until my death, burning in a fire of suffering. Meanwhile, Kapila, Pataṣjali, Gautam, Kaṇabhojī, Jaiminī, and the Bud¬dhists (the proponents of all sorts of ideologies) come run¬ning to me.
Text 3
tab koi nija-mate,  bhukti, mukti yācato,
pāta-i nānā-vidha phāṅd
so-sabu—vañcaka,  tuwā bhakti bahir-mukha,
ghaṭāowe viṣama paramād
tava–about You; ka-i’ (tomāra kahiyā arthāt tomāra dohāi diyā)–explain¬ing (speaking about You, that is, appealing on Your behalf); nija–their own; mate (svasiddhānta)–opinions (own conclusions); bhukti–mundane enjoyment; mukti–liberation; yāchata (yāchṣā kare arthāt grahaṇa karāibāra janya anurodha kare)–appeal (ask, that is, request me to accept); pāta-i (pātiyā)– setting; nānā–various; vidha–kinds; phā̐da (jāla)–of traps; so (tāra)–they; sabu (sakalei)–all; vaṣchaka (pratāraka)–cheaters; tuyā–Your; bhakti–devo¬tional service; bahirmukha–averse; ghaṭāoye (ghaṭāya)–they create; viṣama– terrible; paramāda (bhrānti)–illusion. [3]
Text 3 Speaking about You according to their own conclusions, they implore me to accept the pursuits of either worldly enjoy¬ment or liberation by setting various types of traps. They are all cheaters who are averse to devotion; they simply devise terrible illusions.
Text 4
vaimukha-vañcane,  bhaṭa so-sabu,
niramilo vividha pasār
danḍavat dūrato,  bhakativinoda bhelo,
bhakata-caraṇa kori’ sār
vaimukha (vimukha)–averse; vaṣchane–for cheating; bhaṭa (vīra)–war¬riors (expert fighters); so-sabu (sei samudaya)–all of them; niramila–built; vividha–various; pasāra (dokāna)–shop; daṇḍavat (sammāna)–obeisance (gesture of respect); dūrata (dūra ha-ite)–from afar; bhakti-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; bhela–became; bhakata–of the devotees; charaṇa–the feet; kari’– doing; sāra (sarvasva)–the be-all and end-all. [4]
Text 4 All these combatants have set up various shops for cheat¬ing those who are averse to You. Bhakti Vinod has offered his respects to them all from afar and accepted the feet of Your devotees as his be-all and end-all.
Song 2
Text 1
tuwā-bhakti-pratikūla dharma jā’te roy
parama jatane tāhā tyajibo niścoy
tuyā–Your; bhakti–devotion; pratikūla–unfavourable; dharma–nature; yāte– in which; raya–exists; parama–great; yatane–with care; tāhā–that; tyajiba–I will abandon; niśchaya–certainly. [1]
Text 1 I will certainly abandon with great care everything that is unfavourable to devotion to You.
Text 2
tuwā-bhakti-bahir-mukha saṅga nā koribo
gaurāṅga-virodhi-jana-mukha nā heribo
tuyā–Your; bhakti–devotion; bahirmukha (kṛṣṇa-vimukha janera)–of persons averse (to Kṛṣṇa); saṅga–association; nā–not; kariba–I will do; gaurāṅga–Śrīman Mahāprabhu; virodhi–adverse to; jana–persons; mukha– faces; nā–not; heriba–I will see. [2]
Text 2 I will not associate with those who are averse to devo¬tion to You. I will not even look at the faces of those who are inimical to Śrī Gaurāṅga.
Text 3
bhakti-pratikūla sthāne nā kori vasati
bhaktira apriya kārye nāhi kori rati
bhakti–towards devotion; pratikūla–unfavourable; sthāne–in a place; nā– not; kari–I do; vasati–residence; bhaktira–of devotion; apriya–not dear; kārye–in activities; nāhi–not; kari–I do; rati–attachment. [3]
Text 3 I will not reside in a place that is unfavourable to devotion. I will not have affection for any activities that are unfavourable to devotion.
Text 4
bhaktira virodhī grantha pāṭha nā koribo
bhaktira virodhī vyākhyā kabhu nā śunibo
bhaktira–of devotion; virodhī–adverse to; grantha–literature; pāṭha–read; nā–not; kariba–I will do; bhaktira–of devotion; virodhī–adverse to; vyākhyā– explanations; kabhu–ever; nā–not; śuniba–I will listen. [4]
Text 4 I will not read any literature that is opposed to devotion. I will never listen to any discourses that are opposed to devotion.
Text 5
gaurāṅga-varjita sthāna tīrtha nāhi māni
bhaktira bādhaka jñāna-karma tuccha jāni
gaurāṅga–Śrīman Mahāprabhu; varjita–bereft of; sthāna–place; tīrtha–holy place; nāhi–not; māni–I consider; bhaktira–of devotion; bādhaka–obstructing; jṣāna–knowledge; karma–action; tuchchha–contemptible; jāni–I think. [5] 
Text 5 I will not consider any place bereft of Śrī Gaurāṅga to be a holy place. I will consider all knowledge and activity that obstruct devotion to be contemptible.
Text 6
bhaktira bādhaka kāle nā kori ādar
bhakti bahir-mukha nija-jane jāni par
bhaktira–of devotion; bādhaka–encumbering; kāle–of times, occasions; nā– not; kari–I do; ādara–fondness; bhakti–devotion; bahir–outward; mukha– facing; nija–own; jane–persons; jāni–I know; para–strangers. [6]
Text 6 I will have no fondness for times that are encumbering to devotion. I will consider all my relatives who are averse to devotion to be strangers.
Text 7
bhaktira bādhikā spṛhā koribo varjan
abhakta-pradatta anna nā kori graham
bhaktira–of devotion; bādhika–opposing; spṛhā–desires; kariba–I will do; varjana–rejection; abhakta–non-devotees; pradatta–given; anna–food; nā– not; kari–I do; grahaṇa–acceptance. [7]
Text 7 I will abandon all desires that hinder devotion. I will not accept any food presented to me by non-devotees.
Text 8
jāhā kichu bhakti-pratikūla boli’ jāni
tyajibo jatane tāhā, e niścoya vānī
yāhā–which; kichhu–something; bhakti–to devotion; pratikūla–unfa¬vourable; bali’–considering; jāni–I know; tyajiba–I will reject; yatane–with care; tāhā–that; e–this; niśchaya–certainly; vāṇī–word. [8]
Text 8 I will carefully abandon whatever I know to be unfavour¬able to devotion. This is my resolute vow.
Text 9
bhakativinoda poḍi’ prabhura caraṇe
māgaye śakati pratikūlyera varjane
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; paḍi’–falling; prabhura–of the Lord; charaṇe– at the feet; māgaye–begs; śakati–power; prātikūlyera–of what is unfavour¬able; varjane–to reject. [9] 
Text 9 Falling at the feet of the Lord, Bhakti Vinod prays for the ability to abandon everything unfavourable to devotion.
Song 3
Text 1
viṣaya-vimūḍha ār māyāvādī jan
bhakti-śūnya duṅhe prāna dhare akāraṇ
viṣaya–by mundanity; vimūḍha–bewildered; āra–and; māyāvādī–illusionists (those who consider devotion (bhakti), devotees (bhaktas), and the eternal per¬sonal Lord (Bhagavān) to be illusory); jana–persons; bhakti–devotion; śūnya– devoid of; du̐he–both; prāṇa–life; dhare–maintain; akāraṇa–in vain. [1]
Text 1 Both materialists and illusionists (māyāvādīs) are devoid of devotion and maintain their lives in vain.
Text 2
ei dui-saṅga nātha! nā hoy āmār
prārthanā koriye āmi caraṇe tomār
ei–of these; dui–two; saṅga–association; nātha!–O Lord!; nā–not; haya– happen; āmāra–my; prārthanā–prayer; kariye–do; āmi–I; charaṇe–at the feet; tomāra–Your. [2]
Text 2 O Lord! At Your feet I pray that I will never associate with these two kinds of offenders.
Text 3
se duwera madhye viṣayī tabu bhālo
māyāvādī-saṅga nāhi māgi kono kālo
se–those; du’yera–of the two; madhye–between; viṣayī–materialists; tabu– still; bhāla–better; māyāvādī–illusionists; saṅga–association with; nāhi–not; māgi–I ask; kona–any; kāla–time. [3]
Text 3 Between the two of them, however, materialists are better. I never, ever, desire the association of illusionists.
Text 4
viṣayī-hṛdoya jabe sādhu-saṅga pāy
anāyāse labhe bhakti bhaktera kṛpāy
viṣayi–of a materialist; hṛdaya–the heart; yabe–when; sādhu–saintly devotees; saṅga–the association of; pāya–obtains; anāyāse–without toil; labhe–obtains; bhakti–devotion; bhaktera–of the devotees; kṛpāya–by the mercy. [4]
Text 4 When the hearts of materialists come into the association of sādhus, they easily attain devotion by the mercy of those devotees.
Text 5
māyāvāda-doṣa jā’ra hṛdoye paśilo
kutarke hṛdoya tā’ra vajra-sama bhelo
māyāvāda–of illusionism; doṣa–the contamination; yāra–of whom; hṛdaye–in the heart; paśila (praveśa karila)–entered; kutarke–with fallacious logic; hṛdaya–the heart; tāra–of him; vajra–a thunderbolt; sama–like; bhela– becomes. [5]
Text 5 Once the contamination of illusionism has entered one’s heart, however, one’s heart becomes as hard as a thunderbolt by the influence of fallacious logic.
Text 6
bhaktira swarūpa, āra `viṣaya’, `āśroy’
māyāvādī `anitya’ boliyā saba koy
bhaktira–of devotion; svarūpa–the true form; āra–and; viṣaya (bhajanīya-tattva)–the object (recipient of service—the Lord); āśraya (bhakta-tattva)– the shelter (the devotee); māyāvādī–the illusionists; anitya (naśvara)–non-eternal (transitory); baliyā–saying; saba–all; kaya–say. [6]
Text 6 The illusionists say that the Lord, His devotees, and devo¬tion itself are non-eternal (and thus illusory).
Text 7
dhik tā’ra kṛṣṇa-sevā-śravana-kīrtan
kṛṣṇa-aṅge vajra hāne tāhāra stavan
dhik–fie!; tāra–their; kṛṣṇa–to Kṛṣṇa; sevā–service; śravaṇa–hearing; kīrtana– and chanting; kṛṣṇa–of Kṛṣṇa; aṅge–at the divine form; vajra–thunderbolts; hāne (sachchidānanda vigrahake māyāmaya baliyā kutarkāstra nikṣepa)– strike (saying the Lord’s eternal, conscious, ecstatic form is illusory, they hurl the weapon of their fallacious logic); tāhāra–their; stavana–prayers. [7]
Text 7 Fie on their pretence of service to Kṛṣṇa! Fie on their pre¬tence of hearing and chanting Kṛṣṇa’s glories! Their prayers to Kṛṣṇa are like thunderbolts hurled at His divine body. 

Text 8
māyāvāda sama bhakti-pratikūla nāi
ataeva māyāvādī-saṅga nāhi cāi
māyāvāda–with illusionism; sama–equal; bhakti–to devotion; pratikūla– unfavourable; nāi–is not; ataeva–therefore; māyāvādī–of illusionists; saṅga– the association; nāhi–not; chāi–I want. [8]
Text 8 There is nothing more unfavourable to devotion than illu¬sionism. Therefore, I never desire the association of illusionists.
Text 9
bhakativinoda māyāvāda dūra kori
vaiṣṇava-saṅgete baise nāmāśraya dhori’
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; māyāvāda–from illusionism; dūra–far away; kari’–doing; vaiṣṇava–of the devotees; saṅgete (vaiṣṇava saṅga-i māyāvāda ha-ite niṣkṛtira upāya)–in the association (the association of devo¬tees is the only way of deliverance from illusionism); vaise–sits; nāma–of the Name; āśraya–the shelter; dhari’–holding. [9] 
Text 9 Keeping illusionism far away, Bhakti Vinod remains in the association of devotees and takes shelter of the Name.

Song 4
Text 1
āmi to’ swānanda-sukhada-bāsī
rādhikā-mādhava-caraṇa-dāsī
āmi–I; ta’–certainly; svānanda-sukhada (śrī rādhā-kaiṅkaryera kuṣja-viśeṣa)– the grove known as ‘Svānanda Sukhada’ (the place of the personal service of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī); vāsī–a resident; rādhikā-mādhava–of the Divine Couple; charaṇa–of the feet; dāsī–a maidservant. [1]
Text 1 I am a resident of Svānanda Sukhada Kuṣja and a maidser¬vant of Śrī Śrī Rādhikā-Mādhava’s feet.
Text 2
duṅhāra milane ānanda kori
duṅhāra viyoge duḥkhete mari
du̐hāra–of the Divine Couple; milane–in the meeting; ānanda– ecstasy; kari’–I do; du̐hāra–of the Divine Couple; viyoge–in the separation; duḥkhete–by the distress; mari–I die. [2]
Text 2 I rejoice when the Divine Couple are united. I die in distress when They are separated.
Text 3
sakhī-sthalī nāhi heri nayane
dekhile śaibyāke paraye mane
sakhī-sthalī (chandrāvalī pakṣera adhikṛta sthāna)–at the place known as ‘Sakhī Sthalī’ (the place occupied by Chandrāvalī) nāhi–not; heri–I look; nayane–with my eyes; dekhile–if I see; śaibyāke (chandrāvalīra pakṣera anugatā sakhī viśeṣa)–to Śaibyā (a friend and follower of Chandrāvalī); paḍaye–falls; mane–in my mind. [3]
Text 3 I never cast my glance towards Sakhī Sthalī. If I see it, I am reminded of Śaibyā.
Text 4
je-je pratikūla candrāra sakhī
prāne duḥkha pāi tāhāre dekhi’
ye ye–whoever; pratikūla–unfavourable; chandrāra–of Chandrāvalī; sakhī– girlfriends; prāṇe–in my heart; duḥkha–distress; pāi–I get; tāhāre–of them; dekhi’–seeing. [4]
Text 4 I feel pain in my heart whenever I see any of Chandrāvalī’s unfavourable friends.
Text 5
rādhikā-kuñja āṅdhāra kori’
loite cāhe se rādhāra hari
rādhikā–of Rādhārāṇī; kuṣja–grove; ā̐dhāra–gloom; kari’–doing; la-ite– to take; chāhe–want; se–they; rādhāra–of Rādhārāṇī; hari–Kṛṣṇa. [5]
Text 5 They always want to take away Rādhā’s Hari and enshroud Her grove in gloom.
Text 6
śrī-rādhā-govinda-milana-sukha
pratikūla-jana nā heri mukha
śrī-rādhā-govinda–of the Divine Couple; milana–meeting; sukha–happi¬ness; pratikūla–unfavourable; jana–of persons; nā–not; heri–I look; mukha– at the face. [6]
Text 6 I never look at the face of anyone who is opposed to the ecstatic union of Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Govinda.
Text 7
rādhā-pratikūla jateka jana-
sambhāṣane kabhu nā hoy mana
rādhā–towards Rādhārāṇī; pratikūla–unfavourable; yateka–all; jana–persons; sambhāṣaṇe–in conversing; kabhu–ever; nā–not; haya–is; mana–in the heart. [7]
Text 7 I never desire to speak with anyone who is inimical towards Śrī Rādhā.
Text 8
bhakativinoda śrī-rādhā-caraṇe
saṅpeche parāna atīva jatane
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; śrī-rādhā–of Rādhārāṇī; charaṇe–at the feet; sa̐pechhe–has surrendered; parāṇa (prāṇa)–his life (heart); atīva–very greatly; yatane–with care. [8]
Text 8 Bhakti Vinod has surrendered his heart at Śrī Rādhā’s feet with great care.
Part 6 Svīkara Acceptance of Activities Favorable to Pure Devotion

Song 1
Text 1
tuwā-bhakti-anukūla je-je kārya hoy
parama-jatane tāhā koribo niścoy
tuyā–Your; bhakti–to devotion; anukūla–favourable; ye ye–whatever; kārya–activities; haya–are; parama–great; yatane–with care; tāhā–them; kariba–I will do; niśchaya–certainly. [1]
Text 1 I will certainly perform with great care all activities that are favourable to devotion to You.
Text 2
bhakti-anukūla jata viṣaya saṁsāre
koribo tāhāte rati indriyera dwāre
bhakti–to devotion; anukūla–favourable; yata–all; viṣaya–material; saṁsāre–in the world; kariba–I will do; tāhāte–for that; rati (sukhānveṣaṇa)–attach (search for happiness); indriyera–of the senses; dvāre–by the gates. [2]
Text 2 With my senses, I will take pleasure in those things within the material world that are favourable to devotion.

Text 3
śunibo tomāra kathā jatana koriyā
dekhibo tomāra dhāma nayana bhoriyā
śuniba–I will hear; tomāra–about You; kathā–discussion; yatana–care; kariyā–doing; dekhiba–I will see; tomāra–Your; dhāma–abode; nayana–eyes; bhariyā–filling. [3]
Text 3 I will carefully listen to discussions about You. Beholding Your abode, I will fill my eyes.
Text 4
tomāra prasāde deho koribo poṣan
naivedya-tulasī-ghrāna koribo graham
tomāra–Your; prasāde (uchchhiṣṭe)–with the remnants; deha–body; kari¬ba–I will do; poṣaṇa–nourishment; naivedya–offerings; tulasī–tulasī leaves and flower spikes; ghrāṇa–smell; kariba–I will do; grahaṇa–acceptance. [4]
Text 4 I will maintain my body with Your remnants alone. I will savour the fragrance of the tulasī leaves and maṣjarīs that have been offered to You.
Text 5
kara-dwāre koribo tomāra sevā sadā
tomāra vasati-sthale basibo sarvadā
kara–my hands; dvāre–with; kariba–I will do; tomāra–Your; sevā–service; sadā–always; tomāra–Your; vasati–residence; sthale–in the place; vasiba–I will reside; sarvadā–always. [5]
Text 5 With my hands, I will always engage in Your service. I will always reside in a place where You reside.
Text 6
tomāra sevāya kāma niyoga koribo
tomāra vidveṣi-jane krodha dekhāibo
tomāra–Your; sevāya–in the service; kāma–desires; niyoga–employ; kari¬ba–I will do; tomāra–Your; vidveṣi–those who are inimical; jane–to the per¬sons; krodha–anger; dekhāiba–I will show. [6]
Text 6 I will engage all my desires in Your service. I will show anger towards those who are inimical to You.
Text 7
ei-rūpe sarva-vṛtti āra sarva-bhāva
tuwā anukūla hoye labhuka prabhāva
ei-rūpe–in this way; sarva–all; vṛtti–my faculties, my propensities; āra–and; sarva–all; bhāva–thoughts; tuyā–Your; anukūla–favourable; ha’ye–being; labhuka–may obtain; prabhāva–glory. [7] 
Text 7 Having become favourable to devotion in these ways, may all of my actions and thoughts gain glory.

Text 8
tuwā bhakta-anukūla jāhā jāhā kori
tuwā bhakti-anukūla boli’ tāhā dhori
tuyā–Your; bhakta–to the devotee; anukūla (bhaktera anukūlatā bhagavānera ānukūlyera-i samāna)–favourable (that which is favourable to devotees is as good as that which is favourable to the Lord); yāhā yāhā– whatever; kari–I do; tuyā–Your; bhakti–devotion; anukūla–favourable; bali’– considering; tāhā–that; dhari–I hold. [8] 
Text 8 Whatever I do that is favourable to Your devotees I consider to be favourable to devotion to You.
Text 9
bhakativinoda nāhi jāne dharmādharma
bhakti-anukūla tāra hau saba karma
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; nāhi–not; jāne–knows; dharma–piety; adharma–and impiety; bhakti–to devotion; anukūla–favourable; tāra–of him; ha-u–may be; saba–all; karma–actions. [9] 
Text 9 Bhakti Vinod knows neither religion nor irreligion. May all his actions be favourable to devotion.

Song 2
Text 1
godruma-dhāme bhajana-anukūle
māthura-śrī-nandīśvara-samatule
godruma (abhinna nanda grām)–the island known as ‘Godrum’ (the non-different form of Śrī Nanda Grām of Vraja Dhām); dhāme–in the abode; bhajana–devotional service; anukūle–favourable to; māthura–of Mathurā (Vraja); śrī nandīśvara (parvata o tadupasthita grāma)–the mountain and village situated on top of the mountain where Nanda Mahārāj resides; sama– equal; tule–in comparison.[1]
Text 2
tahi māha surabhi-kuñja-kuṭīre
baiṭhobuṅ hāma sura-taṭinī-tīre
ta̐hi (tāra)–there; māha (mājhe)–within; surabhi– known as ‘Surabhi’; kuṣja–in the grove; kuṭīre–in a cottage; vaiṭhabu̐ (basiba)–will reside; hāma–I; surataṭinī (bhagīrathī)–of the Ganges; tīre–on the bank.[2]
Text 3
gaura-bhakata-priya-veśa dadhānā
tilaka-tulasī-mālā-śobhamānā
gaura–of Śrīman Mahāprabhu; bhakata–to the devotees; priya– dear; veśa–appearance; dadhāna (dhāraṇa kariyā)–wearing; tilaka–markings made with gopī-chandan clay which signify the body to be a temple; tulasī– of tulasī; mālā–necklace; śobhamānā–beautiful. [3]
Text 4
campaka, bakula, kadamba, tamāl
ropato niramibo kuñja viśāl
champaka–tree known as the champak (Magnolia champaca or Michelia champaca); bakula–tree known as the bakul (Mimusops elengi); kadamba– tree known as the kadamba (Neolamarckia cadamba or Anthocephalus cad¬amba); tamāla–tree known as the tamāl (Garcinia xanthochymus or Garcinia tinctoria); ropata (ropaṇa kariyā)–planting; niramiba–I will make; kuṣja– a grove; viśāla–great. [4]
Text 4 Planting champak, bakul, kadamba, and tamāl trees, I will establish a large grove.
Text 5
mādhavī mālatī uṭhābuṅ tāhe
chāyā-manḍapa korobuṅ taṅhi māhe
mādhavī–a flowering vine known as mādhavī (Hiptage madablota or Hiptage benghalensis); mālatī–a flowering vine known as mālatī (Aganos¬ma dichotoma); uṭhābu̐–I will make to climb; tāhe–there; chhāyā–shade; maṇḍapa (nirmita pavitra āśraya sthāna)–pavilion (a pure, constructed, sheltered area); karabu̐–I will make; tahi̐–there; māhe–within. [5] 
Text 5 I will plant mādhavī and mālatī creepers to climb those trees, and in the middle of the grove I will make a shady pavilion.

Text 6
ropobuṅ tatra kusuma-vana-rāji
jūthi, jāti, mallī virājabo sāji’ ropabu̐–I will plant; tatra–there; kusuma–flowers; vana–garden; rāji (śreṇī)– rows; yūthi–flower known as jūthi ( Jasminum molle or Jasminum auricula¬tum); jāti–flower known as jāti ( Jasminum officinale); mallī–flower known as malli ( Jasminum sambac); virājaba (virāja karibe)–I will situate; sāji’ (sajita ha-iyā)–decorating (being decorated). [6] 
Text 6 I will plant rows of various forest flowers there and decora¬tively arrange jūthis, jātis, and mallīs.
Text 7
mañce basāobuṅ tulasī-mahārāṇī
kīrtana-sajja taṅhi rākhabo āni’
maṣche (vedī)–on a raised platform (altar); basāobu̐–I will place; tulasī-mahārāṇī–the great queen Tulasī Devī; kīrtana–for musical glorification; saj¬ja (sāja-saraṣjāma)–instruments (equipment—mṛdaṅgas, kartāls); ta̐hi–there; rākhaba–I will keep; āni’–bringing. [7] 
Text 7 I will place Tulasī Mahārāṇī on a raised platform and keep instruments for kīrtan there. 

Text 8
vaiṣṇava-jana-saha gāobuṅ nām
jaya godruma jaya gaura ki dhām
vaiṣṇava–devotee; jana–persons; saha–with; gāobu̐ (gāhiba)–I will sing; nāma–the Name of the Lord; jaya–‘all glories’; godruma–to Godrumdwīp; jaya–‘all glories’; gaura–of Lord Gaurāṅga; ki–to; dhāma–the divine abode. [8] 
Text 8 In the association of devotees, I will sing the Name. All glo¬ries to Godrumdwīp! All glories to the abode of Śrī Gaurāṅga!


Text 9
bhakativinoda bhakti-anukūl
jaya kuñja, muñja, sura-nadī-kūl
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; bhakti–to devotion; anukūla–favourable; jaya–‘all glories’; kuṣja–grove; muṣja (tṛṇaviśeṣa, śara)–grass, reeds; suranadī (gaṅgā)–of the Ganges; kūla (taṭa)–the bank. [9] 
Text 9 Bhakti Vinod glorifies all that is favourable to devotion. All glories to the groves, the grass, and the bank of the River Ganges!
Song 3
Text 1
śuddha-bhakata-  caraṇa-reṇu,
bhajana-anukūla
bhakata-sevā,  parama-siddhi,
prema-latikāra mūla
śuddha–pure; bhakata–of devotees; charaṇa–of the feet; reṇu–dust; bhajana– devotion; anukūla–favourable; bhakata–to the devotees; sevā–service; parama–supreme; siddhi–fulfilment; prema–divine love; latikāra–of the creeper; mūla–the root. [1] 
Text 1 Pure devotees’ foot-dust is favourable to devotion. Service to the devotees is the supreme fulfilment and the root of the creeper of prema.
Text 2
mādhava-tithi,  bhakti-jananī,
jatane pālana kori
kṛṣṇa-vasati,  vasati boli’,
parama ādare bori
mādhava-tithi–holy days which are especially related to Hari, such as Śrī Harivāsar (Ekādaśī), the appearance day of Kṛṣṇa, and so on; bhakti–of de¬votion; jananī–the mother; yatane–with care; pālana–observe; kari–I do; kṛṣṇa–of Kṛṣṇa; vasati (śrī dhāma)–holy abode; vasati–my dwelling place; bali’–considering; parama–great; ādare–with adoration; bari (varaṇa kari)– I choose, accept. [2] 
Text 2 I carefully observe the holy days related to Mādhava; they are the mother of devotion. With great adoration, I embrace Kṛṣṇa’s abode as my own.
Text 3
gaur āmāra,  ye-saba sthāne,
koralo bhramaṇa raṅge
se-saba sthāna,  heribo āmi,
pranayi-bhakata-saṅge
gaura–Gaurasundar; āmāra–my; ye–which; saba–all; sthāne–in the places; karala–did; bhramaṇa–tour; raṅge (līlāya)–during Pastimes; se–those; saba– all; sthāna–places; heriba–will behold āmi–I; praṇayi–loving; bhakata–of devotees; saṅge–in the company. [3] 
Text 3 In the company of loving devotees, I behold all the places my Gaurasundar visited during His Pastimes.
Text 4
mṛdaṅga-vādya,  śunite mana,
abasara sadā yāce
gaura-vihita,  kīrtana śuni’,
ānande hṛdoya nāce
mṛdaṅga–of the clay drum; vādya–sound; śunite–to hear; mana–heart; avasara (suyoga)–opportunity; sadā–always; yāche–begs; gaura–by Śrī Gaurasundar; vihita (anumata)–prescribed; kīrtana–the musical glorification; śuni’–hearing; ānande–with joy; hṛdaya–heart; nāche–dances. [4] 
Text 4 My heart always begs for the opportunity to hear the sound of the mṛdaṅga. Hearing the kīrtan prescribed by Śrī Gaurasundar, my heart dances with joy.
Text 5
yugala-mūrti,  dekhiyā mora,
parama-ānanda hoya
prasāda-sevā,  korite hoya,
sakala prapañca jaya
yugala–of the Divine Couple; mūrti–Deity form; dekhiyā–beholding; mora– my; parama–great; ānanda–joy; haya–happens; prasāda–of the remnants of food offerings; sevā–service; karite–in doing; haya–happens; sakala–all; prapaṣcha (paṣcha-bhūta nirmita jagat)–the universe made of the five mate¬rial elements; jaya–conquest. [5] 
Text 5 Beholding the Deity forms of the Divine Couple, I feel great joy. By honouring prasād, I overcome the entire material creation.
Text 6
ye-dina gṛhe,  bhajana dekhi,
gṛhete goloka bhāya
caraṇa-sīdhu,  dekhiyā gaṅgā,
sukha nā sīmā pāya
ye–which; dina–days; gṛhe–in house; bhajana–devotional service; dekhi– I see; gṛhete–within house; goloka—the spiritual abode of Kṛṣṇa; bhāya (anubhūta haya)–is experienced; charaṇa-sīdhu (śrī-charaṇāmṛta)–the nectar of the feet of the Lord; dekhiyā–seeing; gaṅgā–river Ganges; sukha–happi¬ness; nā–no; sīmā–limit; pāya–obtains. [6] 
Text 6 On days when I see devotional service going on within my home, I feel that Goloka has manifested there. Seeing the Ganges, the river of nectar that emanates from the Lord’s feet, my happiness has no limit.
Text 7
tulasī dekhi’,  juḍāya prāna,
mādhava-toṣanī jāni’
gaura-priya,  śāka-sevane,
jīvana sārthaka māni
tulasī–the dearmost plant of Kṛṣṇa; dekhi’–seeing; juḍāya–relieves; prāṇa– my heart; mādhava-toṣaṇī (Gaura-kṛṣṇa-priyā)–pleasing to Mādhava (pleasing to Śrī Gaura Kṛṣṇa); jāni’–knowing; gaura–of Śrī Gaurasundar; priya–dear, favourite; śāka–preparations of leafy greens; sevane–by serving; jīvana–my life; sārthaka (saphala)–successful; māni–I consider. [7] 
Text 7 Seeing Tulasī Devī relieves my heart, for I know she is pleasing to Mādhava. By honouring śāk, a favourite of Śrī Gaurasundar, I consider my life successful.
Text 8
bhakativinoda,  kṛṣṇa-bhajane,
anukūla pāya jāhā
prati-divase,  parama-sukhe,
swīkāra koroye tāhā
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; kṛṣṇa–of Kṛṣṇa; bhajane–for the service; anukūla–favourable; pāya–obtains; yāhā–whatever; prati–every; divase–on the day; parama–great; sukhe–with happiness; svīkāra (aṅgīkāra)–accept¬ance; karaye–does; tāhā–that. [8] 
Text 8 Whatever Bhakti Vinod obtains that is favourable to the service of Kṛṣṇa he accepts every day with the greatest joy.

Song 4
Text 1
rādhā-kunḍa-taṭa-kuñja-kuṭīr
govardhana-parvata, jāmuna-tīr
rādhā–of Rādhārāṇī; kuṇḍa–the pond; taṭa–on the bank; kuṣja–in a grove; kuṭīra (śrī kṛṣṇera vilāsa-bhavana)–the cottage (amorous pleasure-house of Śrī Kṛṣṇa); govardhana–known as Govardhan (‘He who nourishes the cows’); parvata–the hill; yāmuna–of the Yamunā; tīra–the bank. [1] 

Text 1 The cottage in the grove on the bank of Rādhā Kuṇḍa, Govardhan Hill, the banks of the river Yamunā …
Text 2
kusuma-sarovara, mānasa-gaṅgā
kalinda-nandinī vipula-taraṅga
kusuma-sarovara–the pond near Govardhan Hill; mānasa-gaṅgā–a pond near Govardhan Hill; kalinda-nandinī–of the river Yamunā (the daughter of Mount Kalinda); vipula–great; taraṅgā–waves. [2]
Text 2 Kusum Sarovar, Mānasa Gaṅgā, the great waves of the Yamunā …
Text 3
vaṁśī-vaṭa, gokula, dhīra-samīr
bṛndābana-taru-latikā-bānīr
vaṁśī-vaṭa–the place beneath a banyan tree near the site of the rāsa-līlā in Vṛndāvan where Kṛṣṇa stands and plays His flute; gokula–the land of Kṛṣṇa’s Pastimes; dhīra-samīra–a site of various Pastimes of Kṛṣṇa (lit. ‘gen¬tle breeze’); vṛndāvana–of the homeland of Kṛṣṇa (lit. forest of tulasī); taru– trees; latikā–vines; vānīra (vetasa vṛkṣa)–palm trees. [3] 
Text 3 Vaṁśī Vaṭ, Gokul, Dhīra Samīra, the trees, the vines, the palms of Vṛndāvan …

Text 4
khaga-mṛga-kula, malaya-bātās
mayūra, bhramara, muralī-vilās
khaga–birds; mṛga–animals; kula–multitudes; malaya (vasanta)–springtime; vātāsa (samīraṇa)–breezes; mayūra–peacocks; bhramara–bumblebees; muralī– of the eighteen-inch wooden flute known as muralī ; vilāsa–play. [4] 
Text 4 The birds, the animals, the cool springtime breeze, the peacocks, the bumblebees, the play of the muralī flute …
Text 5
venu, śṛṅga, pada-cihna, megha-mālā
vasanta, śaśaṅka, śaṅkha, karatāla
veṇu–the six-inch whistling flute known as veṇu; śṛṅga–horn; pada-chihṇa–footprints (of the cows); megha–of clouds; mālā–rows; vasanta– springtime; śaśāṅka–moon; śaṅkha–conch; karatāla–hand-cymbals. [5] 
Text 5 The veṇu flute, the buffalo-horn bugle, the footprints, the rows of clouds, the springtime, the moon, the conch, the kartāls …

Text 6
yugala-vilāse anukūla jāni
līlā-vilāse-uddīpaka māni
yugala–of the Divine Couple; vilāse–within the Pastimes; anukūla– favourable; jāni–I know; līlā-vilāsa–Their Pastimes of love; uddīpaka–stimu¬late; māni–I know. [6] 
Text 6 I know all of these things are favourable to the Divine Couple’s Pastimes. I know they all stimulate Their loving Pastimes.

Text 7
e saba choḍato kaṅhi nāhi jāu
e saba choḍato parāna hārāu
e–these; saba–all; chhoḍata–abandoning; kā̐hā (kothāo)–somewhere; nāhi– not; yāu̐–I will go; e–these; saba–all; chhoḍata–abandoning; parāṇa–my life; hārāu̐ (hārāi)–I will lose. [7] 
Text 7 I will never abandon these things and go elsewhere. I will lose my life if I abandon these things.
Text 8
bhakativinoda kohe, śuno kān!
tuwā uddīpaka hāmārā parān
bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; kahe–says; śuna–please listen; kāna!–O Kṛṣṇa!; tuyā–of You; uddīpaka (smāraka vastu-samūha)–stimulating (all things which cause remembrance); hāmāra–my; parāṇa–life and soul. [8] 
Text 8 Bhakti Vinod says, “Please listen, O Kān! All these things that remind me of You are my life and soul.”

Part 7 Hankering for Divine Service


Song 1
Text 1
hari he!
prapañce poḍiyā,  agati hoiyā,
nā dekhi upāya ār
agatira gati,  caraṇe śaraṇa,
tomāya korinu sār
hari–Lord; he–oh!; prapaṣche (pāṣcha-bhautika jagate)–in the material world (composed of the five gross elements, namely, earth, water, fire, air, and space); paḍiyā–falling; agati (asatkṛta)–helpless (a wrong-doer, one engaged in illusory activities); ha-iyā–becoming; nā–not; dekhi–I see; upāya–way; āra–another; agatira–of the shelterless; gati–the shelter (the Lord); charaṇe–at the feet; śaraṇa–refuge; tomāya–in You; karinu–I did; sāra–the essence. [1]
Text 1 O Lord! Having fallen into this material world and become wicked, I see no other means of deliverance. Shelter at Your feet is the only help for the helpless. I have accepted You as my be-all and end-all.
Text 2
karama geyāna,  kichu nāhi mora,
sādhana bhajana nāi
tumi kṛpā-moya,  āmi to’ kāṅgāla,
ahaitukī kṛpā cāi
karama–pious action; geyāna–knowledge; kichhu–something; nāhi–not; mora–mine; sādhana–devotional practice; bhajana–devotional service; nāi–there is no; tumi–You; kṛpā–mercy; maya–full of; āmi–I; ta’–certain¬ly; kāṅgāla (ati dīna)–poor (extremely fallen); ahaitukī (yogyatā apekṣā nā kariyā)–causeless (not depending on fitness); kṛpā–mercy; chāi–I desire. [2] 
Text 2 I perform no pious actions, I have no knowledge, I do not engage in any devotional practices, and I do not perform any devotional service. You are merciful, and I am most fallen. I pray for Your unconditional mercy.
Text 3
vākya-mano-vega,  krodha-jihvā-vega,
udara-upastha-vega
miliyā e saba,  saṁsāre bhāsā’ye,
diteche paramodvega
vākya–of speech; mana–of the mind; vega–the urges; krodha–of anger; jihvā–of the tongue; vega–the urges; udara–of the belly; upastha–and the genitals; vega–the urges; miliyā–meeting; e–these; saba–all; saṁsāre–in the material world; bhāsāye–casting me adrift; ditechhe–have given; paramod¬vega (dāruṇa duḥkha)–great anxiety (severe distress). [3] 
Text 3 Uniting together and casting me adrift in the ocean of material existence, the urges of speech, the mind, anger, the tongue, the belly, and the genitals cause me terrible distress. 


Text 4
aneka jatane,  se saba damane,
chāḍiyāchi āśā āmi
anāthera nātha!  ḍāki tava nāma,
ekhona bharasā tumi
aneka–numerous; yatane–by efforts; se–they (these urges); saba–all; damane– in subduing; chhāḍiyāchhi–have abandoned; āśā–hope; āmi–I; anāthera–of the helpless; nātha!–O Lord; ḍāki–I call; tava–Your; nāma–Name; ekhana– now; bharasā–shelter, hope; tumi–You. [4] 
Text 4 I have given up hope in subduing these urges by my own persistent endeavours. O Lord of the helpless! I call Your Name. You are now my only hope.
Song 2
Text 1
hari he!
arthera sañcaye,  viṣaya-prayāse,
āno-kathā-prajalpane
āno-adhikāra,  niyama āgrahe,
asat-saṅga-saṁghaṭane
hari–Lord; he!–oh!; arthera–of wealth; saṣchaye–in accumulating; viṣaya– for mundane ends; prayāse (udyame)–in endeavour; āna (bāje)–other (unnecessary); kathā (kṛṣṇa-kathā vyātīta anya-kathā)–talks (all talks other than those which relate to Kṛṣṇa); prajalpane (vṛthā vākya-vyaye)–in prattle (vain use of words); āna–for other; adhikāra–levels of qualification; niyama– prescriptions and prohibitions; āgrahe (anyera adhikāragata niyama grahaṇa o nijādhikāragata niyama agrahaṇa vā varjana-kārye)–in accepting (in accept¬ing the prescriptions and prohibitions meant for those of other stages of spir¬itual advancement and rejecting the prescriptions and prohibitions meant for one’s own stage of advancement); asat–of non-devotees; saṅga–association; saṁghaṭane (asādhura saṅga grahaṇe)–in joining with (in accepting the association of non-devotees).[1]
Text 1 O Lord! I have remained immersed in the defects of over-accumulating wealth, endeavouring for worldly ends, prattling about topics unrelated to You, acting in accordance with guidelines meant for others and disregarding guidelines meant for myself, associating with non-devotees, and being fickle-minded.
Text 2
asthira siddhānte,  rohinu mojiyā,
hari-bhakti roilo dūre
e hṛdoye mātro,  para-hiṁsā, mada,
pratiṣṭhā, śaṭhatā sphure
asthira–unsteady; siddhānte (laulya, aniśchita vichāra)–within conclusions (fickle-mindedness, indecision); rahinu–I remained; majiyā (magna ha-iyā)–being immersed; hari-bhakti–devotional service of Kṛṣṇa; raila (rahila)–remained; dūre–far away; e–this; hṛdaye–in the heart; mātra–only; para–towards others; hiṁsā–malice; mada (mattatā)– madness (intoxication); pratiṣṭhā (yaśolipsa)–prestige (desiring fame); śaṭhatā (dhūrtatā)–insincerity (mischievousness); sphure (sphurita haya)– appear (are present). [2]
Text 2 Thus devotion to You has remained far away from me. Only malice towards others, pride, desire for worldly prestige, and insincerity flourish within my heart.
Text 3
e saba āgraha,  chāḍite nārinu,
āpana doṣate mari
janama biphala,  hoilo āmāra,
ekhona ki kori, hari!
e–these; saba–all; āgraha (ākarṣaṇa)–attachments (attractions); chhāḍite–to abandon; nārinu–I was not able; āpana–own; doṣete–by faults; mari–I die; janama–birth; biphala–fruitless; ha-ila–became; āmāra–my; ekhana–now; ki– what?; kari–I do; hari!–O Lord! [3] 
Text 3 I have not been able to abandon any of these attachments. I now die due to my own defects. My birth has become useless. O Lord! What should I do now?
Text 4
āmi to’ patita,  patita-pāvana,
tomāra pavitra nāma
se sambandha dhori’,  tomāra caraṇe,
śaraṇa loinu hāma
āmi–I; ta’–certainly; patita–of the fallen; pāvana–saviour; tomāra–Your; pavitra–purifying; nāma–Name; se (sad-guru)–that (perfect spiritual mas¬ter); sambandha–relationship; dhari’ (grahaṇa kariyā)–holding (accepting); tomāra–Your; charaṇe–at the feet; śaraṇa–shelter; la-inu–took; hāma–I. [4] 
Text 4 I am fallen. Your purifying Name is the saviour of the fall¬en. Embracing that relationship (through my relationship with Śrī Guru), I have taken shelter at Your feet.
Song 3
Text 1
hari he!
bhajane utsāha,  bhaktite viśvāsa,
prema-labhe dhairya-dhana
bhakti-anukūla,  karma-pravartana,
asat-saṅga-visarjana
hari–Lord; he!–oh!; bhajane (śravaṇa-kīrtanādi bhaktyanuṣṭhāne)–for devotional practice (for the devotional practices of hearing, chanting, and so forth); utsāha–enthusiasm; bhaktite (bhakti-siddhānte)–in devotional service (in the perfect conclusions of pure devotion); viśvāsa (āsthā)–faith (convic¬tion); prema (kṛṣṇa-prīti)–of divine love (desire to lovingly satisfy Kṛṣṇa); lābhe (sādhane)–in the obtainment (in the process of obtaining); dhairya– of perseverance; dhana–the wealth; bhakti–to devotional service; anukūla– favourable; karma–activities; pravartana (pravṛtta haoyā)–engagement in (to be engaged); asat–bad; saṅga–association; visarjana–rejecting.[1]
Text 1 Enthusiasm for devotional practice, conviction in devotion, the wealth of perseverance in striving for prema, engagement in activities favourable to devotion, rejection of bad association.
Text 2
bhakti-sadācāra,  ei chaya guna,
nāhilo āmāra nātha!
kemone bhojibo,  tomāra caraṇa,
chāḍiyā māyāra sātha
bhakti–of devotional service; sat–proper; āchāra–behaviour; ei–these; chhaya–six; guṇa– qualities; nahila–are not; āmāra–mine; nātha!–O Lord!; kemane–how?; bhajiba– I will serve; tomāra–Your; charaṇa–feet; chhāḍiyā–abandoning; māyāra–of illusion; sātha–association. [2]
(2
) Proper devotional behaviour—I have never had these six qualities. O Lord! How shall I serve Your feet and abandon the association of māyā?
Text 3
garhita ācāre,  rohilāma moji’,
nā korinu sādhu-saṅga
lo’ye sādhu-veśa,  āne upadeśi,
e boḍo māyāra raṅga
garhita (nindita)–abominable (condemned); āchāre (karme)–in behaviour (activities); rahilāma–I remained; maji’–being immersed; nā–not; karinu–I did; sādhu–of saintly devotees; saṅga–association; la’ye–taking; sādhu–of a saintly devotee; veśa–the garb; āne–to others; upadeśi–advise; e–this; baḍa–great; māyāra–of illusion; raṅga (vichitra khelā)–trick (strange play). [3] 
Text 3 I have remained immersed in offensive behaviour and never associated with sādhus. Yet I wear the garb of a sādhu and instruct others. This is a great trick of māyā.
Text 4
e heno daśāya,  ahaitukī kṛpā,
tomāra pāibo, hari!
śrī-guru-āśroye,  ḍākibo tomāya,
kabe vā minati kori’
e–this; hena–such; daśāya–in a condition; ahaitukī–causeless; kṛpā–mercy; tomāra–Your; pāiba–I will obtain; hari!–O Lord!; śrī-guru–of my spiritual master; āśraye–in the shelter; ḍakiba–I will call; tomāya–to You; kabe– when?; vā–[emphatic particle]; minati–prayer; kari’–doing. [4] 
Text 4 In such a state, I will attain only Your unconditional mer¬cy, O Lord! When will I prayerfully call out to You under the shelter of Śrī Guru?
Song 4
Text 1
hari he!
dāna, pratigraha,  mitho gupta-kathā,
bhakṣana, bhojana-dāna
saṅgera lakṣana,  ei chaya hoya,
ihāte bhaktira prana
hari–Lord; he!–oh!; dāna–giving gifts; pratigraha (dāna grahaṇa)–accepting gifts; mitho (paraspara)–mutual; gupta–confidential; kathā–talks; bhakṣaṇa– partaking of foodstuffs; bhojana–foodstuffs; dāna–giving; saṅgera–of asso-ciation; lakṣaṇa–the characteristics; ei–these; chhaya–six; haya–are; ihāte–in these; bhaktira–of devotion; prāṇa–the life. [1] 
Text 1 O Lord! Giving and accepting gifts, disclosing and listen¬ing to confidential matters, giving and partaking of foodstuffs— these are the six forms of loving association. The life-force of devotion abides within them.

Text 2
tattva nā bujhiye,  jñāne vā ajñāne,
asate e saba kori’
bhakti hārāinu,  saṁsārī hoinu,
sudūre rohile hari
tattva–this truth; nā–not; bujhiye–understanding; jṣāne–in knowledge; vā– or; ajṣāne–in ignorance; asate–with non-devotees, in a materialistic manner; e–these; saba–all; kari’–doing; bhakti–devotion; hārāinu–I lost; saṁsārī– a worldly person, a family man; ha-inu–I became; sudūre–very far away; rahile–remain; hari–the Lord. [2] 
Text 2 Not understanding this truth, and knowingly or unknow¬ingly associating with non-devotees in all these ways, I have lost devotion and become a worldly person. The Lord has thus remained far away from me.

Text 3
kṛṣṇa-bhakta-jane,  ei saṅga-lakṣane,
ādara koribo jabe
bhakti-mahā-devī,  āmāra hṛdoya-
āsane bosibe tabe
kṛṣṇa–of Kṛṣṇa; bhakta–devotee; jane–with persons; ei–these; saṅga–of association; lakṣaṇe–characteristics; ādara–adore; kariba–I will do; yabe– when; bhakti–of devotion; mahā–great; devī–goddess; āmāra–my; hṛdaya–of the heart; āsane–in the seat; basibe–will sit; tabe–then. [3] 
Text 3 When I will adore Kṛṣṇa’s devotees through these six forms of association, the great goddess of devotion will sit upon the throne of my heart.
Text 4
yoṣit-saṅgī-jana,  kṛṣṇaābhakta āra,
duṅhu-saṅga-parihari’
tava bhakta-jana-  saṅga anukṣana,
kabe vā hoibe hari!
yoṣit-saṅgī (strī-saṅgī)–those who mix with women; jana–persons; kṛṣṇābhakta (kṛṣṇera abhakta arthāt bhakti-hīna—yathā māyāvādī, nirviśeṣavādī prabhṛti)–those who are devoid of devotion to Kṛṣṇa (illusionists, imper-sonalists, materialists, and so on); āra–and; duhu̐ (dui-janera)–of these two persons; saṅga–the association; parihari’–abandoning; tava–Your; bhakta– devotee; jana–persons; saṅga–the association; anukṣaṇa–at every moment; kabe–when?; vā–[an emphatic particle]; ha-ibe–will be; hari!–O Lord! [4] 
Text 4 O Lord! When will I abandon the association of both those who mix with the opposite sex and non-devotees, and constantly associate with Your devotees?
Song 5
Text 1
hari he!
saṅga-doṣa-śūnya,  dīkṣitādīkṣita,
jadi tava nāma gā’ya
mānase ādara,  koribo tāhāre,
jāni’ nija-jana tāya
hari–Lord; he!–oh!; saṅga–association; doṣa (asat)–faulty (bad); śūnya (mukta)–free from; dīkṣita (śrī guru-padāśrita)–initiated (sheltered at the feet of Śrī Guru); adīkṣita (tat-pūrvāvasthā prāpta)–not initiated (situated in the preliminary stage prior to taking shelter of Śrī Guru); yadi–if; tava–Your; nāma–Name; gā’ya–sings; mānase–within my heart; ādara (tā̐hāra hṛdgata bhāvera prati samāna)–honour (for their heartfelt faith and devotion); kariba–I will do; tā̐hāre–of them; jāni’–knowing; nija–own; jana–person; tāya–them. [1] 
Text 1 O Lord! If one free from bad association, be they initiated or yet to be initiated, sings Your Name, I will honour them within my heart, knowing them to be Yours.
Text 2
dīkṣita hoiyā,  bhaje tuwā pada,
tāhāre pranati kori
ananya-bhajane,  vijña yei jana,
tāhāre sevibo, hari!
dīkṣita–initiated; ha-iyā–being; bhaje–serves; tuyā–Your; pada–feet; tā̐hāre (sad-guru padāśraye prakāśita bhakti-chihṇa bhaktake)–to them (to a devotee who exhibits symptoms of devotion while sheltered at the feet of a true Guru); praṇati (prakāśita maryādā dāna kariyā)–bow (offering honour); kari (kariba)–I do (I will do); ananya (aikāntika)–unalloyed (sincere, wholehearted); bhajane (bhajanaśīlera)–in devotional service (of devotional prac¬tice); vijṣa–expert; yei–who; jana–person; tā̐hāre–their; seviba (sevā kariba)– I will serve; hari!–O Lord! [2] 

Text 2 I will offer my obeisance to anyone who has been initiated and serves Your feet. I will serve anyone who is expert in unal¬loyed devotional service, O Lord!
Text 3
sarva-bhūte sama,  ye bhaktera mati,
tāhāra darśane māni
āpanāke dhanya,  se saṅga pāiyā,
caritārtha hoiluṅ jāni
sarva–all; bhūte–to living entities; sama–equal; ye–who; bhaktera–of a devotee; mati–disposition; tā̐hāra (samudaya vastute kṛṣṇa sambandha-darśī bhaktake)–their (a devotee who sees the presence or connection of Kṛṣṇa within all things); darśane–in the sight; māni–I consider; āpanāke–to myself; dhanya–fortunate; se–their; saṅga–association; pāiyā–obtaining; charitārtha (kṛtārtha)–fulfilled; ha-ilu̐–I have become; jāni–I know. [3]
Text 3 I consider myself fortunate to attain the merciful glance of a devotee who is equally disposed towards all beings (who sees Your presence within everything). Attaining their association, I know myself to have become fulfilled. 

Text 4
niṣkapaṭa-mati,  vaiṣṇavera prati,
ei dharma kabe pā’bo
kabe saṁsāra-  sindhu-pāra ho’ye,
tava braja-pure jā’bo
niṣkapaṭa (akṛtrima-bhāve)–non-deceitful (in a non-artificial, sincere way); mati–disposition; vaiṣṇavera–of devotees; prati–towards; ei–this; dharma– nature; kabe–when?; pā’ba–I will obtain; kabe–when?; e–this; saṁsāra–of material existence; sindhu–the ocean; pāra–to the farther shore; ha’ye–being; tava–Your; vraja–known as ‘Vraja’; pure–to the village; yā’ba–I will go. [4] 
Text 4 When will I attain this sincere disposition towards Your devotees? When will I cross over this ocean of material exist¬ence and enter Your abode of Vraja?
Song 6
Text 1
hari he!
nīra-dharma-gata,  jāhnavī-salile,
paṅka-phena dṛṣṭa hoya
tathāpi kakhona,  brahma-drava-dharma,
se salila nā chāḍoya
hari–Lord; he!–oh!; nīra–of water; dharma–the nature; gata–as; jāhṇavī–the Ganges; salile–in the waters; paṅka–mud; phena–foam; dṛṣṭa–seen; haya– are; tathāpi–still; kakhana–at any time; brahma (chinmaya)–spiritual; drava (tāralya)–fluid (liquid state); dharma–nature; se–that; salila–water; nā–not; chāḍaya–gives up. [1] 
Text 1 O Lord! Mud and foam are seen in the water of the Ganges; they naturally appear within river water. Nevertheless, the water of the Ganges never loses its spiritual nature.

Text 2
vaiṣnava-śarīra,  aprākṛta sadā,
swabhāva-vapura dharme
kabhu nāhe jaḍa,  tathāpi ye ninde,
poḍe se viṣamādharme
vaiṣṇava–of a devotee; śarīra–the body; aprākṛta (prakṛtira niyamera atīta)– supramundane (beyond the laws of material nature); sadā–always; svabhāva (nīcha-kula āvirbhāva, karkaśatā, vā ālasyādi svābhāvika doṣa)–of the inborn nature (faults within their inborn nature, such as appearance within a low section of society, roughness [harshness or crassness], laziness, and so forth); vapura (kadarya-varṇa, kugaṭhana, pīḍā-jarādi-janita kudarśana prabhṛti śarīra-gata doṣa)–of the body (faults within their body, such as an unpleasant complexion, a deformed figure, disease, unsightliness as a result of age, and so forth); dharme–in the nature; kabhu–at any time; nahe–is not; jaḍa–material; tathāpi–still; ye–who; ninde–blasphemes; paḍe– falls; se–they; viṣama (gurutara)–terrible (extremely heavy); adharme–into irreligion. [2] 
Text 2 Similarly, the body of a devotee is always supramundane. Although one may see faults within the inborn nature or body of a devotee, a devotee is never mundane. One who nonethe¬less criticises a devotee commits a terrible sin.
Text 3
sei aparādhe,  yamera jātanā,
pāya jīva avirata
he nanda-nandana!  sei aparādhe,
yeno nāhi hoi hata
sei–this; aparādhe–as a result of offence; yamera–of Yamarāj, the lord of punishment; yātanā–tortures; pāya–attaining; jīva–the soul; avirata– incessantly; he–oh; nanda–of Nanda Mahārāj; nandana!–darling son!; sei– that; aparādhe–by offence; yena–so that; nāhi–not; ha-i–I become; hata– destroyed. [3] 
Text 3 For such an offence, the soul is incessantly subjected to the tortures of Yamarāj. O Nanda Nandan! May I never be ruined by committing such an offence.
Text 4
tomāra vaiṣṇava,  vaibhava tomāra,
āmāre korunā doyā
tabe mora gati,  ha’be tava prati,
pā’bo tava pada-chāyā
tomāra–Your; vaiṣṇava–devotee; vaibhava–wealth, glory; tomāra–Your; āmāre–to me; karuṇa–may they do; dayā–mercy; tabe–then; mora–my; gati– movement; habe–will be; tava–Your; prati–towards; pā’ba–I will obtain; tava–Your; pada–of the feet; chhāyā–the shade. [4] 
Text 4 Your devotees are Your wealth. May they bestow mercy upon me; then my destiny will lead me towards You, and I will attain the shade of Your feet.
Song 7
Text 1
ohe!
vaiṣṇava ṭhākura,  doyāra sāgara,
e dāse korunā kori’
diyā pada-chāyā,  śodho he āmāya,
tomāra caraṇa dhori
ohe!–oh!; vaiṣṇava–devotee; ṭhākura–worshippable, topmost; dayāra–of mercy; sāgara–ocean; e–this; dāse–to this servant; karuṇā–mercy; kari’–doing; diyā– giving; pada–of Your feet; chhāyā–the shade; śodha–purify; he–oh!; āmāya– to me; tomāra–Your; charaṇa–feet; dhari–I clasp. [1] 
Text 1 O Vaiṣṇav Ṭhākur! O Ocean of Mercy! Please be merciful to this servant. Give me the shade of your feet and purify me. I clasp hold of your feet.
Text 2
chaya vega domi’,  chaya doṣa śodhi’,
chaya guna deho’ dāse
chaya sat-saṅga,  deho’ he āmāre,
bosechi saṅgera āśe
chhaya–the six; vega–urges; dami’–subduing; chhaya–the six; doṣa–defects; śodhi’–purifying; chhaya–the six; guṇa–qualities; deha’–please give; dāse–to this servant; chhaya–the six; sat–with devotees saṅga–forms of association; deha’–please give; he–oh; āmāre–to me; basechhi–I have sat; saṅgera–of association; āśe–with the desire. [2] 
Text 2 Please subdue the six urges, purify me of the six defects, and give this servant the six qualities. Please grant me the six types of association. I have sat before you in hope of attaining that association.
Text 3
ekakī āmāra,  nāhi pāya bala,
hari-nāma-saṅkīrtane
tumi kṛpā kori’,  śraddhā-bindu diyā,
deho’ kṛṣṇa-nāma-dhane
ekākī–alone; āmāra–my; nāhi–do not; pāya–obtain; bala–ability; hari–of the Lord; nāma–of the Name; saṅkīrtane–to engage in complete glorification and chanting; tumi–you; kṛpā–mercy; kari’–doing; śraddhā–of faith; bindu– a drop; diyā–giving; deha’–please give; kṛṣṇa–of Kṛṣṇa; nāma–of the Name; dhane–in the wealth. [3] 
Text 3 Alone I do not have the ability to properly chant the Lord’s Name. Please mercifully give me a drop of faith; give me the wealth of Kṛṣṇa’s Name.
Text 4
kṛṣṇa se tomāra,  kṛṣṇa dite pāro,
tomāra śakati āche
āmi to’ kāṅgāla,  `kṛṣṇa’ `kṛṣṇa’ boli’,
dhāi tava pāche pāche
kṛṣṇa–the Lord; se–He; tomāra–yours; kṛṣṇa–Kṛṣṇa Himself; dite–to give; pāra–able; tomāra–your; śakati–power; āchhe–is present; āmi–I; ta’–certainly; kāṅgāla–poor; kṛṣṇa–the Name of ‘Kṛṣṇa’; kṛṣṇa–the Name of ‘Kṛṣṇa’; bali’– saying; dhāi–I run; tava–your; pāchhe–after; pāchhe–behind. [4] 
Text 4 Kṛṣṇa is yours. You are able to give Kṛṣṇa; you have that power. I am very poor. Calling, ‘Kṛṣṇa!’ ‘Kṛṣṇa!’, I run after you.
Song 8
Text 1
hari he!
tomāre bhuliyā,  avidyā-pīḍāya,
pīḍita rasanā mora
kṛṣṇa-nāma-sudhā,  bhālo nāhi lāge,
viṣaya-sukhate bhora
hari–Lord; he!–oh!; tomāre–about You; bhuliyā–forgetting; avidyā–of ignorance, averse to You; pīḍāya–with the disease jaundice, a condition which makes sweet taste bitter; pīḍita–afflicted; rasanā–tongue; mora–my; kṛṣṇa–of Kṛṣṇa; nāma–the Name; sudhā–nectar; bhāla–good; nāhi–not; lāge–strikes; viṣaya–mundane; sukhete–in happiness; bhora–engrossed. [1] 
Text 1 O Lord! I have forgotten You, and my tongue has become afflicted with the jaundice of ignorance. Engrossed in mun¬dane pleasures, my tongue does not like the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s Name.
Text 2
prati-dina jadi,  ādara koriyā,
se nāma kīrtana kori
sitapala jeno,  nāśi’ roga-mūla,
krame swādu hoya, hari!
prati–every; dina–day; yadi–if; ādara–faith; kariyā–doing; se–that; nāma– Name; kīrtana–chanting, glorification; kari–I do; sitapala (michhari)–sugar candy; yena–like; nāśi’–destroying; roga–of the disease (jaundice); mūla–the root; krame–gradually; svādu–taste; haya–happens; hari!–O Hari! [2] 
Text 2 Yet if I faithfully chant the Name every day, then, as sugar candy eradicates jaundice, so my taste for the Name will gradu¬ally develop, O Lord!
Text 3
durdaiva āmāra,  se nāme ādara,
nā hoilo, doyāmoya!
daśa aparādha,  āmāra durdaiva,
kemone hoibe kṣoya
durdaiva (duṣkṛti, aparādha)–misfortune (misbehaviour, offences); āmāra–my; se–that; nāme–to the Name; ādara–love; nā–not; ha-ila–hap¬pened; dayāmaya–merciful; daśa–ten; aparādha–offences; āmāra–my; durdaiva–misfortune; kemane–how?; ha-ibe–will be; kṣaya–destruction. [3] 
Text 3 My misfortune is that I have never had faith in the Name. O merciful Lord! How will the ten offences, my misfortune, be destroyed?
Text 4
anudina jeno,  tava nāma gāi,
kramete kṛpāya tava
aparādha jā’be,  nāme ruci ha’be,
āswādibo nāmāsava
anudina (nirantara)–every day (incessantly); yena–as; tava–Your; nāma– Name; gāi–I sing; kramete–gradually; kṛpāya–by mercy; tava–Your; aparādha–offences; yā’be–will go; nāma–for Your Name; ruchi–taste; ha’be– will be; āsvādiba–I will taste; nāmāsaba (nāma-madhu)–the nectar (honey) of Your Name. [4] 
Text 4 As I constantly chant Your Name, my offences will gradually go away by Your mercy. I will attain taste for Your Name, and I will relish Your Name’s nectar.
Song 9
Text 1
hari he!
śrī-rūpa-gosāi,  śrī-guru-rūpete,
śikṣā dila mora kāne
“jāno mora kathā,  nāmera kāṅgāla!
rati pā’be nāma-gāne
hari–Lord; he!–oh!; śrī-rūpa-gosāṣi–Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī Prabhu; śrī-guru-rūpete–in the form of my spiritual master; śikṣā–instruction; dilā–gave; mora–my; kāṇe–in the ear; jāna–understand; mora–my; kathā–words; nāmera–for the Name; kāṅgāla!–O beggar!; rati–melted-hearted, loving attachment; pā’be–will obtain; nāma–the Name; gāne–for singing. [1] 
Text 1 O Lord! Śrī Rūpa Gosāṣi, in the form of Śrī Guru, spoke these instructions into my ears: “O beggar for the Name! Understand my words and you will attain loving attachment for chanting the Name.
Text 2
kṛṣṇa-nāma-rūpa-  guna-sucarita,
parama jatane kori’
rasanā-mānase,  koraho niyoga,
krama-vidhi anusari’
kṛṣṇa–of Kṛṣṇa; nāma–the Names; rūpa–Forms; guṇa–Qualities; sucharita (aprākṛta-līlā)–supramundane Pastimes; parama–great; yatane–with care; kari’–doing; rasanā–tongue; mānase–the mind; karaha–do; niyoga– engagement; krama-vidhi–the gradual process; anusari’ (anusaraṇa kariyā)– following. [2] 
Text 2 “Engage your tongue and mind in chanting and remember¬ing Kṛṣṇa’s Names, Forms, Qualities, and Pastimes with great care, following the gradual process of development.
Text 3
braje kori’ bāsa,  rāgānugā hoiyā,
smaraṇa kīrtana koro
e nikhila kāla,  koraho jāpana,
upadeśa-sāra dharo’ ”
vraje–in Vraja; kari’–doing; vāsa–residence; rāgānugā (nitya-siddha rāgātmika vraja-vāsī janera anugatyā)–follower of the eternally perfect rāgātmikā devotees who reside in Vraja; haṣā–becoming; smaraṇa–remem¬bering; kīrtana–chanting, glorification; kara–do; e–this; nikhila–all; kāla– time; karaha–do; yāpana–spend; upadeśa–of instructions; sāra–the essence; dhara–hold. [3] 
Text 3 “Reside in Vraja, become a rāgānugā, and engage in remembrance and kīrtan. Spend all of your time in this way, and cher¬ish this as the essence of all instruction.”
Text 4
hā! rūpa-gosāi,  doyā kori’ kabe,
dibe dine braja-bāsa
rāgātmika tumi,  tava padānuga,
hoite dāsera āśā
hā!–oh!; rūpa-gosāṣi–Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī Prabhu; dayā–mercy; kari’– doing; kabe–when; dibe–will give; dīne–to this beggar; vraja–in Vraja; vāsa– residence; rāgātmika (vrajera nitya-siddha dāsa, sakhā, pitrādi o preyasīra gaṇa—ihārā rāgātmika jana)–a devotee who by nature has deep loving attachment for the service of Kṛṣṇa (rāga) and who as a result is perpetually absorbed in the service of Kṛṣṇa (the eternally perfect residents of Vraja who serve Kṛṣṇa as His servants, friends, guardians, and lovers); tumi–you; tava– your; pada–the footsteps; anuga–following; ha-ite–to become; dāsera–of a servant; āśā–desire, aspiration. [4] 
Text 4 O Śrī Rūpa Gosāṣi! When will you mercifully grant this beggar residence in Vraja? You are a rāgātmika devotee. To follow in your footsteps is this servant’s desire.
Song 10
Text 1
gurudev!
boḍo kṛpā kori’,  gauḍa-vana mājhe,
godrume diyācho sthāna
ājñā dila more,  ei braje bosi’,
hari-nāma koro gāna
gurudeva!–O spiritual master!; baḍa–great; kṛpā–mercy; kari’–doing; gauḍa–of the land of ‘Gauḍa’, the region where Śrīman Mahāprabhu enacted His Pastimes; vana–the forest; mājhe–in the midst; godrume (abhinna nandīśvara)–on the island of ‘Godrum’ (the non-different form of Śrī Nandīśvar); diyācha–have given; sthāna–a place; ājṣā–order; dila–gave; more–to me; ei–this; vraje (vraja abhinna navadvīp)–in Vraja (in Nabadwīp which is non-different from Vraja); vasi’–residing; hari–of the Lord; nāma– the Name; kara–do; gāna–song. [1] 
Text 1 O Gurudev! You have very mercifully given me a place in Śrī Godrumdwīp amid the forests of Gauḍa, and ordered me: “Reside in this abode which is non-different from Vraja and chant the Lord’s Name.”
Text 2
kintu kabe prabhu,  yogyatā arpibe,\
e dāsere doyā kori’
citta sthira habe,  sakala sohibo,
ekānte bhajibo hari
kintu–but; kabe–when?; prabho–O master; yogyatā–qualification; arpibe– you will give; e–this; dāsere–to the servant; dayā–mercy; kari’–doing; chitta–the heart; sthira–steadfast; habe–will be; sakala–all; sahiba–I will toler¬ate; ekānte–in a solitary place, sincerely; bhajiba–I will serve; hari–my Lord. [2] 
Text 2 But when, O master, will you mercifully grant this serv¬ant the qualification to do this? Then my heart will become steadfast, I will tolerate everything, and I will serve the Lord sincerely.
Text 3
śaiśava-yauvane,  jaḍa-sukha-saṅge,
abhyāsa hoilo manda
nija-karma-doṣe,  e deho hoilo,
bhajanera pratibandha
śaiśava–childhood; yauvane–in youth; jaḍa–material; sukha–happiness; saṅge–in association with; abhyāsa–habits; ha-ila–were; manda–bad; nija– own; karma–actions; doṣe–by the fault; e–this; deha–body; ha-ila–became; bhajanera–to devotional service; pratibandha (antarāya, vighna, bādhā)–an obstacle (obstruction, hindrance, impediment). [3] 
Text 3 In my childhood and youth, I was attached to material happiness and my habits were wicked. Now because of my sins this body has become an impediment to engagement in service.
Text 4
vārdhakye ekhona,  pañca-roge hata,
kemone bhojibo bolo’
kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā,  tomāra caraṇe,
poḍiyāchi suvihvala
vārdhakye–in old age; ekhana–now; paṣcha (vividha)–five (various); roge–by diseases; hata–attacked; kemane–how?; bhajiba–I will serve; bala’–please say; kā̐diyā–weeping; kā̐diyā–and weeping; tomāra–your; charaṇe–at the feet; paḍiyāchhi–I have fallen; suvihvala–greatly overwhelmed. [4] 
Text 4 Now aged, I am afflicted by various diseases. Tell me, how shall I serve? Crying incessantly, I have fallen at your feet, utterly overwhelmed.

Song 11
Text 1
gurudev!
kṛpā-bindu diyā,  koro’ ei dāse,
tṛṇāpekṣā ati hīna
sakala sahane,  bala diyā koro’,
nija-māne spṛhā-hīna
gurudeva!–O spiritual master!; kṛpā–of mercy; bindu–a drop; diyā– giving; kara’–please make; ei–this; dāse–to the servant; tṛṇa–blade of grass; apekṣā–more than; ati–very; dīna–humble; sakala–all; sahane–for tolerating; bala–strength; diyā–giving; kara’–please make; nija–own; māne–for honour; spṛhā–desire; hīna–devoid. [1] 
Text 1 O Gurudev! Give this servant a drop of your mercy and make him more humble than a blade of grass. Give him the strength to tolerate everything, and make him free from any desire for personal honour.
Text 2
sakale sammāna,  korite śakati,
deho’ nātha! jathājatha
tabe to’ gāibo,  hari-nāma-sukhe,
aparādha ha’be hata
sakale–to everyone; sammāna–honour; karite–to do; śakati–the strength; deha’–please give; nātha!–O master!; yathāyatha–befittingly; tabe–then; ta’–certainly; gāiba–I will sing; hari–of the Lord; nāma–the Name; sukhe– happily; aparādha–offences; ha’be–will be; hata–destroyed. [2] 
Text 2 O master! Give me the ability to befittingly honour every¬one. Then I will sing the Lord’s Name happily, and all my of¬fences will be eradicated.
Text 3
kabe heno kṛpā,  labhiyā e jana,
kṛtārtha hoibe, nātha!
śakti-buddhi-hīna,  āmi ati dīna,
koro’ more ātma-sātha
kabe–when?; hena–such; kṛpā–mercy; labhiyā–obtaining; e–this; jana– person; kṛtārtha–fulfilled; ha-ibe–will be; nātha!–O master!; śakti–strength; buddhi–and intelligence; hīna–devoid; āmi–I; ati–greatly; dīna–distressed; kara’–please do; more–to me; ātma–self; sātha–with. [3] 
Text 3 When will this soul attain such mercy and become ful¬filled? O master! I am devoid of ability and intelligence, and greatly distressed. Please accept me as your own.
Text 4
yogyatā-vicāre,  kichu nāhi pāi,
tomāra karuṇā—sāra
karuṇā nā hoile,  kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā,
prāṇa nā rākhibo āra
yogyatā–fitness; vichāre–in considering; kichhu–anything; nāhi–not; pāi– I obtain; tomāra–your; karuṇā–mercy; sāra–the essence; karuṇā–merciful; nā–not; haile–if you are; kā̐diyā–crying; kā̐diyā–and crying; prāṇa–life; nā– not; rākhiba–I will maintain; āra–any more. [4] 
Text 4 When I examine my qualifications, I find none. Your mercy is everything. If you are not merciful to me, then, crying incessantly, I will not live any longer.
Song 12
Text 1
gurudev!
kabe mora sei din ha’be
mana sthira kori’,  nirjane bosiyā,
kṛṣṇa-nāma gā’bo jabe
saṁsāra-phukāra,  kāne nā poṣibe,
deho-roga dūre ro’be
gurudeva!–O spiritual master!; kabe–when?; mora–mine; sei–that; dina–day; ha’be–will be; mana–mind; sthira–steady; kari’–doing; nirjane–in a solitary place; vasiyā–residing; kṛṣṇa–of Kṛṣṇa; nāma–the Name; gāba–I will sing; yabe–when; saṁsāra–of the material world; phukāra (kolāhala)–loud shout¬ing (confused noise); kāṇe–in the ear; nā–not; paśibe–will enter; deha–of the material body; roga (smṛti)–disease (remembrance); dūre–far away; rabe–will remain. [1] 
Text 1 O Gurudev! When will that day be mine, when I will steady my mind, reside in a solitary place, and chant Kṛṣṇa’s Name? Then all the cacophony of the material world will no longer enter my ears, and the disease of bodily consciousness will remain far away from me.
Text 2
`hare kṛṣṇa’ boli’,  gāhite gāhite,
nayane bohibe lora
dehete pulaka,  udita hoibe,
premete koribe bhora
‘hare kṛṣṇa’–O Rādhā! O Kṛṣṇa!; bali’–calling; gāhite–chanting; gāhite–and chanting; nayane–from my eyes; bahibe–will flow; lora (aśru)–tears; dehete– in the body; pulaka (romāṣcha)–horripilation (ecstasy); udita–rise; ha-ibe– will be; premete–with divine love; karibe–will do; bhora–overcome. [2] 
Text 2 Chanting continuously, I will call out, “Hare Krṣṇa”, tears will flow from my eyes, the hair of my body will stand on end, and I will be overwhelmed with prema.
Text 3
gada-gada vānī,  mukhe bāhiribe,
kāṅpibe śarīra mama
gharma muhur muhuḥ,  virvarna hoibe,
stambhita pralaya sama
gada-gada–faltering; vāṇī–utterances; mukhe–from my mouth; vāhiribe– will come out; kā̐pibe–will tremble; śarīra–body; mama–my; gharma–perspiration; muhuḥ–again; muhuḥ–and again; vivarṇa–turning pale; ha-ibe– will be; stambhita–stunned; pralaya–devastation; sama–like. [3] 
Text 3 Faltering utterances will issue from my mouth. My body will tremble, perspire again and again, turn pale, and become stunned as though devastated. 


Text 4
niṣkapaṭe heno,  daśā kabe ha’be,
nirantara nāma gā’bo
āveśe rohiyā,  deha-yātrā kori’,
tomāra karunā pā’bo
niṣkapaṭe–without deceit, sincerely; hena–such; daśā–condition, state of ecstasy; kabe–when?; ha’be–will be; nirantara–incessantly; nāma–the Name; gāba–I will chant; āveśe–in ecstasy; rahiyā–remaining; deha–of the body; yātrā–maintenance; kari’–doing; tomāra–your; karuṇā–mercy; pāba–I will obtain. [4] 
Text 4 When will I genuinely experience such a state? Then I will chant the Name incessantly. Remaining rapt in ecstasy and somehow or other maintaining my body, I will receive your mercy.
Song 13
Text 1
gurudev!
kabe tava karunā-prakāśe
śrī-gaurāṅga-līlā,  hoya nitya-tattwa,
ei dṛḍha viśvāse
`hari hari’ boli’,  godruma-kānane,
bhromibo darśana-āśe
gurudeva!–O spiritual master!; kabe–when?; tava–your; karuṇā–mercy; prakāśe–by the manifestation; śrī-gaurāṅga–of Śrīman Mahāprabhu; līlā–the Pastimes; haya–become; nitya–eternal; tattva–truth; ei–this; dṛḍha–firm; viśvāse–with faith; hari–Name of ‘Hari’; hari–Name of ‘Hari’; bali’–calling; godruma–of the island known as ‘Godrum’; kānane–in the forest; bhrami¬ba–I will wander; darśana (bahir-darśana)–to see (to see outwardly before me); āśe–with the desire. [1] 
Text 1 O Gurudev! When, by the manifestation of your mercy, will I have firm faith in the eternal truth of Śrī Gaurāṅga’s Pastimes, and wander amid the forest of Śrī Godrumdwīp calling out, “Hari!” “Hari!” in hope of beholding those Pastimes before me?

Text 2
nitāi, gaurāṅga,  adwaita, śrīvāsa,
gadādhara,—pañca-jana
kṛṣṇa-nāma-rase,  bhāsā’be jagat,
kori’ mahā-saṅkīrtana
nitāi–Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu; gaurāṅga–Śrīman Mahāprabhu; advaita–Śrī Advaita Prabhu; śrīvāsa–Śrīvās Ṭhākur; gadādhara–Gadādhar Paṇḍit; paṣcha– five; jana–persons; kṛṣṇa–of Kṛṣṇa; nāma–the Names; rase–with the nectar; bhāsā’be–will make float; jagat (bhuvana)–the universe (the world); kari’– doing; mahā–great; saṅkīrtana–congregational chanting. [2] 
Text 2 Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, Śrī Advaita Prabhu, Śrī Śrīvās Ṭhākur, and Śrī Gadādhar Paṇḍit— these five great personages will inundate the world with the rasa of Kṛṣṇa’s Name by performing mahāsaṅkīrtan.
Text 3
nartana-vilāsa,  mṛdaṅga-vādana,
śunibo āpana-kāne
dekhiyā dekhiyā,  se līlā-mādhurī,
bhāsibo premera bane
nartana–of dancing; vilāsa–Pastimes; mṛdaṅga–of the clay drum; vādana– sound; śuniba–I will hear; āpana–my own; kāṇe–with the ears; dekhiyā–see¬ing; dekhiyā–and seeing; se–those; līlā–of the Pastimes; mādhurī–sweetness; bhāsiba–I will float; premera–of divine love; vāne–in a flood. [3] 
Text 3 I will hear with my own ears the sounds of the mṛdaṅga and the movements of Their dancing. Beholding the sweet beauty of such Pastimes, I will float in a flood of prema.
Text 4
nā dekhi’ ābāra,  se līlā-ratana,
kāṅdi hā gaurāṅga! boli’
āmāre viṣayī,  pāgala boliyā,
aṅgete dibeka dhūli
nā–not; dekhi’–seeing; ābāra–again; se–these; līlā–Pastimes; ratana–jewel-like; kā̐di–I cry; hā–oh!; gaurāṅga–the name ‘Gaurāṅga’; bali’–calling; āmāre–to me; viṣayī–materialists; pāgala–a madman; baliyā–calling; aṅgete–on my body; dibeka–will put; dhūli–dust. [4] 
Text 4 Again, not seeing those jewel-like Pastimes before me, I will cry, calling out, “O Gaurāṅga!” Considering me a madman, ma¬terialists will kick dust upon my body.
Thus ends the section on Bhajana-Lālasā.
Part 8 Hankering for Spiritual Perfection


Song 1
Text 1
kabe gaura-vane,  suradhunī-taṭe,
`hā rādhe hā kṛṣṇa’ bole’
kāṅdiyā beḍā’bo,  deho-sukha chāḍi’,
nānā latā-taru-tale
kabe–when?; gaura (śrī gaurasundarer)–of Śrī Gaurasundar; vane (vihāra-kṣetre)–in the forest (in the place of the Pastimes of Śrī Gaurasundar—Śrī Nabadwīp Dhām); suradhunī–of the Ganges; taṭe–on the bank; hā–oh!; rādhe–Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; hā–oh!; kṛṣṇa–Kṛṣṇa; bale–say; kā̐diyā–crying; beḍāba–I will wander; deha–of the body; sukha–happiness; chhāḍi’–aban¬doning; nānā–various; latā–creepers; taru–trees; tale–at the base. [1]
Text 1 When will I abandon all bodily pleasures and wander along the banks of the Ganges beneath the trees and creepers of the forests of the land of Śrī Gaurasundar, crying and calling out, “O Rādhā! O Kṛṣṇa!”?
Text 2
śwa-paca-gṛhete,  māgiyā khāibo,
pibo saraswatī-jala
puline puline,  gaḍā-gaḍi dibo,
kori’ kṛṣṇa-kolāhala
śvapacha (kukura māṁsa-bhojī chaṇḍāla)–of low-class persons who eat dog-meat; gṛhete–in the homes; māgiyā–begging; khāiba–I will eat; piba–I will drink; saraswatī–of the river Sarasvatī; jala–the water; puline–on the banks; puline–along the banks; gaḍā-gaḍi–rolling on the ground; diba–I will give; kari’–making; kṛṣṇa–of Kṛṣṇa; kolāhala–an uproar. [2] 
Text 2 Then I will eat by begging food from the houses of dog-eating outcasts and drink the water of the Saraswatī. I will roll about on the banks of the Ganges and uproariously call out, “Kṛṣṇa!”
Text 3
dhāma-bāsī jane,  pranati koriyā,
māgibo kṛpāra leśa
vaiṣṇava-caraṇa-  reṇu gāya mākhi’,
dhori’ avadhūta-veśa
dhāma–of the holy abode; vāsī–residents; jane–to the people; praṇati– obeisance; kariyā–doing; māgiba–I will beg; kṛpāra–of mercy; leśa (kaṇā)–a trace (a particle); vaiṣṇava–of the devotees; charaṇa–of the feet; reṇu–the dust; gāya–on the body; mākhi’–smearing; dhari’–wearing; avadhūta–of an itinerant mendicant transcendental to varṇāśram-dharma, whose ecstatic, purely devotional behaviour is incomprehensible (and disregarded) by worldly persons (and neophyte devotees); veśa–the garb. [3] 
Text 3 I will bow down before the residents of Śrī Gaurasundar’s abode and beg for a particle of their mercy. I will wear the garb of an avadhūt and smear my body with the devotees’ foot-dust.
Text 4
gauḍa-braja-jane,  bheda nā dekhibo,
hoibo baraja-bāsī
dhāmera swarūpa,  sphuribe nayane,
hoibo rādhāra dāsī
gauḍa (śrī-gauḍa-maṇḍala)–of the district of Gauḍa; vraja (śrī vraja-maṇḍala)–of the district of Vraja; jane (parikara, bhagavat pārṣada)–the peo¬ple (retinue, associates of the Lord); bheda–difference; nā–not; heriba–I will see; ha-iba–I will become; varaja (vraja)–of Vraja; vāsī–a resident; dhāmera– of the abode (of Vraja); svarūpa (chidānanda svarūpa)–the true nature (ec¬static spiritual nature); sphuribe–will be manifest; nayane–before my eyes; ha-iba (lābha kariba)–I will become (I will obtain); rādhāra–of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; dāsī (kaiṅkarya)–a maidservant (servitude). [4] 
Text 4 I will see no difference between the residents of Gauḍa and the residents of Vraja, and I will become a resident of Vraja. The true nature of the Lord’s abode will manifest before my eyes, and I will become Śrī Rādhā’s maidservant.
Song 2
Text 1
dekhite dekhite,  bhulibo vā kabe,
nija-sthūla-paricoya
nayane heribo,  braja-pura-śobhā,
nitya cid-ānanda-moya
dekhite dekhite–immediately; bhuliba–I will forget; vā–[an emphatic particle]; kabe–when?; nija–own; sthūla (jaḍa jagatera)–gross (of the material world); parichaya–identity; nayane–in the eyes; heriba–I will behold; vraja–of Vraja; pura–the village; śobhā–the beauty; nitya–eternal; chit–spiritual; ānanda– ecstasy; maya–consisting of. [1] 
vṛṣabhānu–of King Vṛṣabhānu (the father of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī); pure– in the village; janama–birth; la-iba–I will take; yāvaṭe (śrī rādhārāṇīra 
Text 1 When will I at once forget my gross material identity? Then I will behold before my eyes the beauty of the eternal, spiritual, ecstatic abode of Vraja.
Text 2
bṛṣabhānu-pure,  janama loibo,
yāvaṭe vivāha ha’be
braja-gopī-bhāva,  hoibe swabhāva,
āno-bhāva nā rohibe
śvaśurālaye)–in the village of Yāvaṭ (in the abode of the father-in-law of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī); vivāha–wedding; ha’be–will be; vraja–of Vraja; gopī– cowherd lady; bhāva–nature, identity, mood; ha-ibe–will be; svabhāva– nature; āna (gopī-bhinna anya)–another (different from that of a gopī); bhāva–nature; nā–not; rahibe–will remain. [2] 
Text 2 I will take birth in the village of Vṛṣabhānu and be married in the village of Yāvaṭ. My nature will become that of a Vraja-gopī; no other nature will remain within me.
Text 3
nija-siddha-deha,  nija-siddha-nāma,
nija-rūpa-swa-vasana
rādhā-kṛpā-bale,  lobhibo vā kabe,
kṛṣṇa-prema-prakaraṇa
nija–own; siddha–perfect; deha–body; nija–own; siddha–perfect; nāma–name; nija–own; rūpa–form; sva–own; vasana–garments; rādhā (rādhābhinna śrī guru)–of Śrī Rādhā (of Śrī Rādhā’s non-different form of Śrī Guru); kṛpā–of the mercy; bale–by the strength; labhiba–I will obtain; vā–[an emphatic particle]; kabe–when; kṛṣṇa–of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; prema–divine love; prakaraṇa (paddhati)–method (path). [3] 
Text 3 When will I attain, by the mercy of Śrī Rādhā (Śrī Guru), my eternal name, eternal body, eternal dress, and the path of Kṛṣṇa-prema? 


Text 4
jamunā-salila-  āharaṇe giyā,
bujhibo yugala-rasa
prema-mugdha ho’ye,  pāgalinī-prāya,
gāibo rādhāra yaśa
yāmuna–of the river Yamunā; salila–water; āharaṇe–to collect; giyā–going; bujhiba–I will understand; yugala–of the Divine Couple; rasa–ecstatic rela¬tionship; prema–with divine love; mugdha–overwhelmed; ha’ye–becoming; pāgalinī–madwoman; prāya–almost; gāiba–I will sing; rādhāra–of Śrī Rādhā; yaśa–the glories. [4] 
Text 4 Then as I collect water from the river Yamunā, I will have realisations about the Divine Couple’s loving relationship. I will become overwhelmed with prema and sing Śrī Rādhā’s glories like a madwoman.
Song 3
Text 1
bṛṣabhānu-sutā-  caraṇa-sevane,
hoibo ye pālya-dāsī
śrī-rādhāra sukha,  satata sādhane,
rohibo āmi prayāsī
vṛṣabhānu–of Vṛṣabhānu; sutā–of the daughter; charaṇa–feet; sevane–in the service; ha-iba–I will become; ye–which; pālya–to be maintained; dāsī (nitya-siddhā sakhī-gaṇa āśritā)–maidservant (sheltered maidservant of the eternal, spiritual girlfriends of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī); śrī-rādhāra–of Śrī Rādhā; sukha–happiness; satata–always; sādhane–in pursuits; rahiba–will remain; āmi–I; prayāsī–one who endeavours. [1] 
Text 1 I will become a maintained maidservant engaged in the ser¬vice of Vṛṣabhānu Sutā’s feet and constantly endeavour for Her happiness.

Text 2
śrī-rādhāra sukhe,  kṛṣṇaera ye sukha,
jānibo manete āmi
rādhā-pada chāḍi’,  śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅgame,
kabhu nā hoibo kāmī
śrī-rādhāra–of Śrī Rādhā; sukhe–in the happiness; kṛṣṇera–of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; ye– which; sukha–happiness; jāniba–I will know; manete–in my heart; āmi–I; rādhā–of Śrī Rādhā; pada–the feet; chhāḍi’–abandoning; śrī-kṛṣṇa–with Śrī Kṛṣṇa; saṅgame–for union; kabhu–ever; nā–not; ha-iba–I will become; kāmī–desirous. [2] 
Text 2 I will know within my heart the pleasure that Kṛṣṇa finds in the pleasure of Śrī Rādhā. I will never abandon Śrī Rādhā’s feet and become desirous of direct union with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Text 3
sakhī-gaṇa mama,  parama-suhṛt,
yugala-premera guru
tad-anugā ho’ye,  sevibo rādhāra,
caraṇa-kalapa-taru
sakhī–of girlfriends; gaṇa–group; mama–my; parama–supreme; suhṛt–the well-wishers; yugala–of the Divine Couple; premera–of divine love; guru– guardians, instructors; tad–of them; anuga–the follower; ha’ye–being; seviba– I will serve; rādhāra–of Śrī Rādhā; charaṇa–of the feet; kalapa-taru–the wish-fulfilling tree. [3] 
Text 3 Śrī Rādhā’s girlfriends are my greatest well-wishers. They are my Gurus who teach me about the Divine Couple’s prema. As their follower, I will serve the wish-fulfilling tree of Śrī Rādhā’s feet.
Text 4
rādhā-pakṣa chāḍi’,  ye-jana se-jana,
ye bhāve se bhāve thāke
āmi to’ rādhikā-  pakṣa-pātī sadā,
kabhu nāhi heri tā’ke
rādhā–of Śrī Rādhā; pakṣa–the party; chhāḍi’–abandoning; ye–which; jana– persons; se–those; jana–persons; ye–which; bhāve–nature; se–that; bhāve– mood; thāke–stay; āmi–I; ta’–certainly; rādhikā–of Śrī Rādhā; pakṣapātī– partial; sadā–always; kabhu–ever; nāhi–not; heri–I see; tā’ke–to them. [4] 
Text 4 I am always completely partial to Śrī Rādhā’s party. I never even look at those who have abandoned Her party, whoever they are, and whatever their nature may be.
Part 9 Spiritual Request
Song 1
Text 1
kabe ha’be bolo se-dina āmār
(āmār) aparādha ghuci’,  śuddha nāme ruci,
kṛpā-bale ha’be hṛdoye sañcār
kabe–when?; ha’be–will be; bala–please tell; se–that; dina–day; āmāra–mine; aparādha–offences; ghuchi’–dispelling; śuddha–pure; nāme–for the Name; ruchi (anurāga)–taste (deep loving attachment); kṛpā (nāma vā guru kṛpā)–of mercy (of the mercy of the Name, or, of the mercy of Śrī Guru); bale–by the power; ha’be–will be; hṛdaye–in my heart; saṣchara–infused. [1]
Text 1 Please tell me, when will that day be mine when my offences will be dispelled and taste for the pure Name will be infused within my heart by the power of mercy?
Text 2
tṛnādhika hīna,  kabe nije māni’,
sahiṣnutā-guna hṛdoyete āni’
sakale mānada,  āpani amānī,
hoye āswādibo nāma-rasa-sār
tṛṇa–a blade of grass; adhika–more than; hīna–low; kabe–when?; nije–towards myself; māni–considering; sahiṣṇutā–of tolerance; guṇa–the quality; hṛdayete–in the heart; āni’–bringing; sakale–to all; mānada–desire to offer honour; āpani–myself; amānī–without desire for honour; ha’ye–being; āsvādiba–I will taste; nāma–of the Name; rasa–of the ecstatic nectar; sāra– the essence. [2] 

Text 2 When will I feel myself to be lower than a blade of grass, bring the quality of tolerance within my heart, become eager to honour everyone and devoid of desire for honour from anyone, and relish the essence of the Name’s rasa?

Text 3
dhana jana āra,  kavitā-sundarī,
bolibo nā cāhi deho-sukha-karī
janme janme dāo,  ohe gaurahari!
ahaitukī bhakti caraṇe tomār
dhana–wealth; jana–followers (family); āra–and; kavitā–erudition; sundarī–beautiful women; baliba–I will say; nā–not; chāhi–I desire; deha– the material body; sukha–pleasure; karī–doing; janme–in birth; janme–after birth; dāo–please give; ohe–oh; gaurahari!–Śrīman Mahāprabhu!; ahaitukī– causeless; bhakti–devotion; charaṇe–for the feet; tomāra–Your. [3]
Text 3 When will I declare that I do not desire wealth, follow¬ers, erudition, beautiful women, or any other bodily pleasure? O Gaurahari! Birth after birth, please give me unconditional devotion to Your feet.”
Text 4
(kabe) korite śrī-kṛṣṇa-  nāma uccāraṇa,
pulakita deho gadgada vacana
vaivarnya-vepathu,  ha’be saṁghaṭana,
nirantara netre ba’be aśru-dhār
kabe–when?; karite–in doing; śrī-kṛṣṇa–of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; nāma–the Name; uchchāraṇa–expression aloud; pulakita–horripilation; deha–body; gadgada– choked up; vachana–utterances; vaivarṇya–turning; vepathu–trembling; ha’be–will be; saṁghaṭana–occurrence; nirantara–incessantly; netre–in the eyes; va’be–will flow; aśru–of tears; dhāra–streams. [4] 
Text 4 When will my hair stand on end, my voice falter, my com¬plexion turn pale, my body tremble, and tears pour incessantly from my eyes while I call aloud Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Name? 


Text 5
kabe navadwīpe,  suradhunī-taṭe,
gaura-nityānanda boli’ niṣkapaṭe
nāciyā gāiyā,  beḍāibo chuṭe,
bātulera prāya chāḍiyā vicar
kabe–when?; navadvīpe–in Nabadwīp; suradhunī–of the Ganges; taṭe–on the bank; gaura-nityānanda–‘Gaur-Nityānanda!’; bali’–saying; niṣkapaṭe– sincerely; nāchiyā–dancing; gāiyā–singing; beḍāiba–I will wander; chhuṭe– running about; vātulera–as a madman; prāya–almost; chhāḍiyā–abandoning; vichāra–concern, prudence. [5] 
Text 5 When will I wander along the banks of the Ganges in Nabadwīp, sincerely calling out, “Gaur-Nityānanda!”, while dancing, singing, and running about, having abandoned all concerns as though mad?
Text 6
kabe nityānanda,  more kori’ doyā,
chāḍāibe mora viṣayera māyā
diyā more nija-  caraṇera chāyā,
nāmera hāṭete dibe adhikār
kabe–when?; nityānanda–Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu; more–to me; kari’–do¬ing; dayā–mercy; chhāḍāibe–will cause to abandon; mora–my; viṣayera– of mundanity; māyā–attachment; diyā–giving; more–to me; nija–own; charaṇera–of His feet; chhāyā–shade; nāmera–of the Name; hāṭete–in the marketplace; dibe–will give; adhikāra–qualification. [6] 
Text 6 When will Nityānanda be merciful to me and cause me to abandon my attachment to mundanity? When will He give me the shade of His feet and grant me a place in the marketplace of the Name?
Text 7
kinibo, luṭibo,  hari-nāma-rasa,
nāma-rase māti’ hoibo vivaśa
rasera rasika-  caraṇa paraśa,
koriyā mojibo rase anibār
kiniba–I will buy; luṭiba–I will festively scatter; hari–of Śrī Hari; nāma–of the Name; rasa–the nectar; nāma–of the Name; rase–with the nectar; māti’–being intoxicated; ha-iba–I will become; vivaśa (ātma-vismṛta)–over¬whelmed (self-forgetful); rasera–of nectar; rasika (nāma rasa-dātā śrī gurudeva)–of a relisher, of a topmost devotee (of Śrī Gurudev, the distributer of the rasa of the Name); charaṇa–feet; paraśa–touch; kariyā–doing; majiba– I will become submerged; rase–in nectar; anibāra–incessantly. [7] 
Text 7 When will I buy and festively scatter the rasa of the Lord’s Name? When will I become intoxicated and overwhelmed with that rasa? When will I touch the feet of a relisher of that rasa and become immersed in that rasa perpetually?
Text 8
kabe jīve doya,  hoibe udoya,
nija-sukha bhuli’ sudīna-hṛdoya
bhakativinoda,  koriyā vinoya,
śrī-ājñā-ṭahala koribe pracār
kabe–when?; jīve–for souls; dayā–mercy; ha-ibe–will be; udaya–an aris¬ing; nija–own; sukha–happiness; bhuli’–forgetting; sudīna–most humble; hṛdaya–heart; bhakati-vinoda–Bhakti Vinod; kariyā–doing; vinaya–humility; śrī-ājṣā–divine order; ṭahala–patrol; karibe–will do; prachāra–preaching. [8] 
Text 8 When will compassion for all souls arise within me? When will Bhakti Vinod forget his own happiness and travel about respectfully preaching the divine order with a most humble heart?
