Part Canto 10
Song Prayers by the Demigods to Krsna in the womb of Mother Devaki 	
TEXT 26
s$atya˜ataM s$atyaparM" i‡as$atyaM
s$atyasya yaAeinaM inaih"taM ca s$atyae
s$atyasya s$atyama{tas$atyanae‡aM
s$atyaAtmakM( tvaAM zAr"NAM ‘apaªaA:
satya-vrataṁ satya-paraṁ tri-satyaṁ
satyasya yoniṁ nihitaṁ ca satye
satyasya satyam ṛta-satya-netraṁ
satyātmakaṁ tvāṁ śaraṇaṁ prapannāḥ
satya-vratam—the Personality of Godhead, who never deviates from His vow *; satya-param—who is the Absolute Truth (as stated in the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi); tri-satyam—He is always present as the Absolute Truth, before the creation of this cosmic manifestation, during its maintenance, and even after its annihilation; satyasya—of all relative truths, which are emanations from the Absolute Truth, Kṛṣṇa; yonim—the cause; nihitam—entered *; ca—and; satye—in the factors that create this material world (namely, the five elements—earth, water, fire, air and ether); satyasya—of all that is accepted as the truth; satyam—the Lord is the original truth; ṛta-satya-netram—He is the origin of whatever truth is pleasing (sunetram); satya-ātmakam—everything pertaining to the Lord is truth (sac-cid-ānanda: His body is truth, His knowledge is truth, and His pleasure is truth); tvām—unto you, O Lord; śaraṇam—offering our full surrender; prapannāḥ—we are completely under Your protection.
The demigods prayed: O Lord, You never deviate from Your vow, which is always perfect because whatever You decide is perfectly correct and cannot be stopped by anyone. Being present in the three phases of cosmic manifestation—creation, maintenance and annihilation—You are the Supreme Truth. Indeed, unless one is completely truthful, one cannot achieve Your favor, which therefore cannot be achieved by hypocrites. You are the active principle, the real truth, in all the ingredients of creation, and therefore you are known as antaryāmī, the inner force. You are equal to everyone, and Your instructions apply for everyone, for all time. You are the beginning of all truth. Therefore, offering our obeisances, we surrender unto You. Kindly give us protection.
The demigods or devotees know perfectly well that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the true substance, whether within this material world or in the spiritual world. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam begins, therefore, with the words oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya . . . satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi [SB 1.1.1]. Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is the paraṁ satyam, the Supreme Truth. The Supreme Truth can be approached or understood by the supreme method, as declared by the Supreme Truth: bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ (Bg. 18.55). Bhakti, devotional service, is the only way to understand the Absolute Truth. For protection, therefore, the demigods surrender to the Supreme Truth, not to the relative truth. There are persons who worship various demigods, but the Supreme Truth, Kṛṣṇa, declares in the Bhagavad-gītā (7.23), antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām: "Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are limited and temporary." Worship of demigods may be useful for a limited time, but the result is antavat, perishable. This material world is impermanent, the demigods are impermanent, and the benedictions derived from the demigods are also impermanent, whereas the living entity is eternal (nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām [Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13]). Every living entity, therefore, must search for eternal happiness, not temporary happiness. The words satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi [SB 1.1.1] indicate that one should search for the Absolute Truth, not the relative truth.
While offering prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nṛsiṁhadeva, Prahlāda Mahārāja said:
bālasya neha śaraṇaṁ pitarau nṛsiṁha
nārtasya cāgadam udanvati majjato nauḥ
Generally it is understood that the protectors for a child are his parents, but this is not actually the fact. The real protector is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
taptasya tat-pratividhir ya ihāñjaseṣṭas
tāvad vibho tanu-bhṛtāṁ tvad-upekṣitānām
(SB 7.9.19)
If neglected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a child, despite the presence of his parents, will suffer, and a diseased person, despite all medical help, will die. In this material world, where there is a struggle for existence, men have invented many means for protection, but these are useless if the Supreme Personality of Godhead rejects them. Therefore the demigods purposefully say, satyātmakaṁ tvāṁ śaraṇaṁ prapannāḥ: "Real protection can be obtained from You, O Lord, and therefore we surrender unto You,"
The Lord demands that one surrender unto Him (sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]), and He further says:
sakṛd eva prapanno yas
tavāsmīti ca yācate
abhayaṁ sarvadā tasmai
dadāmy etad vrataṁ mama
"If a person once surrenders unto Me sincerely, saying, 'My Lord, from this day I am fully surrendered unto You,' I always give him protection. That is My vow." (Rāmāyaṇa, Yuddha-kāṇḍa 12.20) The demigods offered their prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead because He had now appeared in the womb of His devotee Devakī to protect all the devotees harassed by Kaṁsa and his lieutenants. Thus the Lord acts as satyavrata. The protection given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be compared to the protection given by the demigods. It is said that Rāvaṇa was a great devotee of Lord Śiva, but when Lord Rāmacandra went to kill him, Lord Śiva could not give him protection.
Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, accompanied by great sages like Nārada and followed by many other demigods, had now invisibly appeared in the house of Kaṁsa. They began to pray to the Supreme Personality of Godhead in select prayers which are very pleasing to the devotees and which award fulfillment of devotional desires. The first words they spoke acclaimed that the Lord is true to His vow. As stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa descends to this material world just to protect the pious and destroy the impious. That is His vow. The demigods could understand that the Lord had taken His residence within the womb of Devakī to fulfill this vow. They were very glad that the Lord was appearing in order to fulfill His mission, and they addressed Him as satyaṁ param, or the Supreme Absolute Truth.
Everyone is searching after the truth. That is the philosophical way of life. The demigods give information that the Supreme Absolute Truth is Kṛṣṇa. One who becomes fully Kṛṣṇa conscious can attain the Absolute Truth. Kṛṣṇa is the Absolute Truth. Relative truth is not truth in all the three phases of eternal time. Time is divided into past, present and future. Kṛṣṇa is Truth always, past, present and future. In the material world, everything is being controlled by supreme time, in the course of past, present and future. But before the creation, Kṛṣṇa was existing, and when there is creation, everything is resting in Kṛṣṇa, and when this creation is finished, Kṛṣṇa will remain. Therefore, He is the Absolute Truth in all circumstances. If there is any truth within this material world, it emanates from the Supreme Truth, Kṛṣṇa. If there is any opulence within this material world, the cause of the opulence is Kṛṣṇa. If there is any reputation within this material world, the cause of the reputation is Kṛṣṇa. If there is any strength within this material world, the cause of such strength is Kṛṣṇa. If there is any wisdom and education within this material world, the cause of such wisdom and education is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is the source of all relative truths.
Devotees, therefore, following in the footsteps of Lord Brahmā, pray, govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **, worshiping the ādi-puruṣa, the supreme truth, Govinda. Everything, everywhere, is performed in terms of three principles, jñāna-bala-kriyā—knowledge, strength and activity. In every field, if there is not full knowledge, full strength and full activity, an endeavor is never successful. Therefore, if one wants success in everything, one must be backed by these three principles. In the Vedas (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.8) there is this statement about the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate
na tat samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate
parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate
svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca
 [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]
The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not need to do anything personally, for He has such potencies that anything He wants done will be done perfectly well through the control of the material nature (svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca). Similarly, those who are engaged in the service of the Lord are not meant to struggle for existence. The devotees who are fully engaged in spreading the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, more than ten thousand men and women all over the world, have no steady or permanent occupation, yet we actually see that they are maintained very opulently. The Lord says in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.22):
ananyāś cintayanto māṁ
ye janāḥ paryupāsate
teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ
yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham
"Those who always worship Me with exclusive devotion, meditating on My transcendental form—to them I carry what they lack, and I preserve what they have." The devotees have no anxiety over what will happen next, where they will stay or what they will eat, for everything is maintained and supplied by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has promised, kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati: "O son of Kuntī, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes." (Bg. 9.31) From all angles of vision, therefore, in all circumstances, if one fully surrenders unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no question of one's struggling for existence. In this connection, the commentary by Śrīpāda Madhvācārya, who quotes from the Tantra-bhāgavata, is very meaningful:
sac-chadba uttamaṁ brūyād
ānandantīti vai vadet
yetijñānaṁ samuddiṣṭaṁ
pūrṇānanda-dṛśis tataḥ

.   .   .
attṛtvāc ca tadā dānāt
satyāttya cocyate vibhuḥ
Explaining the words satyasya yonim, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that Kṛṣṇa is the avatārī, the origin of all incarnations. All incarnations are the Absolute Truth, yet the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa is the origin of all incarnations. Dīpārcir eva hi daśāntaram abhyupetya dīpāyate (Bs. 5.46). There may be many lamps, all equal in power, yet there is a first lamp, a second lamp, a third lamp and so on. Similarly, there are many incarnations, who are compared to lamps, but the first lamp, the original Personality of Godhead, is Kṛṣṇa. Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **.
The demigods must offer worship in obedience to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but one might argue that since the Supreme Godhead was within the womb of Devakī, He was also coming in a material body. Why then should He be worshiped? Why should one make a distinction between an ordinary living entity and the Supreme Personality of Godhead? These questions are answered in the following verses.
TEXT 27
Wk(AyanaAe's$aAE iã"P(laiṣmaUlazA,
cataUr"s$a: paÂaivaDa: Sax"AtmaA
s$aæatvagAí"ivaq%paAe navaAºaAe
d"zAcC$d"I iã"KagAAe ÷Aid"va{ºa:
ekāyano 'sau dvi-phalas tri-mūlaś
catū-rasaḥ pañca-vidhaḥ ṣaḍ-ātmā
sapta-tvag aṣṭa-viṭapo navākṣo
daśa-cchadī dvi-khago hy ādi-vṛkṣaḥ
eka-ayanaḥ—the body of an ordinary living being is fully dependent on the material elements; asau—that; dvi-phalaḥ—in this body we are subject to material happiness and distress, which result from karma; tri-mūlaḥ—having three roots, the three modes of nature (goodness, passion and ignorance), upon which the body is created;  catuḥ-rasaḥ—four rasas, or tastes; pañca-vidhaḥ—consisting of five senses for acquiring knowledge (the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and touch); ṣaṭ-ātmā—six circumstances (lamentation, illusion, old age, death, hunger and thirst); sapta-tvak—having seven coverings (skin, blood, muscle, fat, bone, marrow and semen); aṣṭa-viṭapaḥ—eight branches (the five gross elements—earth, water, fire, air and ether—and also the mind, intelligence and ego); nava-akṣaḥ—nine holes; daśa-chadī—ten kinds of life air, resembling the leaves of a tree; dvi-khagaḥ—two birds (the individual soul and the Supersoul); hi—indeed; ādi-vṛkṣaḥ -this is the original tree or construction of the material body, whether individual or universal.
The body [the total body and the individual body are of the same composition] may figuratively be called "the original tree." From this tree, which fully depends on the ground of material nature, come two kinds of fruit—the enjoyment of happiness and the suffering of distress. The cause of the tree, forming its three roots, is association with the three modes of material nature—goodness, passion and ignorance. The fruits of bodily happiness have four tastes—religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and liberation—which are experienced through five senses for acquiring knowledge in the midst of six circumstances: lamentation, illusion, old age, death, hunger and thirst. The seven layers of bark covering the tree are skin, blood, muscle, fat, bone, marrow and semen, and the eight branches of the tree are the five gross and three subtle elements—earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego. The tree of the body has nine hollows—the eyes, the ears, the nostrils, the mouth, the rectum and the genitals—and ten leaves, the ten airs passing through the body. In this tree of the body there are two birds: one is the individual soul, and the other is the Supersoul.
This material world is composed of five principal elements—earth, water, fire, air and ether—all of which are emanations from Kṛṣṇa. Although materialistic scientists may accept these five primary elements as the cause of the material manifestation, these elements in their gross and subtle states are produced by Kṛṣṇa, whose marginal potency also produces the living entities working within this material world. The Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā clearly states that the entire cosmic manifestation is a combination of two of Kṛṣṇa's energies—the superior energy and the inferior energy. The living entities are the superior energy, and the inanimate material elements are His inferior energy. In the dormant stage, everything rests in Kṛṣṇa.
Material scientists cannot give such a thorough analysis of the material structure of the body. The analysis of the material scientists concerns itself only with inanimate matter, but this is inadequate because the living entity is completely separate from the material bodily structure. In the Bhagavad-gītā (7.5) the Lord says:
apareyam itas tv anyāṁ
prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām
jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho
yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat
"Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is another, superior energy of Mine, which comprises the living entities who are exploiting the resources of this material, inferior nature." Although the material elements emanate from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, they are separated elements and are sustained by the living elements.
As indicated by the word dvi-khagaḥ, the living elements within the body resemble two birds in a tree. Kha means "sky," and ga means "one who flies." Thus the word dvi-khagaḥ refers to birds. In the tree of the body there are two birds, or two living elements, and they are always different. In the Bhagavad-gītā (13.3), the Lord says, kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata: "O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in all bodies." The kṣetra-jña, the individual knower of the body, is also called the khaga, the living entity. Within the body there are two such kṣetra-jñas—the individual soul and the Supersoul. The individual soul is the knower of his individual body, but the Supersoul is present within the bodies of all living entities. Such a thorough analysis and understanding of the bodily structure cannot be obtained anywhere but in the Vedic literature.
When two birds enter a tree, one may foolishly think that the birds become one or merge with the tree, but actually they do not. Rather, each bird keeps its individual identity. Similarly, the individual soul and the Supersoul do not become one, nor do they merge with matter. The living entity lives close to matter, but this does not mean that he merges or mixes with it (asaṅgo hy ayaṁ puruṣaḥ), although material scientists mistakenly see the organic and inorganic, or animate and inanimate, to be mixed.
Vedic knowledge has been kept imprisoned or concealed, but every human being needs to understand it in truth. The modern civilization of ignorance is simply engaged in analyzing the body, and thus people come to the erroneous conclusion that the living force within the body is generated under certain material conditions. People have no information of the soul, but this verse gives the perfect explanation that there are two living forces (dvi-khaga): the individual soul and the Supersoul. The Supersoul is present in every body (īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]), whereas the individual soul is situated only in his own body (dehī) and is transmigrating from one body to another.
TEXT 28
tvamaek( WvaAsya s$ata: ‘as$aUitas$a,
tvaM s$aiªaDaAnaM tvamanauƒah"ê
tvanmaAyayaA s$aMva{tacaetas$astvaAM
pazyainta naAnaA na ivapaiêtaAe yae
tvam eka evāsya sataḥ prasūtis
tvaṁ sannidhānaṁ tvam anugrahaś ca
tvan-māyayā saṁvṛta-cetasas tvāṁ
paśyanti nānā na vipaścito ye
tvam—You (O Lord); ekaḥ—being one without a second, You are everything; eva—indeed; asya sataḥ—of this cosmic manifestation now visible; prasūtiḥ—the original source; tvam—Your Lordship; sannidhānam—the conservation of all such energy when everything is annihilated; tvam—Your Lordship; anugrahaḥ ca—and the maintainer; tvat-māyayā—by Your illusory, external energy; saṁvṛta-cetasaḥ—those whose intelligence is covered by such illusory energy; tvām—unto You; paśyanti—observe; nānā—many varieties; na—not; vipaścitaḥ—learned scholars or devotees; ye—who are.
The efficient cause of this material world, manifested with its many varieties as the original tree, is You, O Lord. You are also the maintainer of this material world, and after annihilation You are the one in whom everything is conserved. Those who are covered by Your external energy cannot see You behind this manifestation, but theirs is not the vision of learned devotees.
Various demigods, beginning from Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and even Viṣṇu, are supposed to be the creator, maintainer and annihilator of this material world, but actually they are not. The fact is that everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, manifested in varieties of energy. Ekam evādvitīyaṁ brahma. There is no second existence. Those who are truly vipaścit, learned, are those who have reached the platform of understanding and observing the Supreme Personality of Godhead in any condition of life. premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti (Bs. 5.38). Learned devotees accept even conditions of distress as representing the presence of the Supreme Lord. When a devotee is in distress, he sees that the Lord has appeared as distress just to relieve or purify the devotee from the contamination of the material world. While one is within this material world, one is in various conditions, and therefore a devotee sees a condition of distress as but another feature of the Lord. Tat te'nukampāṁ susamīkṣamāṇaḥ (SB 10.14.8). A devotee, therefore, regards distress as a great favor of the Lord because he understands that he is being cleansed of contamination. Teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt (Bg. 12.7). The appearance of distress is a negative process intended to give the devotee relief from this material world, which is called mṛtyu-saṁsāra, or the constant repetition of birth and death. To save a surrendered soul from repeated birth and death, the Lord purifies him of contamination by offering him a little distress. This cannot be understood by a nondevotee, but a devotee can see this because he is vipaścit, or learned. A nondevotee, therefore, is perturbed in distress, but a devotee welcomes distress as another feature of the Lord. Sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma. A devotee can actually see that there is only the Supreme Personality of Godhead and no second entity. Ekam evādvitīyam. There is only the Lord, who presents Himself in different energies.
Persons who are not in real knowledge think that Brahmā is the creator, Viṣṇu the maintainer and Śiva the annihilator and that the different demigods are intended to fulfill diverse purposes. Thus they create diverse purposes and worship various demigods to have these purposes fulfilled (kāmais tais tair hṛta jñānāḥ prapadyante 'nya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]). A devotee, however, knows that these various demigods are but different parts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and that these parts need not be worshiped. As the Lord says in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.23):
ye 'py anya-devatā bhaktā
yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ
te 'pi mām eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam
"Those who are devotees of other gods and who worship them with faith actually worship only Me, O son of Kunti, but they do so in a wrong way." There is no need to worship the demigods, for this is avidhi, not in order. Simply by surrendering oneself at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, one can completely discharge one's duties; there is no need to worship various deities or demigods. These various divinities are observed by the mūḍhas, fools, who are bewildered by the three modes of material nature (tribhir guṇamayair bhāvair ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat). Such fools cannot understand that the real source of everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead (mohitaṁ nābhijānāti mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam [Bg. 7.13]). Not being disturbed by the Lord's various features, one should concentrate upon and worship the Supreme Lord (mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja). This should be the guiding principle of one's life.
TEXT 29
ibaBaiSaR ṝ&paANyavabaAeDa @AtmaA
ºaemaAya laAek(sya car"Acar"sya
s$aÔvaAepapaªaAina s$auKaAvah"Aina
s$ataAmaBa‰"AiNA mauḍ": KalaAnaAma,
bibharṣi rūpāṇy avabodha ātmā
kṣemāya lokasya carācarasya
sattvopapannāni sukhāvahāni
satām abhadrāṇi muhuḥ khalānām
bibharṣi—You accept; rūpāṇi—varieties of forms, such as Matsya, Kūrma, Varāha, Rāma and Nṛsiṁha; avabodhaḥ ātmā—in spite of having different incarnations, You remain the Supreme, full of knowledge; kṣemāya—for the benefit of everyone, and especially the devotees; lokasya—of all living entities; cara-acarasya—moving and nonmoving; sattva-upapannāni—all such incarnations are transcendental (śuddha-sattva); sukha-avahāni—full of transcendental bliss; satām—of the devotees; abhadrāṇi—all inauspiciousness or annihilation; muhuḥ—again and again; khalānām—of the nondevotees.
O Lord, You are always in full knowledge, and to bring all good fortune to all living entities, You appear in different incarnations, all of them transcendental to the material creation. When You appear in these incarnations, You are pleasing to the pious and religious devotees, but for nondevotees You are the annihilator.
This verse explains why the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears as an incarnation again and again. The incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead all function differently, but their main purpose is paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]—to protect the devotees and annihilate the miscreants. Yet even though the duṣkṛtīs, or miscreants, are annihilated, this is ultimately good for them.
TEXT 30
tvayyambaujaAºaAiKalas$aÔvaDaAi°a
s$amaAiDanaAvaeizAtacaetas$aEke(
tvatpaAd"paAetaena mah"tk{(taena
ku(vaRinta gAAevats$apadM" BavaAibDama,
tvayy ambujākṣākhila-sattva-dhāmni
samādhināveśita-cetasaike
tvat-pāda-potena mahat-kṛtena
kurvanti govatsa-padaṁ bhavābdhim
tvayi—in You; ambuja-akṣa—O lotus-eyed Lord; akhila-sattva-dhāmni—who are the original cause of all existence, from whom everything emanates and in whom all potencies reside; samādhinā—by constant meditation and complete absorption (in thoughts of You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead); āveśita—fully absorbed, fully engaged; cetasā—but by such a mentality; eke—the one process of always thinking of Your lotus feet; tvat-pāda-potena—by boarding such a boat as Your lotus feet; mahat-kṛtena—by that action which is considered the most powerful original existence or which is executed by mahājanas; kurvanti—they make; govatsa-padam—like the hoofprint of a calf; bhava-abdhim—the great ocean of nescience.
O lotus-eyed Lord, by concentrating one's meditation on Your lotus feet, which are the reservoir of all existence, and by accepting those lotus feet as the boat by which to cross the ocean of nescience, one follows in the footsteps of mahājanas [great saints, sages and devotees]. By this simple process, one can cross the ocean of nescience as easily as one steps over the hoofprint of a calf.
The true mission in life is to cross the ocean of nescience, of repeated birth and death. Those in the darkness of ignorance, however, do not know this mission. Instead, being carried away by the waves of material nature (prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]), they are undergoing the tribulations of mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani [Bg. 9.3], repeated birth and death. But a person who has achieved knowledge by the association of devotees follows the mahājanas (mahat-kṛtena). Such a person always concentrates his mind upon the lotus feet of the Lord and executes one or more of the nine varieties of devotional service (śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]). Simply by this process, one can cross the insurmountable ocean of nescience.
Devotional service is powerful in any form. Śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe parīkṣid abhavad vaiyāsakiḥ kīrtane (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.265). According to this verse, Mahārāja Parīkṣit became liberated by fully concentrating his mind on hearing the Lord's holy name, attributes and pastimes. Similarly, Śukadeva Gosvāmī simply glorified the Lord, and by speaking on the subject matters of Kṛṣṇa that constitute the entire Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he too was liberated. One may also be liberated simply by sakhya, friendly behavior with the Lord. Such is the power of devotional service, as we learn from the examples set by the Lord's many pure devotees.
svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ
kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ
prahlādo janako bhīṣmo
balir vaiyāsakir vayam
 [SB 6.3.20]
We have to follow in the footsteps of such devotees, for by this one easy process one can cross the great ocean of nescience just as one might cross a small hole created by the hoof of a calf.
Here the Lord is described as ambujākṣa, or lotus-eyed. By seeing the eyes of the Lord, which are compared to lotus flowers, one becomes so satisfied that one does not want to turn his eyes to anything else. Simply by seeing the transcendental form of the Lord, a devotee is at once fully absorbed in the Lord in his heart. This absorption is called samādhi. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ (SB 12.13.1). A yogī is fully absorbed in thoughts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for he has no other business than to think of the Lord always within the heart. It is also said:
samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavaṁ
mahat-padaṁ puṇya-yaśo murāreḥ
bhavāmbudhir vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ
padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām
"For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Murāri, the enemy of the demon Mura, the ocean of the material world is like the water contained in a calf's hoofprint. His goal is paraṁ padam, or Vaikuṇṭha, the place where there are no material miseries, not the place where there is danger at every step." (SB 10.14.58) This process is recommended here by authorities like Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva (svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ [SB 6.3.20]), and therefore we must take to this process in order to transcend nescience. This is very easy, but we must follow in the footsteps of great personalities, and then success will be possible.
In regard to the word mahat-kṛtena, it is also significant that the process shown by great devotees is not exclusively for them but is also for others. If things are made easy, this affords facility for the person who has made them easy and also for others who follow the same principles. The process recommended in this verse for crossing the ocean of nescience is easy not only for the devotee but also for common persons who follow the devotee (mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]).
TEXT 31
svayaM s$amauÔaIyaR s$auāu"starM" âumana,
BavaANARvaM BaImamad"”as$aAEô$d"A:
Bavatpad"AmBaAeś&h"naAvama‡a tae
inaDaAya yaAtaA: s$ad"nauƒah"Ae BavaAna,
svayaṁ samuttīrya sudustaraṁ dyuman
bhavārṇavaṁ bhīmam adabhra-sauhṛdāḥ
bhavat-padāmbhoruha-nāvam atra te
nidhāya yātāḥ sad-anugraho bhavān
svayam—personally; samuttīrya—perfectly crossing; su-dustaram—which is very difficult to cross; dyuman—O Lord, who appear exactly like the sun, illuminating the darkness of this world of ignorance; bhava-arṇavam—the ocean of nescience; bhīmam—which is extremely fierce; adabhra-sauhṛdāḥ—devotees who are incessantly friendly to the fallen souls; bhavat-pada-ambhoruha—Your lotus feet; nāvam—the boat for crossing; atra—in this world; te—they (the Vaiṣṇavas); nidhāya—leaving behind; yātāḥ—on to the ultimate destination, Vaikuṇṭha; sat-anugrahaḥ—who are always kind and merciful to the devotees; bhavān—You.
O Lord, who resemble the shining sun, You are always ready to fulfill the desire of Your devotee, and therefore You are known as a desire tree [vāñchā-kalpataru]. When ācāryas completely take shelter under Your lotus feet in order to cross the fierce ocean of nescience, they leave behind on earth the method by which they cross, and because You are very merciful to Your other devotees, You accept this method to help them.
This statement reveals how the merciful ācāryas and the merciful Supreme Personality of Godhead together help the serious devotee who wants to return home, back to Godhead. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in His teachings to Rūpa Gosvāmī, said:
brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva
guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja
(Cc. Madhya 19.151)
One can achieve the seed of bhakti-latā, devotional service, by the mercy of guru and Kṛṣṇa. The duty of the guru is to find the means, according to the time, the circumstances and the candidate, by which one can be induced to render devotional service, which Kṛṣṇa accepts from a candidate who wants to be successful in going back home, back to Godhead. After wandering throughout the universe, a fortunate person within this material world seeks shelter of such a guru, or ācārya, who trains the devotee in the suitable ways to render service according to the circumstances so that the Supreme Personality of Godhead will accept the service. This makes it easier for the candidate to reach the ultimate destination. The ācārya's duty, therefore, is to find the means by which devotees may render service according to references from śāstra. Rūpa Gosvāmī, for example, in order to help subsequent devotees, published such devotional books as Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. Thus it is the duty of the ācārya to publish books that will help future candidates take up the method of service and become eligible to return home, back to Godhead, by the mercy of the Lord. In our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, this same path is being prescribed and followed. Thus the devotees have been advised to refrain from four sinful activities—illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling—and to chant sixteen rounds a day. These are bona fide instructions. Because in the Western countries constant chanting is not possible, one should not artificially imitate Haridāsa Ṭhākura but should follow this method. Kṛṣṇa will accept a devotee who strictly follows the regulative principles and the method prescribed in the various books and literatures published by the authorities. The ācārya gives the suitable method for crossing the ocean of nescience by accepting the boat of the Lord's lotus feet, and if this method is strictly followed, the followers will ultimately reach the destination, by the grace of the Lord. This method is called ācārya-sampradāya. It is therefore said, sampradāya-vihīnā ye mantrās te niṣphalā matāḥ (Padma Purāṇa). The ācārya-sampradāya is strictly bona fide. Therefore one must accept the ācārya-sampradāya; otherwise one's endeavor will be futile. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura therefore sings:
tāṅdera caraṇa sevi bhakta sane vāsa
janame janame haya, ei abhilāṣa
One must worship the lotus feet of the ācārya and live within the society of devotees. Then one's endeavor to cross over nescience will surely be successful.
TEXT 32
yae'nyae'r"ivand"Aºa ivamau·(maAinanas$a,
tvayyastaBaAvaAd"ivazAuŪ"bauŪ"ya:
@Aś&÷ k{(cC)e$NA parM" padM" tata:
patantyaDaAe'naAā{"tayauSmad"x.~„aya:
ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas
tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ
āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ
patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ
ye anye—anyone else, or all others; aravinda-akṣa—O lotus-eyed one; vimukta-māninaḥ—falsely considering themselves free from the bondage of material contamination; tvayi—unto You; asta-bhāvāt—speculating in various ways but not knowing or desiring more information of Your lotus feet; aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ—whose intelligence is still not purified and who do not know the goal of life; āruhya—even though achieving; kṛcchreṇa—by undergoing severe austerities, penances and hard labor; param padam—the highest position (according to their imagination and speculation); tataḥ—from that position; patanti—they fall; adhaḥ—down into material existence again; anādṛta—neglecting devotion to; yuṣmat—Your; aṅghrayaḥ—lotus feet.
[Someone may say that aside from devotees, who always seek shelter at the Lord's lotus feet, there are those who are not devotees but who have accepted different processes for attaining salvation. What happens to them? In answer to this question, Lord Brahmā and the other demigods said:] O lotus-eyed Lord, although nondevotees who accept severe austerities and penances to achieve the highest position may think themselves liberated, their intelligence is impure. They fall down from their position of imagined superiority because they have no regard for Your lotus feet.
Aside from devotees, there are many others, nondevotees, known as karmīs, jñānīs or yogīs, philanthropists, altruists, politicians, impersonalists and voidists. There are many varieties of nondevotees who have their respective ways of liberation, but simply because they do not know the shelter of the Lord's lotus feet, although they falsely think that they have been liberated and elevated to the highest position, they fall down. As clearly stated by the Lord Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.3):
aśraddadhānāḥ puruṣā
dharmasyāsya parantapa
aprāpya māṁ nivartante
mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani
"Those who are not faithful in this devotional service cannot attain Me, O conqueror of enemies. Therefore they return to the path of birth and death in this material world." It doesn't matter whether one is a karmī, jñānī, yogī, philanthropist, politician or whatever; if one has no love for the lotus feet of the Lord, one falls down. That is the verdict given by Lord Brahmā in this verse.
There are persons who advocate accepting any process and who say that whatever process one accepts will lead to the same goal, but that is refuted in this verse, where such persons are referred to as vimukta-māninaḥ, signifying that although they think they have attained the highest perfection, in fact they have not. In the present day, big, big politicians all over the world think that by scheming they can occupy the highest political post, that of president or prime minister, but we actually see that even in this life such big prime ministers, presidents and other politicians, because of being nondevotees, fall down (patanty adhaḥ). To become president or prime minister is not easy; one must work very hard (āruhya kṛcchreṇa) to achieve the post. And even though one may reach his goal, at any moment one may be kicked down by material nature. In human society there have been many instances in which great, exalted politicians have fallen from government and become lost in historical oblivion. The cause of this is aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ: [SB 10.2.32] their intelligence is impure. The śāstra says, na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum (SB 7.5.31). One achieves the perfection of life by becoming a devotee of Viṣṇu, but people do not know this. Therefore, as stated in the Bhagavad-gītā (12.5), kleśo 'dhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām. Persons who do not ultimately accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead and take to devotional service, but who instead are attached to impersonalism and voidism, must undergo great labor to achieve their goals.
śreyaḥ-sṛtiṁ bhaktim udasya te vibho
kliśyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye
(SB 10.14.4)
To achieve understanding, such persons work very hard and undergo severe austerities, but their hard labor and austerities themselves are their only achievement, for they do not actually achieve the real goal of life.
Dhruva Mahārāja at first wanted to achieve the greatest material kingdom and greater material possessions than his father, but when he was actually favored by the Lord, who appeared before him to give him the benediction he desired, Dhruva Mahārāja refused it, saying, svāmin kṛtārtho'smi varaṁ na yāce: [Cc. Madhya 22.42] "Now I am fully satisfied. I do not want any material benediction." (Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 7.28) This is the perfection of life. Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ (Bg. 6.22). If one achieves the shelter of the Lord's lotus feet, one is fully satisfied and does not need to ask for any material benediction.
At night, no one can see a lotus, for lotuses blossom only during the daytime. Therefore the word aravindākṣa is significant. One who is not captivated by the lotus eyes or transcendental form of the Supreme Lord is in darkness, exactly like one who cannot see a lotus. One who has not come to the point of seeing the lotus eyes and transcendental form of Śyāmasundara is a failure. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. Those who are attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead in love always see the Lord's lotus eyes and lotus feet, whereas others cannot see the Lord's beauty and are therefore classified as anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ, or neglectful of the Lord's personal form. Those who neglect the Lord's form are surely failures on every path in life, but if one develops even a little love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is liberated without difficulty (svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt). Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead recommends in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.34), man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru: [Bg. 18.65] "Simply think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer some slight homage to Me." Simply by this process, one is guaranteed to return home, back to Godhead, and thus attain the highest perfection. The Lord further affirms in the Bhagavad-gītā (18.54-55):
brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā
na śocati na kāṅkṣati
samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu
mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām
bhaktyā mām abhijānāti
yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ
tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā
viśate tad-anantaram
"One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have anything. He is equally disposed toward every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service unto Me. One can understand Me as I am, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of Me by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God."
TEXT 33
taTaA na tae maADava taAvak(A: ¸(icaā,"
”azyainta maAgAARÔvaiya baŪ"s$aAEô$d"A:
tvayaAiBagAuæaA ivacar"inta inaBaRyaA
ivanaAyak(AnaIk(pamaUDaRs$au ‘aBaAe
tathā na te mādhava tāvakāḥ kvacid
bhraśyanti mārgāt tvayi baddha-sauhṛdāḥ
tvayābhiguptā vicaranti nirbhayā
vināyakānīkapa-mūrdhasu prabho
tathā—like them (the nondevotees); na—not; te—they (the devotees); mādhava—O Lord, husband of the goddess of fortune; tāvakāḥ—the followers of the devotional path, the devotees; kvacit—in any circumstances; bhraśyanti—fall down; mārgāt—from the path of devotional service; tvayi—unto You; baddha-sauhṛdāḥ—because of being fully attached to Your lotus feet; tvayā—by You; abhiguptāḥ—always protected from all dangers; vicaranti—they move; nirbhayāḥ—without fear; vināyaka-anīkapa—the enemies who maintain paraphernalia to oppose the bhakti cult; mūrdhasu—on their heads; prabho—O Lord.
O Mādhava, Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord of the goddess of fortune, if devotees completely in love with You sometimes fall from the path of devotion, they do not fall like nondevotees, for You still protect them. Thus they fearlessly traverse the heads of their opponents and continue to progress in devotional service.
Devotees generally do not fall down, but if circumstantially they do, the Lord, because of their strong attachment to Him, gives them protection in all circumstances. Thus even if devotees fall down, they are still strong enough to traverse the heads of their enemies. We have actually seen that our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement has many opponents, such as the "deprogrammers," who instituted a strong legal case against the devotees. We thought that this case would take a long time to settle, but because the devotees were protected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we unexpectedly won the case in one day. Thus a case that was expected to continue for years was settled in a day because of the protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has promised in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.31), kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati: "O son of Kuntī, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes." In history there are many instances of devotees like Citraketu, Indradyumna and Mahārāja Bharata who circumstantially fell down but were still protected. Mahārāja Bharata, for example, because of his attachment to a deer, thought of the deer at the time of death, and therefore in his next life he became a deer (yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]). Because of protection by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, the deer remembered his relationship with the Lord and next took birth in a good brahminical family and performed devotional service (śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]). Similarly, Citraketu fell down and became a demon, Vṛtrāsura, but he too was protected. Thus even if one falls down from the path of bhakti-yoga, one is ultimately saved. If a devotee is strongly situated in devotional service, the Supreme Personality of Godhead has promised to protect him (kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]). But even if a devotee circumstantially falls down, he is protected by Mādhava.
The word Mādhava is significant. Mā, Mother Lakṣmī, the mother of all opulences, is always with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and if a devotee is in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all the opulences of the Lord are ready to help him.
yatra yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇo
yatra pārtho dhanur-dharaḥ
tatra śrīr vijayo bhūtir
dhruvā nītir matir mama
(Bg. 18.78)
Wherever there is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, along with His devotee Arjuna, Pārtha, there is victory, opulence, extraordinary power and morality. The opulences of a devotee are not a result of karma-kāṇḍa-vicāra. A devotee is always protected by all of the Supreme Lord's opulences, of which no one can deprive him (teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham [Bg. 9.22]). Thus a devotee cannot be defeated by any opponents. A devotee, therefore, should not deviate knowingly from the path of devotion. The adherent devotee is assured all protection by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 34
s$aÔvaM ivazAuŪM" ™ayatae BavaAna, isTataAE
zAr"Iir"NAAM ™aeyaopaAyanaM vapau:
vaed"i‚(yaAyaAegAtapa:s$amaAiDaiBas$a,
tavaAhR"NAM yaena jana: s$amaIh"tae
sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ śrayate bhavān sthitau
śarīriṇāṁ śreya-upāyanaṁ vapuḥ
veda-kriyā-yoga-tapaḥ-samādhibhis
tavārhaṇaṁ yena janaḥ samīhate
sattvam—existence; viśuddham—transcendental, beyond the three modes of material nature; śrayate—accepts; bhavān—Your Lordship; sthitau—during the maintenance of this material world; śarīriṇām—of all living entities; śreyaḥ—of supreme auspiciousness; upāyanam—for the benefit; vapuḥ—a transcendental form or body; veda-kriyā—by ritualistic ceremonies according to the directions of the Vedas; yoga—by practice of devotion; tapaḥ—by austerities; samādhibhiḥ—by becoming absorbed in transcendental existence; tava—Your; arhaṇam—worship; yena—by such activities; janaḥ—human society; samīhate—offers (its obligation unto You).
O Lord, during the time of maintenance You manifest several incarnations, all with transcendental bodies, beyond the material modes of nature. When You appear in this way, You bestow all good fortune upon the living entities by teaching them to perform Vedic activities such as ritualistic ceremonies, mystic yoga, austerities, penances, and ultimately samādhi, ecstatic absorption in thoughts of You. Thus You are worshiped by the Vedic principles.
As stated in the Bhagavad-gītā (18.3), yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma na tyājyam: the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies, charity, austerity and all such prescribed duties are never to be given up. Yajño dānaṁ tapaś caiva pāvanāni manīṣiṇām (18.5): even one who is very much advanced in spiritual realization must still execute the Vedic principles. Even in the lowest stage, the karmīs are advised to work for the sake of the Lord.
yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra
loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ
"Work done as a sacrifice for Viṣṇu has to be performed, otherwise work causes bondage in this material world." (Bg. 3.9) The words yajñārthāt karmaṇaḥ indicate that while performing all kinds of duties one should remember that these duties should be performed to satisfy the Supreme Lord (sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya [Bg. 18.46]). According to Vedic principles, there must be divisions of human society (cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam [Bg. 4.13]). There should be brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras, and everyone should learn to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead (tam abhyarcya). This is real human society, and without this system we are left with animal society.
The modern activities of human society are described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as the activities of go-khara, cows and asses (sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13]). Everyone is acting in a bodily concept of life involving society, friendship and love for the improvement of economic and political conditions, and thus all activities are enacted in ignorance. The Supreme Personality therefore comes to teach us how to act according to the Vedic principles. In this Age of Kali, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and preached that in this age the Vedic activities cannot be systematically performed because people are so fallen. He gave this recommendation from the śāstras:
harer nāma harer nāma
harer nāmaiva kevalam
kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva
nāsty eva gatir anyathā
 [Cc. Ādi 17.21]
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way. There is no other way." The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore teaching people all over the world how to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and this has proved very effective in all places at all times. The Supreme Personality of Godhead appears in order to teach us Vedic principles intended for understanding Him (vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]). We should always know that when Kṛṣṇa and Lord Caitanya appeared, They appeared in śuddha-sattva bodies. One should not mistake the body of Kṛṣṇa or Caitanya Mahāprabhu to be a material body like ours, for Kṛṣṇa and Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared as needed for the benefit of the entire human society. Out of causeless mercy, the Lord appears in different ages in His original śuddha-sattva transcendental body to elevate human society to the spiritual platform, from which they can truly benefit. Unfortunately, modern politicians and other leaders stress the bodily comforts of life (yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]) and concentrate on the activities of this ism and that ism, which they describe in different kinds of flowery language. Essentially such activities are the activities of animals (sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13]). We should learn how to act from Bhagavad-gītā, which explains everything for human understanding. Thus we can become happy even in this Age of Kali.
TEXT 35
s$aÔvaM na caeŪ"Atair"dM" inajaM Bavaeā,"
ivaÁaAnamaÁaAnaiBad"ApamaAjaRnama,
gAuNA‘ak(AzAEr"naumaIyatae BavaAna,
‘ak(AzAtae yasya ca yaena vaA gAuNA:
sattvaṁ na ced dhātar idaṁ nijaṁ bhaved
vijñānam ajñāna-bhidāpamārjanam
guṇa-prakāśair anumīyate bhavān
prakāśate yasya ca yena vā guṇaḥ
sattvam—śuddha-sattva, transcendental; na—not; cet—if; dhātaḥ—O reservoir of all energies, cause of all causes; idam—this; nijam—personal, spiritual; bhavet—could have been; vijñānam—transcendental knowledge; ajñāna-bhidā—which drives away the ignorance of the material modes; apamārjanam—completely vanquished; guṇa-prakāśaiḥ—by the awakening of such transcendental knowledge; anumīyate—becomes manifested; bhavān—Your Lordship; prakāśate—exhibit; yasya—whose; ca—and; yena—by which; vā—either; guṇaḥ—quality or intelligence.
O Lord, cause of all causes, if Your transcendental body were not beyond the modes of material nature, one could not understand the difference between matter and transcendence. Only by Your presence can one understand the transcendental nature of Your Lordship, who are the controller of material nature. Your transcendental nature is very difficult to understand unless one is influenced by the presence of Your transcendental form.
It is said, trai-guṇya-viṣayā vedā nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna. Unless one is situated in transcendence, one cannot understand the transcendental nature of the Lord. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.29):
athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-
prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi
jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno
na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan
Only by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can one understand Him. Those who are in the modes of material nature, although speculating for thousands of years, cannot understand Him. The Lord has innumerable forms (rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan [Bs. 5.39]), and unless these forms, such as Lord Rāmacandra, Nṛsiṁhadeva, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, are transcendental, why would they be worshiped by devotees since time immemorial? Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ (Bg. 18.55). Devotees who awaken their transcendental nature in the presence of the Lord and who follow the rules and regulations of devotional service can understand Lord Kṛṣṇa, Lord Rāmacandra and other incarnations, who are not of this material world but who come from the spiritual world for the benefit of people in general. If one does not take to this process, one imagines or manufactures some form of God according to material qualities and can never awaken a real understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The words bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ signify that unless one worships the Lord according to the regulative devotional principles, one cannot awaken the transcendental nature. Deity worship, even in the absence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, awakens the transcendental nature of the devotee, who thus becomes increasingly attached to the Lord's lotus feet.
The appearance of Kṛṣṇa is the answer to all imaginative iconography of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone imagines the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead according to his mode of material nature. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said that the Lord is the oldest person. Therefore a section of religionists imagine that God must be very old, and therefore they depict a form of the Lord like a very old man. But in the same Brahma-saṁhitā, that is contradicted: although He is the oldest of all living entities, He has His eternal form as a fresh youth. The exact words used in this connection in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam are vijñānam ajñāna-bhidāpamārjanam. Vijñāna means transcendental knowledge of the Supreme Personality; vijñāna is also experienced knowledge. Transcendental knowledge has to be accepted by the descending process of disciplic succession as Brahmā presents the knowledge of Kṛṣṇa in the Brahma-saṁhitā. The Brahma-saṁhitā is vijñāna as realized by Brahmā's transcendental experience, and in that way he presented the form and the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in the transcendental abode. Ajñāna-bhidā means "that which can match all kinds of speculation." In ignorance, people are imagining the form of the Lord; sometimes He has no form and sometimes He has form, according to their different imaginations. But the presentation of Kṛṣṇa in the Brahma-saṁhitā is vijñāna—scientific, experienced knowledge given by Lord Brahmā and accepted by Lord Caitanya. There is no doubt about it. Śrī Kṛṣṇa's form, Śrī Kṛṣṇa's flute, Kṛṣṇa's color—everything is reality. Here it is said that this vijñānam is always defeating all kinds of speculative knowledge. "Therefore," the demigods prayed, "without Your appearing as Kṛṣṇa, as You are, neither ajñāna-bhidā (the nescience of speculative knowledge) nor vijñānam would be realized. Ajñāna-bhidāpamārjanam—by Your appearance the speculative knowledge of ignorance will be vanquished, and the real, experienced knowledge of authorities like Lord Brahmā will be established. Men influenced by the three modes of material nature imagine their own God according to the modes of material nature. In this way God is presented in various ways, but Your appearance will establish what the real form of God is."
The greatest blunder committed by the impersonalist is to think that when the incarnation of God comes He accepts a form of matter in the mode of goodness. Actually, the form of Kṛṣṇa or Nārāyaṇa is transcendental to any material idea. Even the greatest impersonalist, Śaṅkarācārya, has admitted, nārāyaṇaḥ paro 'vyaktāt: the material creation is caused by the avyakta, the impersonal manifestation of matter or the nonphenomenal total reservoir of matter, and Kṛṣṇa is transcendental to that material conception. This is expressed in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as śuddha-sattva, or transcendental. The Lord does not belong to the material mode of goodness, for He is above the position of material goodness. He belongs to the transcendental, eternal status of bliss and knowledge.
"Dear Lord," the demigods prayed, "when You appear in Your different incarnations, You take different names and forms according to different situations. Lord Kṛṣṇa is Your name because You are all-attractive; You are called Śyāmasundara because of Your transcendental beauty. Śyāma means blackish, yet they say that You are more beautiful than thousands of Cupids. Kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya. Although You appear in a color which is compared to that of a blackish cloud, You are the transcendental Absolute, and therefore Your beauty is many, many times more attractive than the delicate body of Cupid. Sometimes You are called Giridhārī because You lifted the hill known as Govardhana. You are sometimes called Nanda-nandana or Vāsudeva or Devakī-nandana because You appear as the son of Mahārāja Nanda or Devakī or Vasudeva. Impersonalists think that Your many names or forms are according to a particular type of work and quality because they accept You from the position of a material observer.
"Our dear Lord, the way of understanding You is not to study Your absolute nature, form and activities by mental speculation. One must engage himself in devotional service; then one can understand Your absolute nature and Your transcendental form, name and qualities. Actually, only a person who has a little taste for the service of Your lotus feet can understand Your transcendental nature or form and qualities. Others may go on speculating for millions of years, but it is not possible for them to understand even a single part of Your actual position." In other words, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, cannot be understood by the nondevotees because there is a curtain of yogamāyā which covers Kṛṣṇa's actual features. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (7.25), nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya. The Lord says, "I am not exposed to anyone and everyone." When Kṛṣṇa came, He was actually present on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, and everyone saw Him. But not everyone could understand that He was the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Still, everyone who died in His presence attained complete liberation from material bondage and was transferred to the spiritual world.
Because foolish mūḍhas do not awaken their spiritual nature, they do not understand Kṛṣṇa or Rāma (avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]). Even big academic scholars, not considering the endeavors of the ācāryas who have recommended devotional service in many elaborate commentaries and notes, think that Kṛṣṇa is fictitious. This is due to a lack of transcendental knowledge and a failure to awaken Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One should have the common sense to ask why, if Kṛṣṇa or Rāma were fictitious, stalwart scholars like Śrīdhara Svāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Vīrarāghava, Vijayadhvaja, Vallabhācārya and many other recognized ācāryas would have spent so much time to write about Kṛṣṇa in notes and commentaries on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
TEXT 36
na naAmaṝ&pae gAuNAjanmak(maRiBar,"
inaṝ&ipatavyae tava tasya s$aAiºaNA:
manaAevacaAeByaAmanaumaeyavatmaRnaAe
de"va i‚(yaAyaAM ‘aitayantyaTaAipa ih"
na nāma-rūpe guṇa-janma-karmabhir
nirūpitavye tava tasya sākṣiṇaḥ
mano-vacobhyām anumeya-vartmano
deva kriyāyāṁ pratiyanty athāpi hi
na—not; nāma-rūpe—the name and form; guṇa—with attributes; janma—appearance; karmabhiḥ—activities or pastimes; nirūpitavye—are able to be ascertained; tava—Your; tasya—of Him; sākṣiṇaḥ—who is the direct observer; manaḥ—of the mind; vacobhyām—words; anumeya—hypothesis; vartmanaḥ—the path; deva—O Lord; kriyāyām—in devotional activities; pratiyanti—they realize; atha api—still; hi—indeed (You can be realized by the devotees).
O Lord, Your transcendental name and form are not ascertained by those who merely speculate on the path of imagination. Your name, form and attributes can be ascertained only through devotional service.
As stated in the Padma Purāṇa:
ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi
na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ
sevonmukhe hi jihvādau
svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ
 [Cc. Madhya 17.136]
"One cannot understand the transcendental nature of the name, form, qualities and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa through one's materially contaminated senses. Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the Lord are the transcendental name, form, qualities and pastimes of the Lord revealed to him." Since Kṛṣṇa and His transcendental name, form and activities are all of a transcendental nature, ordinary persons or those who are only slightly advanced cannot understand them. Even big scholars who are nondevotees think that Kṛṣṇa is fictitious. Yet although so-called scholars and commentators do not believe that Kṛṣṇa was factually a historical person whose presence on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra is recorded in the history known as the Mahābhārata, they feel compelled to write commentaries on the Bhagavad-gītā and other historical records. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ: [Brs.  1.2.234] Kṛṣṇa's transcendental name, form, attributes and activities can be revealed only when one engages in His service in full consciousness. This confirms Kṛṣṇa's own words in the Bhagavad-gītā (18.55):
bhaktyā mām abhijānāti
yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ
tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā
viśate tad-anantaram
"One can understand Me as I am, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of Me by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God." Only by sevonmukha, by engaging oneself in the Lord's service, can one realize the name, form and qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
"O Lord," the demigods say, "the impersonalists, who are nondevotees, cannot understand that Your name is identical with Your form." Since the Lord is absolute, there is no difference between His name and His actual form. In the material world there is a difference between form and name. The mango fruit is different from the name of the mango. One cannot taste the mango fruit simply by chanting, "Mango, mango, mango." But the devotee who knows that there is no difference between the name and the form of the Lord chants Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, and realizes that he is always in Kṛṣṇa's company.
For persons who are not very advanced in absolute knowledge of the Supreme, Lord Kṛṣṇa exhibits His transcendental pastimes. They can simply think of the pastimes of the Lord and get the full benefit. Since there is no difference between the transcendental name and form of the Lord, there is no difference between the transcendental pastimes and the form of the Lord. For those who are less intelligent (like women, laborers or the mercantile class), the great sage Vyāsadeva wrote the Mahābhārata. In the Mahābhārata, Kṛṣṇa is present in His different activities. The Mahābhārata is history, and simply by studying, hearing, and memorizing the transcendental activities of Kṛṣṇa, the less intelligent can also gradually rise to the standard of pure devotees.
The pure devotees, who are always absorbed in the thought of the transcendental lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and who are always engaged in devotional service in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, are never to be considered to be in the material world. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained that those who are always engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness by body, mind and activities are to be considered liberated even within this body. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā: those who are engaged in the devotional service of the Lord have already transcended the material position.
Kṛṣṇa appears in order to give both the devotees and the nondevotees a chance for realization of the ultimate goal of life. The devotees get the direct chance to see Him and worship Him. Those who are not on that platform get the chance to become acquainted with His activities and thus become elevated to the same position.
The Brahma-saṁhitā (5.38) says:
premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti
yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ
govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi
Although Kṛṣṇa's transcendental form is presented as black, devotees who are in love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead appreciate the Lord as Śyāmasundara, having a very beautiful blackish form. The Lord's form is so beautiful that the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.30) also states:
veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣaṁ
barhāvataṁsam asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam
kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobhaṁ
govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who plays on His transcendental flute. His eyes are like lotus flowers, He is decorated with peacock plumes, and His bodily color resembles the color of a fresh black cloud, His bodily features are more beautiful than millions of Cupids." This beauty of the Supreme Lord can be seen by devotees who are in love with Him, devotees whose eyes are anointed with love of Godhead (premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena [Bs. 5.38]).
The Lord is also known as Giridhārī or Girivara-dhārī. Because Kṛṣṇa, for the sake of His devotees, lifted Govardhana Hill, the devotees appreciate the Lord's inconceivable strength; but nondevotees, in spite of directly perceiving the Lord's inconceivable strength and power, regard the Lord's activities as fictitious. This is the difference between a devotee and a nondevotee. Nondevotees cannot give any nomenclature for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, yet the Lord is known as Śyāmasundara and Giridhārī. Similarly, the Lord is known as Devakī-nandana and Yaśodā-nandana because He accepted the role of son for Mother Devakī and Mother Yaśodā, and He is known as Gopāla because He enjoyed the sport of maintaining the cows and calves. Therefore, although He has no mundane name, He is addressed by devotees as Devakī-nandana, Yaśodā-nandana, Gopāla and Śyāmasundara. These are all transcendental names that only devotees can appreciate and nondevotees cannot.
The history of Kṛṣṇa the person has been openly seen by everyone, yet only those who are in love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead can appreciate this history, whereas nondevotees, who have not developed their loving qualities, think that the activities, form and attributes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are fictitious. Therefore this verse explains, na nāma-rūpe guṇa janma-karmabhir nirūpitavye tava tasya sākṣiṇaḥ. In this connection, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has given the example that persons suffering from jaundice cannot taste the sweetness of sugar candy, although everyone knows that sugar candy is sweet. Similarly, because of the material disease, nondevotees cannot understand the transcendental name, form, attributes and activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although they actually see the Lord's activities, either through authority or through history. The Purāṇas are old, authentic histories, but nondevotees cannot understand them, especially Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is the essence of Vedic knowledge. Nondevotees cannot understand even the preliminary study of transcendental knowledge, the Bhagavad-gītā. They simply speculate and present commentaries with absurd distortions. In conclusion, unless one elevates himself to the transcendental platform by practicing bhakti-yoga, one cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His name, form, attributes or activities. But if by chance, by the association of devotees, one can actually understand the Lord and His features, one immediately becomes a liberated person. As the Lord says in the Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ
tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma
naiti mām eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has therefore said that by affection and love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, devotees can express their mind to Him with their words. Others, however, cannot do this, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]).
TEXT 37
Za{Nvana, gA{NAna, s$aMsmar"yaMê icantayana,
naAmaAina ṝ&paAiNA ca maṆḷlaAina tae
i‚(yaAs$au yastva»ar"NAAr"ivand"yaAer,"
@Aivaí"caetaA na BavaAya k(lpatae
śṛṇvan gṛṇan saṁsmarayaṁś ca cintayan
nāmāni rūpāṇi ca maṅgalāni te
kriyāsu yas tvac-caraṇāravindayor
āviṣṭa-cetā na bhavāya kalpate
śṛṇvan—constantly hearing about the Lord (śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ); gṛṇan—chanting or reciting (the holy name of the Lord and His activities); saṁsmarayan—remembering (constantly thinking of the Lord's lotus feet and His form); ca—and; cintayan—contemplating (the transcendental activities of the Lord); nāmāni—His transcendental names; rūpāṇi—His transcendental forms; ca—also; maṅgalāni—which are all transcendental and therefore auspicious; te—of Your Lordship; kriyāsu—in being engaged in the devotional service; yaḥ—he who; tvat-caraṇa-aravindayoḥ—at Your lotus feet; āviṣṭa-cetāḥ—the devotee who is completely absorbed (in such activities); na—not; bhavāya—for the material platform; kalpate—is fit.
Even while engaged in various activities, devotees whose minds are completely absorbed at Your lotus feet, and who constantly hear, chant, contemplate and cause others to remember Your transcendental names and forms, are always on the transcendental platform, and thus they can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
How bhakti-yoga can be practiced is explained in this verse. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has said that anyone who has dedicated his life to the service of the Lord (īhā yasya harer dāsye) by his activities, his mind and his words (karmaṇā manasā girā) may stay in any condition of life (nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu) and yet is no longer actually conditioned but is liberated (jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate). Even though such a devotee is in a material body, he has nothing to do with this body, for he is transcendentally situated. Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati: because a devotee is engaged in transcendental activities, he is not afraid of being materially embodied. (SB 6.17.28) Illustrating this liberated position, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu prayed, mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi: [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4] "All I want is Your causeless devotional service in My life, birth after birth." Even if a devotee, by the supreme will of the Lord, takes birth in this material world, he continues his devotional service. When King Bharata made a mistake and in his next life became a deer, his devotional service did not stop, although some slight chastisement was given to him because of his negligence. Nārada Muni says that even if one falls from the platform of devotional service, he is not lost, whereas nondevotees are lost entirely because they are not engaged in service. The Bhagavad-gītā (9.14) therefore recommends that one always engage at least in chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra:
satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ
yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ
namasyantaś ca māṁ bhaktyā
nitya-yuktā upāsate
"Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing down before Me, the great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion."
One should not give up the process of devotional service, which is performed in nine different ways (śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam, etc. [SB 7.5.23]). The most important process is hearing (śravaṇam) from the guru, sādhu and śāstra—the spiritual master, the saintly ācāryas and the Vedic literature. Sādhu-śāstra-guru-vākya, cittete kariyā aikya. We should not hear the commentaries and explanations of nondevotees, for this is strictly forbidden by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, who quotes from the Padma Purāṇa:
avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ
pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam
śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyaṁ
sarpocchiṣṭaṁ yathā payaḥ
"One should not hear anything about Kṛṣṇa from a non-Vaiṣṇava. Milk touched by the lips of a serpent has poisonous effects; similarly, talks about Kṛṣṇa given by a non-Vaiṣṇava are also poisonous." We should strictly follow this injunction and never try to hear from Māyāvādīs, impersonalists, voidists, politicians or so-called scholars. Strictly avoiding such inauspicious association, we should simply hear from pure devotees. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī therefore recommends, śrī-guru-padāśrayaḥ: one must seek shelter at the lotus feet of a pure devotee who can be one's guru. Caitanya Mahāprabhu advises that a guru is one who strictly follows the instructions of the Bhagavad-gītā: yāre dekha, tāre kaha, 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa (Cc. Madhya 7.128). A juggler, a magician or one who speaks nonsense as an academic career is not a guru. Rather, a guru is one who presents the Bhagavad-gītā, the book of Kṛṣṇa's instructions, as it is. Śravaṇa is very important; one must hear from the Vaiṣṇava sādhu, guru and śāstra.
The word kriyāsu, meaning "by manual labor" or "by work," is important in this verse. One should engage in practical service to the Lord. In our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, all our activities are concentrated upon distributing Kṛṣṇa literature. This is very important. One may approach any person and induce him to read Kṛṣṇa literature so that in the future he also may become a devotee. Such activities are recommended in this verse. Kriyāsu yas tvac-caraṇāravindayoḥ. Such activities will always remind the devotees of the Lord's lotus feet. By fully concentrating on distributing books for Kṛṣṇa, one is fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa. This is samādhi.
TEXT 38
id"í"YaA h"re"'syaA Bavata: pad"Ae BauvaAe
BaAr"Ae'panaItastava janmanaeizAtau:
id"í"YaAiÆḷtaAM tvatpad"kE(: s$auzAAeBanaEr,"
‰"ºyaAma gAAM âAM ca tavaAnauk(impataAma,
diṣṭyā hare 'syā bhavataḥ pado bhuvo
bhāro 'panītas tava janmaneśituḥ
diṣṭyāṅkitāṁ tvat-padakaiḥ suśobhanair
drakṣyāma gāṁ dyāṁ ca tavānukampitām
diṣṭyā—by fortune; hare—O Lord; asyāḥ—of this (world); bhavataḥ—of Your Lordship; padaḥ—of the place; bhuvaḥ—on this earth; bhāraḥ—the burden created by the demons; apanītaḥ—now removed; tava—of Your Lordship; janmanā—by appearance as an incarnation; īśituḥ—You, the controller of everything; diṣṭyā—and by fortune; aṅkitām—marked; tvat-padakaiḥ—by Your lotus feet; su-śobhanaiḥ—which are transcendentally decorated with the marks of conchshell, disc, lotus and club; drakṣyāma—we shall surely observe; gām—upon this earth; dyām ca—in heaven also; tava anukampitām—due to Your causeless mercy upon us.
O Lord, we are fortunate because the heavy burden of the demons upon this earth has been immediately removed by Your appearance. Indeed, we are certainly fortunate, for we shall be able to see upon this earth and in the heavenly planets the marks of lotus, conchshell, club and disc that adorn Your lotus feet.
The soles of the Lord's lotus feet are marked with śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-padma—conchshell, disc, club and lotus—and also by a flag and a thunderbolt. When Kṛṣṇa walks on this earth or in the heavenly planets, these marks are visible wherever He goes. Vṛndāvana-dhāma is a transcendental place because of Kṛṣṇa's walking on this land frequently. The inhabitants of Vṛndāvana were fortunate to see these marks here and there. When Akrūra went to Vṛndāvana to take Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma away to the festival arranged by Kaṁsa, upon seeing the marks of the Lord's lotus feet on the ground of Vṛndāvana, he fell down and began to groan. These marks are visible to devotees who receive the causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (tavānukampitām). The demigods were jubilant not only because the appearance of the Supreme Lord would do away with the burdensome demons, but also because they would be able to see upon the ground the transcendental marks from the soles of the Lord's lotus feet. The gopīs always thought of the Lord's lotus feet when He was walking in the pasturing grounds, and, as described in the previous verse, simply by thinking of the Lord's lotus feet, the gopīs were fully absorbed in transcendence (āviṣṭa-cetā na bhavāya kalpate). Like the gopīs, one who is always absorbed in thought of the Lord is beyond the material platform and will not remain in this material world. It is our duty, therefore, always to hear, chant and think about the Lord's lotus feet, as is actually done by Vaiṣṇavas who have decided to live in Vṛndāvana always and think of the Lord's lotus feet twenty-four hours a day.
TEXT 39
na tae'BavasyaezA Bavasya k(Ar"NAM
ivanaA ivanaAedM" bata takR(yaAmahe"
BavaAe inar"AeDa: isTaitar"pyaivaâyaA
k{(taA yatastvayyaBayaA™ayaAtmaina
na te 'bhavasyeśa bhavasya kāraṇaṁ
vinā vinodaṁ bata tarkayāmahe
bhavo nirodhaḥ sthitir apy avidyayā
kṛtā yatas tvayy abhayāśrayātmani
na—not; te—of Your Lordship; abhavasya—of whom there is no birth, death or maintenance as for an ordinary being; īśa—O Supreme Lord; bhavasya—of Your appearance, Your birth; kāraṇam—the cause; vinā—without; vinodam—the pastimes (despite what is said, You are not forced to come to this world by any cause); bata—however; tarkayāmahe—we cannot argue (but must simply understand that these are Your pastimes); bhavaḥ—birth; nirodhaḥ—death; sthitiḥ—maintenance; api—also; avidyayā—by the external, illusory energy; kṛtāḥ—done; yataḥ—because; tvayi—unto You; abhaya-āśraya—O fearless shelter of all; ātmani—of the ordinary living entity.
O Supreme Lord, You are not an ordinary living entity appearing in this material world as a result of fruitive activities. Therefore Your appearance or birth in this world has no other cause than Your pleasure potency. Similarly, the living entities, who are part of You, have no cause for miseries like birth, death and old age, except when these living entities are conducted by Your external energy.
As stated in the Bhagavad-gītā (15.7), mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ: the living entities are parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, and thus they are qualitatively one with the Lord. We can understand that when the Supreme Lord appears or disappears as an incarnation, there is no other cause than His pleasure potency. We cannot force the Supreme Personality of Godhead to appear. As He says in the Bhagavad-gītā (4.7):
yadā yadā hi dharmasya
glānir bhavati bhārata
abhyutthānam adharmasya
tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend Myself." When there is a need to diminish a burden created by the demons, the Supreme Godhead can do it in many ways because He has multifarious energies. There is no need for Him to come as an incarnation, since He is not forced to do anything like ordinary living entities. The living entities come to this material world in the spirit of enjoyment, but because they want to enjoy without Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha haiyā bhoga-vāñchā kare), they suffer birth, death, old age and disease under the control of the illusory energy. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears, however, no such causes are involved; His descent is an act of His pleasure potency. We should always remember this distinction between the Lord and the ordinary living entity and not uselessly argue that the Lord cannot come. There are philosophers who do not believe in the Lord's incarnation and who ask, "Why should the Supreme Lord come?" But the answer is, "Why should He not come? Why should He be controlled by the desire of the living entity?" The Lord is free to do whatever He likes. Therefore this verse says, vinā vinodaṁ bata tarkayāmahe. It is only for His pleasure that He comes although He does not need to come.
When the living entities come to this world for material enjoyment, they are entangled in karma and karma-phala by the Lord's illusory energy. But if one seeks shelter at the Lord's lotus feet, one is again situated in his original, liberated state. As stated here, kṛtā yatas tvayy abhayāśrayātmani: one who seeks shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord is always fearless. Because we are dependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we should give up the idea that without Kṛṣṇa we can enjoy freedom in this material world. This idea is the reason we have become entangled. Now it is our duty to seek shelter again at the Lord's lotus feet. This shelter is described as abhaya, or fearless. Since Kṛṣṇa is not subject to birth, death, old age or disease, and since we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, we also are not subject to birth, death, old age or disease, but we have become subject to these illusory problems because of our forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa and our position as His eternal servants (jīvera 'svarūpa' haya—kṛṣṇera 'nitya-dāsa' [Cc. Madhya 20.108]). Therefore, if we practice devotional service by always thinking of the Lord, always glorifying Him and always chanting about Him, as described in text 37 (śṛṇvan gṛṇan saṁsmarayaṁś ca cintayan), we will be reinstated in our original, constitutional position and thus be saved. The demigods, therefore, encouraged Devakī not to fear Kaṁsa but to think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was already within her womb.
TEXT 40
matsyaAṅk(cC$pana{is$aMh"var"Ah"hM"s$a-
r"Ajanyaiva‘aivabauDaeSau k{(taAvataAr":
tvaM paAis$a naiṣBauvanaM ca yaTaADaunaezA
BaArM" BauvaAe h"r" yaāU"Ôama vand"naM tae
matsyāśva-kacchapa-nṛsiṁha-varāha-haṁsa-
rājanya-vipra-vibudheṣu kṛtāvatāraḥ
tvaṁ pāsi nas tri-bhuvanaṁ ca yathādhuneśa
bhāraṁ bhuvo hara yadūttama vandanaṁ te
matsya—the fish incarnation; aśva—the horse incarnation; kacchapa—the tortoise incarnation; nṛsiṁha—the Narasiṁha incarnation; varāha—the Varāha incarnation; haṁsa—the swan incarnation; rājanya—incarnations as Lord Rāmacandra and other kṣatriyas; vipra—incarnations as brāhmaṇas like Vāmanadeva; vibudheṣu—among the demigods; kṛta-avatāraḥ—appeared as incarnations; tvam—Your Lordship; pāsi—please save; naḥ—us; tri-bhuvanam ca—and the three worlds; yathā—as well as; adhunā—now; īśa—O Supreme Lord; bhāram—burden; bhuvaḥ—of the earth; hara—please diminish; yadu-uttama—O Lord Kṛṣṇa, best of the Yadus; vandanam te—we offer our prayers unto You.
O supreme controller, Your Lordship previously accepted incarnations as a fish, a horse, a tortoise, Narasiṁhadeva, a boar, a swan, Lord Rāmacandra, Paraśurāma and, among the demigods, Vāmanadeva, to protect the entire world by Your mercy. Now please protect us again by Your mercy by diminishing the disturbances in this world. O Kṛṣṇa, best of the Yadus, we respectfully offer our obeisances unto You.
In every incarnation, the Supreme Personality of Godhead has a particular mission to execute, and this was true in His appearance as the son of Devakī in the family of the Yadus. Thus all the demigods offered their prayers to the Lord, bowing down before Him, and requested the Lord to do the needful. We cannot order the Supreme Personality of Godhead to do anything for us. We can simply offer Him our obeisances, as advised in the Bhagavad-gītā (man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]), and pray to Him for annihilation of dangers.
TEXT 41
id"í"YaAmba tae ku(iºagAta: par": paumaAna,
@MzAena s$aAºaAṁ"gAvaAna, BavaAya na:
maABaUṁ"yaM BaAejapataemauRmaUSaAeRr,"
gAAeæaA yaāU"naAM BaivataA tavaAtmaja:
diṣṭyāmba te kukṣi-gataḥ paraḥ pumān
aṁśena sākṣād bhagavān bhavāya naḥ
mābhūd bhayaṁ bhoja-pater mumūrṣor
goptā yadūnāṁ bhavitā tavātmajaḥ
diṣṭyā—by fortune; amba—O mother; te—your; kukṣi-gataḥ—in the womb; paraḥ—the Supreme; pumān—Personality of Godhead; aṁśena—with all His energies, His parts and parcels; sākṣāt—directly; bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhavāya—for the auspiciousness; naḥ—of all of us; mā abhūt—never be; bhayam—fearful; bhoja-pateḥ—from Kaṁsa, King of the Bhoja dynasty; mumūrṣoḥ—who has decided to be killed by the Lord; goptā—the protector; yadūnām—of the Yadu dynasty; bhavitā—will become; tava ātmajaḥ—your son.
O Mother Devakī, by your good fortune and ours, the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, with all His plenary portions, such as Baladeva, is now within your womb. Therefore you need not fear Kaṁsa, who has decided to be killed by the Lord. Your eternal son, Kṛṣṇa, will be the protector of the entire Yadu dynasty.
The word kukṣi-gataḥ, meaning "within the womb of Devakī," has been discussed by Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī in his Krama-sandarbha commentary. Since it was said at first that Kṛṣṇa was present within the heart of Vasudeva and was transferred to the heart of Devakī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī writes, how is it that Kṛṣṇa was now in the womb? He replies that there is no contradiction. From the heart the Lord can go to the womb, or from the womb He can go to the heart. Indeed, He can go or stay anywhere. As confirmed in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.35), aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi. The Lord can stay wherever He likes. Devakī, therefore, in accordance with the desire of her former life, now had the opportunity to seek the benediction of having the Supreme Personality of Godhead as her son, Devakī-nandana.
The words paraḥ pumān aṁśena signify that Kṛṣṇa is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the verdict of the śāstra (kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]). Thus the demigods assured Devakī, "Your son is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He is appearing with Baladeva, His plenary portion. He will give you all protection and kill Kaṁsa, who has decided to continue his enmity toward the Lord and thus be killed by Him."

Song Prayers by Vasudeva to Krsna after His Apperance

TEXT 13
™aIvas$aude"va ovaAca
ivaid"taAe'is$a BavaAna, s$aAºaAta,
pauś&Sa: ‘ak{(tae: par":
ke(valaAnauBavaAnand"-
svaṝ&pa: s$avaRbauiŪ"ā{"k,(
śrī-vasudeva uvāca
vidito 'si bhavān sākṣāt
puruṣaḥ prakṛteḥ paraḥ
kevalānubhavānanda-
svarūpaḥ sarva-buddhi-dṛk
śrī-vasudevaḥ uvāca—Śrī Vasudeva prayed; viditaḥ asi—now I am fully conscious of You; bhavān—Your Lordship; sākṣāt—directly; puruṣaḥ—the Supreme Person; prakṛteḥ—to material nature; paraḥ—transcendental, beyond everything material; kevala-anubhava-ānanda-svarūpaḥ—Your form is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], and whoever perceives You becomes transcendentally blissful; sarva-buddhi-dṛk—the supreme observer, the Supersoul, the intelligence of everyone.
Vasudeva said: My Lord, You are the Supreme Person, beyond material existence, and You are the Supersoul. Your form can be perceived by transcendental knowledge, by which You can be understood as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I now understand Your position perfectly.
Within Vasudeva's heart, affection for his son and knowledge of the Supreme Lord's transcendental nature both awakened. In the beginning Vasudeva thought, "Such a beautiful child has been born, but now Kaṁsa will come and kill Him." But when he understood that this was not an ordinary child but the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he became fearless. Regarding his son as the Supreme Lord, wonderful in everything, he began offering prayers appropriate for the Supreme Lord. Completely free from fear of Kaṁsa's atrocities, he accepted the child simultaneously as an object of affection and as an object of worship by prayers.
TEXT 14
s$a Wva sva‘ak{(tyaedM"
s$a{"î"Aƒae i‡agAuNAAtmak(ma,
tad"nau tvaM ÷‘aivaí":
‘aivaí" wva BaAvyas$ae
sa eva svaprakṛtyedaṁ
sṛṣṭvāgre tri-guṇātmakam
tad anu tvaṁ hy apraviṣṭaḥ
praviṣṭa iva bhāvyase
saḥ—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); eva—indeed; sva-prakṛtyā—by Your personal energy (mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram); idam—this material world; sṛṣṭvā—after creating; agre—in the beginning; tri-guṇa-ātmakam—made of three modes of energy (sattva-rajas-tamo-guṇa); tat anu—thereafter; tvam—Your Lordship; hi—indeed; apraviṣṭaḥ—although You did not enter; praviṣṭaḥ iva—You appear to have entered; bhāvyase—are so understood.
My Lord, You are the same person who in the beginning created this material world by His personal external energy. After the creation of this world of three guṇas [sattva, rajas and tamas], You appear to have entered it, although in fact You have not.
In the Bhagavad-gītā (7.4) the Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly explains:
bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ
khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca
ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me
bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā
This material world of three modes of nature—sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa—is a composition of earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego, all of which are energies coming from Kṛṣṇa, yet Kṛṣṇa, being always transcendental, is aloof from this material world. Those who are not in pure knowledge think that Kṛṣṇa is a product of matter and that His body is material like ours (avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 9.11]). In fact, however, Kṛṣṇa is always aloof from this material world.
In the Vedic literature, we find the creation described in relationship to Mahā-Viṣṇu. As stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.35):
eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ
yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ
aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ
govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, the original Personality of Godhead. By His partial plenary expansion as Mahā-Viṣṇu, He enters into material nature. Then He enters every universe as Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and He enters all the elements, including every atom of matter, as Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Such manifestations of cosmic creation are innumerable, both in the universes and in the individual atoms." Govinda is partially exhibited as antaryāmī, the Supersoul, who enters this material world (aṇḍāntara-stha) and who is also within the atom. The Brahma-saṁhitā (5.48) further says:
yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya
jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ
viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo
govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi
This verse describes Mahā-Viṣṇu as a plenary expansion of Kṛṣṇa. Mahā-Viṣṇu lies on the Causal Ocean, and when He exhales, millions of brahmāṇḍas, or universes, come from the pores of His body. Then, when Mahā-Viṣṇu inhales, all these brahmāṇḍas disappear. Thus the millions of brahmāṇḍas controlled by the Brahmās and other demigods come and go in this material world through the breathing of Mahā-Viṣṇu.
Foolish persons think that when Kṛṣṇa appears as the son of Vasudeva, He is limited like an ordinary child. But Vasudeva was aware that although the Lord had appeared as his son, the Lord had not entered Devakī's womb and then come out. Rather, the Lord was always there. The Supreme Lord is all-pervading, present within and without. Praviṣṭa iva bhāvyase: He only seemed to have entered the womb of Devakī and to have now appeared as Vasudeva's child. The expression of this knowledge by Vasudeva indicates that Vasudeva knew how these events had taken place. Vasudeva was certainly a devotee of the Lord in full knowledge, and we must learn from devotees like him. The Bhagavad-gītā (4.34) therefore recommends:
tad viddhi praṇipātena
paripraśnena sevayā
upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ
jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ
"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." Vasudeva begot the Supreme Personality of Godhead, yet he was in full knowledge of how the Supreme Lord appears and disappears. He was therefore a tattva-darśī, a seer of the truth, because he personally saw how the Supreme Absolute Truth appeared as his son. Vasudeva was not in ignorance, thinking that because the Supreme Godhead had appeared as his son, the Lord had become limited. The Lord is unlimitedly existing and all-pervading, inside and outside. Thus there is no question of His appearance or disappearance.
TEXTS 15-17
yaTaemae'ivak{(taA BaAvaAs$a,
taTaA tae ivak{(taE: s$ah"
naAnaAvaIyaAR: pa{TagBaUtaA
ivar"AjaM janayainta ih"
s$aiªapatya s$amautpaAâ
ā{"zyantae'naugAtaA wva
‘aAgAeva ivaâmaAnatvaAna,
na taeSaAimah" s$amBava:
WvaM BavaAna, bauŪ"YanaumaeyalaºaNAEr,"
ƒaA÷EgAuRNAE: s$aªaipa taṬ"NAAƒah":
@naAva{tatvaAḶ"ih"r"ntarM" na tae
s$avaRsya s$avaARtmana @Atmavastauna:
yatheme 'vikṛtā bhāvās
tathā te vikṛtaiḥ saha
nānā-vīryāḥ pṛthag-bhūtā
virājaṁ janayanti hi
sannipatya samutpādya
dṛśyante 'nugatā iva
prāg eva vidyamānatvān
na teṣām iha sambhavaḥ
evaṁ bhavān buddhy-anumeya-lakṣaṇair
grāhyair guṇaiḥ sann api tad-guṇāgrahaḥ
anāvṛtatvād bahir antaraṁ na te
sarvasya sarvātmana ātma-vastunaḥ
yathā—as; ime—these material creations, made of material energy; avikṛtāḥ—actually not unintegrated; bhāvāḥ—with such a conception; tathā—similarly; te—they; vikṛtaiḥ saha—association with these different elements coming from the total material energy; nānā-vīryāḥ—every element is full of different energies; pṛthak—separated; bhūtāḥ—becoming; virājam—the whole cosmic manifestation; janayanti—create; hi—indeed; sannipatya—because of association with the spiritual energy; samutpādya—after being created; dṛśyante—they appear; anugatāḥ—entered within it; iva—as if; prāk—from the very beginning, before the creation of this cosmic manifestation; eva—indeed; vidyamānatvāt—due to the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na—not; teṣām—of these material elements; iha—in this matter of creation; sambhavaḥ—entering would have been possible; evam—in this way; bhavān—O my Lord; buddhi-anumeya-lakṣaṇaiḥ—by real intelligence and by such symptoms; grāhyaiḥ—with the objects of the senses; guṇaiḥ—with the modes of material nature; san api—although in touch; tat-guṇa-agrahaḥ—are not touched by the material qualities; anāvṛtatvāt—because of being situated everywhere; bahiḥ antaram—within the external and internal; na te—there is no such thing for You; sarvasya—of everything; sarva-ātmanaḥ—You are the root of everything; ātma-vastunaḥ—everything belongs to You, but You are outside and inside of everything.
The mahat-tattva, the total material energy, is undivided, but because of the material modes of nature, it appears to separate into earth, water, fire, air and ether. Because of the living energy [jīva-bhūta], these separated energies combine to make the cosmic manifestation visible, but in fact, before the creation of the cosmos, the total energy is already present. Therefore, the total material energy never actually enters the creation. Similarly, although You are perceived by our senses because of Your presence, You cannot be perceived by the senses, nor experienced by the mind or words [avāṅ-mānasa-gocara]. With our senses we can perceive some things, but not everything; for example, we can use our eyes to see, but not to taste. Consequently, You are beyond perception by the senses. Although in touch with the modes of material nature, You are unaffected by them. You are the prime factor in everything, the all-pervading, undivided Supersoul. For You, therefore, there is no external or internal. You never entered the womb of Devakī; rather, You existed there already.
This same understanding is explained by the Lord Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.4):
mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ
jagad-avyakta-mūrtinā
mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni
na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am not in them."
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not perceivable through the gross material senses. It is said that Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa's name, fame, pastimes, etc., cannot be understood by material senses. Only to one who is engaged in pure devotional service under proper guidance is He revealed. As stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.38):
premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti
One can always see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, within oneself and outside oneself if one has developed the transcendental loving attitude toward Him. Thus for people in general He is not visible. In the above-mentioned verse from the Bhagavad-gītā, therefore, it is said that although He is all-pervading, everywhere present, He is not conceivable by the material senses. But actually, although we cannot see Him, everything is resting in Him. As discussed in the Seventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gītā, the entire material cosmic manifestation is only a combination of His two different energies, the superior, spiritual energy and the inferior, material energy. Just as the sunshine is spread all over the universe, the energy of the Lord is spread all over the creation, and everything is resting in that energy.
Yet one should not conclude that because He is spread all over He has lost His personal existence. To refute such arguments, the Lord says, "I am everywhere, and everything is in Me, but still I am aloof." For example, a king heads a government which is but the manifestation of the king's energy; the different governmental departments are nothing but the energies of the king, and each department is resting on the king's power. But still one cannot expect the king to be present in every department personally. That is a crude example. Similarly, all the manifestations that we see, and everything that exists, both in this material world and in the spiritual world, are resting on the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The creation takes place by the diffusion of His different energies, and, as stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, He is everywhere present by His personal representation, the diffusion of His different energies.
One may argue that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who creates the whole cosmic manifestation simply by His glance, cannot come within the womb of Devakī, the wife of Vasudeva. To eradicate this argument, Vasudeva said, "My dear Lord, it is not very wonderful that You appeared within the womb of Devakī, for the creation was also made in that way. You were lying in the Causal Ocean as Mahā-Viṣṇu, and by Your breathing, innumerable universes came into existence. Then You entered into each of the universes as Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Then again You expanded Yourself as Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and entered into the heart of all living entities and entered even within the atoms. Therefore Your entrance into the womb of Devakī is understandable in the same way. You appear to have entered, but You are simultaneously all-pervading. We can understand Your entrance and nonentrance from material examples. The total material energy remains intact even after being divided into sixteen elements. The material body is nothing but a combination of the five gross elements—namely earth, water, fire, air and ether. Whenever there is a material body, it appears that such elements are newly created, but actually the elements are always existing outside of the body. Similarly, although You appear as a child in the womb of Devakī, You are also existing outside. You are always in Your abode, but still You can simultaneously expand Yourself into millions of forms.
"One has to understand Your appearance with great intelligence because the material energy is also emanating from You. You are the original source of the material energy, just as the sun is the source of the sunshine. The sunshine cannot cover the sun globe, nor can the material energy—being an emanation from You—cover You. You appear to be in the three modes of material energy, but actually the three modes of material energy cannot cover You. This is understood by the highly intellectual philosophers. In other words, although You appear to be within the material energy, You are never covered by it."
We hear from the Vedic version that the Supreme Brahman exhibits His effulgence and therefore everything is illuminated. We can understand from the Brahma-saṁhitā that the brahma-jyoti, or the Brahman effulgence, emanates from the body of the Supreme Lord. And from the Brahman effulgence, all creation takes place. It is further stated in the Bhagavad-gītā that the Lord is the support of the Brahman effulgence. Originally He is the root cause of everything. But persons who are less intelligent think that when the Supreme Personality of Godhead comes within this material world, He accepts material qualities. Such conclusions are not mature but are made by the less intelligent.
TEXT 18
ya @AtmanaAe ā{"zyagAuNAeSau s$aiªaita
vyavasyatae svavyaitare"k(taAe'bauDa:
ivanaAnauvaAdM" na ca tanmanaIiSataM
s$amyagyatastya·(maupaAd"d"tpaumaAna,
ya ātmano dṛśya-guṇeṣu sann iti
vyavasyate sva-vyatirekato 'budhaḥ
vinānuvādaṁ na ca tan manīṣitaṁ
samyag yatas tyaktam upādadat pumān
yaḥ—anyone who; ātmanaḥ—of his own real identity, the soul; dṛśya-guṇeṣu—among the visible objects, beginning with the body; san—being situated in that position; iti—thus; vyavasyate—continues to act; sva-vyatirekataḥ—as if the body were independent of the soul; abudhaḥ—a rascal; vinā anuvādam—without proper analytical study; na—not; ca—also; tat—the body and other visible objects; manīṣitam—such considerations having been discussed; samyak—fully; yataḥ—because he is a fool; tyaktam—are rejected; upādadat—accepts this body as reality; pumān—a person.
One who considers his visible body, which is a product of the three modes of nature, to be independent of the soul is unaware of the basis of existence, and therefore he is a rascal. Those who are learned have rejected his conclusion because one can understand through full discussion that with no basis in the soul, the visible body and senses would be insubstantial. Nonetheless, although his conclusion has been rejected, a foolish person considers it a reality.
Without the basic principle of the soul, the body cannot be produced. So-called scientists have tried in many ways to produce a living body in their chemical laboratories, but no one has been able to do it because unless the spirit soul is present, a body cannot be prepared from material elements. Since scientists are now enamored of theories about the chemical composition of the body, we have challenged many scientists to make even a small egg. The chemicals in eggs can be found very easily. There is a white substance and a yellow substance, covered by a shell, and modern scientists should very easily be able to duplicate all this. But even if they were to prepare such an egg and put it in an incubator, this man-made chemical egg would not produce a chicken. The soul must be added because there is no question of a chemical combination for life. Those who think that life can exist without the soul have therefore been described here as abudhaḥ, foolish rascals.
Again, there are those who reject the body, regarding it as insubstantial. They are of the same category of fools. One can neither reject the body nor accept it as substantial. The substance is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and both the body and the soul are energies of the Supreme Godhead, as described by the Lord Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā (7.4-5):
bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ
khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca
ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me
bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā
apareyam itas tv anyāṁ
prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām
jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho
yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat
"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together these eight constitute My separated material energies. Besides these, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is another, superior energy of Mine, which comprises the living entities who are exploiting the resources of this material, inferior nature."
The body, therefore, has a relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just as the soul does. Since both of them are energies of the Lord, neither of them is false, because they come from the reality. One who does not know this secret of life is described as abudhaḥ. According to the Vedic injunctions, aitadātmyam idaṁ sarvam, sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma: everything is the Supreme Brahman. Therefore, both the body and the soul are Brahman, since matter and spirit emanate from Brahman.
Not knowing the conclusions of the Vedas, some people accept the material nature as substance, and others accept the spirit soul as substance, but actually Brahman is the substance. Brahman is the cause of all causes. The ingredients and the immediate cause of this manifested material world are Brahman, and we cannot make the ingredients of this world independent of Brahman. Furthermore, since the ingredients and the immediate cause of this material manifestation are Brahman, both of them are truth, satya; there is no validity to the expression brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. The world is not false.
Jñānīs reject this world, and foolish persons accept this world as reality, and in this way they are both misguided. Although the body is not as important as the soul, we cannot say that it is false. Yet the body is temporary, and only foolish, materialistic persons, who do not have full knowledge of the soul, regard the temporary body as reality and engage in decorating this body. Both of these pitfalls—rejection of the body as false and acceptance of the body as all in all—can be avoided when one is fully situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If we regard this world as false, we fall into the category of asuras, who say that this world is unreal, with no foundation and no God in control (asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te jagad āhur anīśvaram). As described in the Sixteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gītā, this is the conclusion of demons.
TEXT 19
tvaÔaAe'sya janmaisTaitas$aMyamaAna, ivaBaAe
vad"ntyanaIh"Ad"gAuNAAd"ivai‚(yaAta,
tvayaIṅre" “aṭiNA naAe ivaś&Dyatae
tvad"A™ayatvaAāu"pacayaRtae gAuNAE:
tvatto 'sya janma-sthiti-saṁyamān vibho
vadanty anīhād aguṇād avikriyāt
tvayīśvare brahmaṇi no virudhyate
tvad-āśrayatvād upacaryate guṇaiḥ
tvattaḥ—are from Your Lordship; asya—of the entire cosmic manifestation; janma—the creation; sthiti—maintenance; saṁyamān—and annihilation; vibho—O my Lord; vadanti—the learned Vedic scholars conclude; anīhāt—who are free from endeavor; aguṇāt—who are unaffected by the modes of material nature; avikriyāt—who are unchanging in Your spiritual situation; tvayi—in You; īśvare—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; brahmaṇi—who are Para-brahman, the Supreme Brahman; na u—not; virudhyate—there is a contradiction; tvat-āśrayatvāt—because of being controlled by You; upacaryate—things are going on automatically; guṇaiḥ—by the operation of the material modes.
O my Lord, learned Vedic scholars conclude that the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the entire cosmic manifestation are performed by You, who are free from endeavor, unaffected by the modes of material nature, and changeless in Your spiritual situation. There are no contradictions in You, who are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Para-brahman. Because the three modes of material nature-sattva, rajas and tamas—are under Your control, everything takes place automatically.
As stated in the Vedas:
na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate
na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate
parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate
svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca
 [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]
"The Supreme Lord has nothing to do, and no one is found to be equal to or greater than Him, for everything is done naturally and systematically by His multifarious energies." (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.8) Creation, maintenance and annihilation are all conducted personally by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and this is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]). Yet ultimately the Lord does not need to do anything, and therefore He is nirvikāra, changeless. Because everything is done under His direction, He is called sṛṣṭi-kartā, the master of creation. Similarly, He is the master of annihilation. When a master sits in one place while his servants work in different duties, whatever the servants are doing is ultimately an activity of the master, although he is doing nothing (na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate). The Lord's potencies are so numerous that everything is nicely done. Therefore, He is naturally still and is not directly the doer of anything in this material world.
TEXT 20
s$a tvaM i‡alaAek(isTatayae svamaAyayaA
ibaBaiSaR zAuflaM Kalau vaNARmaAtmana:
s$agAARya r"·M( r"jas$aAepaba{Mih"taM
k{(SNAM ca vaNA< tamas$aA janaAtyayae
sa tvaṁ tri-loka-sthitaye sva-māyayā
bibharṣi śuklaṁ khalu varṇam ātmanaḥ
sargāya raktaṁ rajasopabṛṁhitaṁ
kṛṣṇaṁ ca varṇaṁ tamasā janātyaye
saḥ tvam—Your Lordship, who are the same person, the Transcendence; tri-loka-sthitaye—to maintain the three worlds, the upper, middle and lower planetary systems; sva-māyayā—by Your personal energy (ātma-māyayā); bibharṣi—assume; śuklam—the white form of Viṣṇu in goodness; khalu—as well as; varṇam—color; ātmanaḥ—of the same category as You (viṣṇu-tattva); sargāya—for the creation of the entire world; raktam—the reddish color of rajo-guṇa; rajasā—with the quality of passion; upabṛṁhitam—being charged; kṛṣṇam ca—and the quality of darkness; varṇam—the color; tamasā—which is surrounded by ignorance; jana-atyaye—for the ultimate destruction of the entire creation.
My Lord, Your form is transcendental to the three material modes, yet for the maintenance of the three worlds, You assume the white color of Viṣṇu in goodness; for creation, which is surrounded by the quality of passion, You appear reddish; and at the end, when there is a need for annihilation, which is surrounded by ignorance, You appear blackish.
Vasudeva prayed to the Lord, "You are called śuklam. Śuklam, or 'whiteness,' is the symbolic representation of the Absolute Truth because it is unaffected by the material qualities. Lord Brahmā is called rakta, or red, because Brahmā represents the quality of passion for creation. Darkness is entrusted to Lord Śiva because he annihilates the cosmos. The creation, annihilation and maintenance of this cosmic manifestation are conducted by Your potencies, yet You are always unaffected by those qualities." As confirmed in the Vedas, harir hi nirguṇaḥ sākṣāt: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always free from all material qualities. It is also said that the qualities of passion and ignorance are nonexistent in the person of the Supreme Lord.
In this verse, the three colors mentioned—śukla, rakta and kṛṣṇa—are not to be understood literally, in terms of what we experience with our senses, but rather as representatives of sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. After all, sometimes we see that a heron is white, although it is in tamo-guṇa, the mode of ignorance. Illustrating the logic called bakāndha-nyāya, the heron is such a fool that it runs after the testicles of a bull, thinking them to be a hanging fish that can be taken when it drops. Thus the heron is always in darkness. Vyāsadeva, however, the compiler of the Vedic literature, is blackish, but this does not mean that he is in tamo-guṇa; rather, he is in the highest position of sattva-guṇa, beyond the material modes of nature. Sometimes these colors (śukla-raktas tathā pītaḥ) are used to designate the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras. Lord Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is celebrated as possessing a blackish color, Lord Śiva is whitish, and Lord Brahmā is reddish, but according to Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī in the Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī-ṭīkā, this exhibition of colors is not what is referred to here.
The real understanding of śukla, rakta and kṛṣṇa is as follows. The Lord is always transcendental, but for the sake of creation He assumes the color rakta as Lord Brahmā. Again, sometimes the Lord becomes angry. As He says in the Bhagavad-gītā (16.19):
tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān
saṁsāreṣu narādhamān
kṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān
āsurīṣv eva yoniṣu
"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, I perpetually cast into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life." To destroy the demons, the Lord becomes angry, and therefore He assumes the form of Lord Śiva. In summary, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always beyond the material qualities, and we should not be misled into thinking otherwise simply because of sense perception. One must understand the position of the Lord through the authorities, or mahājanas. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28), ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam.
TEXT 21
tvamasya laAek(sya ivaBaAe ir"r"iºaSaur,"
gA{he"'vataINAAeR'is$a mamaAiKalaeṅr"
r"Ajanyas$aMÁaAs$aur"k(Aeiq%yaUTapaEr,"
inavyaUR÷maAnaA inah"inaSyas$ae camaU:
tvam asya lokasya vibho rirakṣiṣur
gṛhe 'vatīrṇo 'si mamākhileśvara
rājanya-saṁjñāsura-koṭi-yūthapair
nirvyūhyamānā nihaniṣyase camūḥ
tvam—Your Lordship; asya—of this world; lokasya—especially of this martya-loka, the planet earth; vibho—O Supreme; rirakṣiṣuḥ—desiring protection (from the disturbance of the asuras); gṛhe—in this house; avatīrṇaḥ asi—have now appeared; mama—my; akhila-īśvara—although You are the proprietor of the entire creation; rājanya-saṁjña-asura-koṭi-yūtha-paiḥ—with millions of demons and their followers in the roles of politicians and kings; nirvyūhyamānāḥ—which are moving here and there all over the world; nihaniṣyase—will kill; camūḥ—the armies, paraphernalia, soldiers and retinues.
O my Lord, proprietor of all creation, You have now appeared in my house, desiring to protect this world. I am sure that You will kill all the armies that are moving all over the world under the leadership of politicians who are dressed as kṣatriya rulers but who are factually demons. They must be killed by You for the protection of the innocent public.
Kṛṣṇa appears in this world for two purposes, paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām: [Bg. 4.8] to protect the innocent, religious devotees of the Lord and to annihilate all the uneducated, uncultured asuras, who unnecessarily bark like dogs and fight among themselves for political power. It is said, kali-kāle nāma-rūpe kṛṣṇa avatāra. The Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is also an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa in the form of the holy name (nāma-rūpe). Every one of us who is actually afraid of the asuric rulers and politicians must welcome this incarnation of Kṛṣṇa: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Then we will surely be protected from the harassment of asuric rulers. At the present moment these rulers are so powerful that by hook or by crook they capture the highest posts in government and harass countless numbers of people on the plea of national security or some emergency. Then again, one asura defeats another asura, but the public continues to suffer. Therefore the entire world is in a precarious condition, and the only hope is this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement. Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared when Prahlāda was excessively harassed by his asuric father. Because of such asuric fathers—that is, the ruling politicians—it is very difficult to press forward the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, but because Kṛṣṇa has now appeared in His holy name through this movement, we can hope that these asuric fathers will be annihilated and the kingdom of God established all over the world. The entire world is now full of many asuras in the guise of politicians, gurus, sādhus, yogīs and incarnations, and they are misleading the general public away from Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which can offer true benefit to human society.
TEXT 22
@yaM tvas$aByastava janma naAE gA{he"
™autvaAƒajaAMstae nyavaDaIts$aure"ṅr"
s$a tae'vataArM" pauś&SaE: s$amaipaRtaM
™autvaADaunaEvaAiBas$ar"tyaud"AyauDa:
ayaṁ tv asabhyas tava janma nau gṛhe
śrutvāgrajāṁs te nyavadhīt sureśvara
sa te 'vatāraṁ puruṣaiḥ samarpitaṁ
śrutvādhunaivābhisaraty udāyudhaḥ
ayam—this (rascal); tu—but; asabhyaḥ—who is not civilized at all (asura means "uncivilized," and sura means "civilized"); tava—of Your Lordship; janma—the birth; nau—our; gṛhe—into the home; śrutvā—after hearing; agrajān te—all the brothers born before You; nyavadhīt—killed; sura-īśvara—O Lord of the suras, the civilized persons; saḥ—he (that uncivilized Kaṁsa); te—Your; avatāram—appearance; puruṣaiḥ—by his lieutenants; samarpitam—being informed of; śrutvā—after hearing; adhunā—now; eva—indeed; abhisarati—will come immediately; udāyudhaḥ—with raised weapons.
O my Lord, Lord of the demigods, after hearing the prophecy that You would take birth in our home and kill him, this uncivilized Kaṁsa killed so many of Your elder brothers. As soon as he hears from his lieutenants that You have appeared, he will immediately come with weapons to kill You.
Kaṁsa has here been described as asabhya, meaning "uncivilized" or "most heinous," because he killed the many children of his sister. When he heard the prophecy that he would be killed by her eighth son, this uncivilized man, Kaṁsa, was immediately ready to kill his innocent sister on the occasion of her marriage. An uncivilized man can do anything for the satisfaction of his senses. He can kill children, he can kill cows, he can kill brāhmaṇas, he can kill old men; he has no mercy for anyone. According to the Vedic civilization, cows, women, children, old men and brāhmaṇas should be excused if they are at fault. But asuras, uncivilized men, do not care about that. At the present moment, the killing of cows and the killing of children is going on unrestrictedly, and therefore this civilization is not at all human, and those who are conducting this condemned civilization are uncivilized asuras.
Such uncivilized men are not in favor of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. As public officers, they declare without hesitation that the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is a nuisance, although the Bhagavad-gītā clearly says, satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]. According to this verse, it is the duty of the mahātmās to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and try to spread it all over the world to the best of their ability. Unfortunately, society is in such an uncivilized state that there are so-called mahātmās who are prepared to kill cows and children and stop the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement. Such uncivilized activities were actually demonstrated in opposition to the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement's Bombay center, Hare Krishna Land. As Kaṁsa was not expected to kill the beautiful child of Devakī and Vasudeva, the uncivilized society, although unhappy about the advancement of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, cannot be expected to stop it. Yet we must face many difficulties in many different ways. Although Kṛṣṇa cannot be killed, Vasudeva, as the father of Kṛṣṇa, was trembling because in affection he thought that Kaṁsa would immediately come and kill his son. Similarly, although the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and Kṛṣṇa are not different and no asuras can check it, we are afraid that at any moment the asuras can stop this movement in any part of the world.


Song Prayers by Devaki to Krsna after His Apperance
TEXT 24
™aIde"vafyauvaAca
ṝ&paM yaÔat‘aAḍ"r"vya·(maAâM
“aṭ jyaAeitainaRgAuRNAM inaivaRk(Ar"ma,
s$aÔaAmaA‡aM inaivaRzAeSaM inar"IhM"
s$a tvaM s$aAºaAiã"SNAur"DyaAtmad"Ipa:
śrī-devaky uvāca
rūpaṁ yat tat prāhur avyaktam ādyaṁ
brahma jyotir nirguṇaṁ nirvikāram
sattā-mātraṁ nirviśeṣaṁ nirīhaṁ
sa tvaṁ sākṣād viṣṇur adhyātma-dīpaḥ
śrī-devakī uvāca—Śrī Devakī said; rūpam—form or substance; yat tat—because You are the same substance; prāhuḥ—You are sometimes called; avyaktam—not perceivable by the material senses (ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ); ādyam—You are the original cause; brahma—You are known as Brahman; jyotiḥ—light; nirguṇam—without material qualities; nirvikāram—without change, the same form of Viṣṇu perpetually; sattā-mātram—the original substance, the cause of everything; nirviśeṣam—You are present everywhere as the Supersoul (within the heart of a human being and within the heart of an animal, the same substance is present); nirīham—without material desires; saḥ—that Supreme Person; tvam—Your Lordship; sākṣāt—directly; viṣṇuḥ—Lord Viṣṇu; adhyātma-dīpaḥ—the light for all transcendental knowledge (knowing You, one knows everything: kasmin nu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavatīti).
Śrī Devakī said: My dear Lord, there are different Vedas, some of which describe You as unperceivable through words and the mind. Yet You are the origin of the entire cosmic manifestation. You are Brahman, the greatest of everything, full of effulgence like the sun. You have no material cause, You are free from change and deviation, and You have no material desires. Thus the Vedas say that You are the substance. Therefore, my Lord, You are directly the origin of all Vedic statements, and by understanding You, one gradually understands everything. You are different from the light of Brahman and Paramātmā, yet You are not different from them. Everything emanates from You. Indeed, You are the cause of all causes, Lord Viṣṇu, the light of all transcendental knowledge.
Viṣṇu is the origin of everything, and there is no difference between Lord Viṣṇu and Lord Kṛṣṇa because both of Them are viṣṇu-tattva. From the Ṛg Veda we understand, oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam: the original substance is the all-pervading Lord Viṣṇu, who is also Paramātmā and the effulgent Brahman. The living entities are also part and parcel of Viṣṇu, who has various energies (parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]). Viṣṇu, or Kṛṣṇa, is therefore everything. Lord Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā (10.8), ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate: "I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me." Kṛṣṇa, therefore, is the original cause of everything (sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1]). When Viṣṇu expands in His all-pervading aspect, we should understand Him to be the nirākāra-nirviśeṣa-brahma-jyoti.
Although everything emanates from Kṛṣṇa, He is ultimately a person. Aham ādir hi devānām: [Bg 10.2] He is the origin of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara, and from them many other demigods are manifested. Kṛṣṇa therefore says in the Bhagavad-gītā (14.27), brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham: "Brahman rests upon Me." The Lord also says:
ye 'py anya-devatā-bhaktā
yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ
te 'pi mām eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam
"Those who are devotees of other gods and who worship them with faith actually worship only Me, O son of Kuntī, but they do so in a wrong way." (Bg. 9.23) There are many persons who worship different demigods, considering all of them to be separate Gods, which in fact they are not. The fact is that every demigod, and every living entity, is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa (mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]). The demigods are also in the category of living entities; they are not separate gods. But men whose knowledge is immature and contaminated by the modes of material nature worship various demigods, according to their intelligence. Therefore they are rebuked in the Bhagavad-gītā (kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ prapadyante 'nya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]). Because they are unintelligent and not very advanced and have not properly considered the truth, they take to the worship of various demigods or speculate according to various philosophies, such as the Māyāvāda philosophy.
Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu, is the actual origin of everything. As stated in the Vedas, yasya bhāṣā sarvam idaṁ vibhāti. The Absolute Truth is described later in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.28.15) as satyaṁ jñānam anantam yad brahma-jyotiḥ sanātanam. The brahma-jyoti is sanātana, eternal, yet it is dependent on Kṛṣṇa (brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham). The Brahma-saṁhitā states that the Lord is all-pervading. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham: [Bs. 5.35] He is within this universe, and He is within the atom as Paramātmā. Yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhuti-bhinnam: [Bs. 5.40] Brahman is also not independent of Him. Therefore whatever a philosopher may describe is ultimately Kṛṣṇa, or Lord Viṣṇu (sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]). According to different phases of understanding, Lord Viṣṇu is differently described, but in fact He is the origin of everything.
Because Devakī was an unalloyed devotee, she could understand that the same Lord Viṣṇu had appeared as her son. Therefore, after the prayers of Vasudeva, Devakī offered her prayers. She was very frightened because of her brother's atrocities. Devakī said, "My dear Lord, Your eternal forms, like Nārāyaṇa, Lord Rāma, Śeṣa, Varāha, Nṛsiṁha, Vāmana, Baladeva, and millions of similar incarnations emanating from Viṣṇu, are described in the Vedic literature as original. You are original because all Your forms as incarnations are outside of this material creation. Your form was existing before this cosmic manifestation was created. Your forms are eternal and all-pervading. They are self-effulgent, changeless and uncontaminated by the material qualities. Such eternal forms are ever-cognizant and full of bliss; they are situated in transcendental goodness and are always engaged in different pastimes. You are not limited to a particular form only; all such transcendental, eternal forms are self-sufficient. I can understand that You are the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu." We may conclude, therefore, that Lord Viṣṇu is everything, although He is also different from everything. This is the acintya-bhedābheda-tattva philosophy.
TEXT 25
naíe" laAeke( iã"par"ADaARvas$aAnae
mah"ABaUtaeSvaAid"BaUtaM gAtaeSau
vya·e('vya·M( k(AlavaegAena yaAtae
BavaAnaek(: izASyatae'zAeSas$aMÁa:
naṣṭe loke dvi-parārdhāvasāne
mahā-bhūteṣv ādi-bhūtaṁ gateṣu
vyakte 'vyaktaṁ kāla-vegena yāte
bhavān ekaḥ śiṣyate śeṣa-saṁjñaḥ
naṣṭe—after the annihilation; loke—of the cosmic manifestation; dvi-parārdha-avasāne—after millions and millions of years (the life of Brahmā); mahā-bhūteṣu—when the five primary elements (earth, water, fire, air and ether); ādi-bhūtam gateṣu—enter within the subtle elements of sense perception; vyakte—when everything manifested; avyaktam—into the unmanifested; kāla-vegena—by the force of time; yāte—enters; bhavān—Your Lordship; ekaḥ—alone; śiṣyate—remains; śeṣa-saṁjñaḥ—named Śeṣa.
After millions of years, at the time of cosmic annihilation, when everything, manifested and unmanifested, is annihilated by the force of time, the five gross elements enter into the subtle conception, and the manifested categories enter into the unmanifested substance. At that time, You alone remain, and You are known as Ananta Śeṣa-nāga.
At the time of annihilation, the five gross elements—earth, water, fire, air and ether—enter into the mind, intelligence and false ego (ahaṅkāra), and the entire cosmic manifestation enters into the spiritual energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who alone remains as the origin of everything. The Lord is therefore known as Śeṣa-nāga, as Ādi-puruṣa and by many other names.
Devakī therefore prayed, "After many millions of years, when Lord Brahmā comes to the end of his life, the annihilation of the cosmic manifestation takes place. At that time the five gross elements—namely earth, water, fire, air and ether—enter into the mahat-tattva. The mahat-tattva enters, by the force of time, into the nonmanifested total material energy, the total material energy enters into the energetic pradhāna, and the pradhāna enters into You. Therefore after the annihilation of the whole cosmic manifestation, You alone remain with Your transcendental name, form, qualities and paraphernalia.
"My Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You because You are the director of the unmanifested total energy, and the ultimate reservoir of the material nature. My Lord, the whole cosmic manifestation is under the influence of time, beginning from the moment up to the duration of the year. All act under Your direction. Therefore You are the original director of everything and the reservoir of all potent energies."
TEXT 26
yaAe'yaM k(Alastasya tae'vya·(banDaAe
caeí"AmaAḍ"êeí"tae yaena ivaṅma,
inamaeSaAid"vaRts$ar"AntaAe mah"IyaAMs$a,
taM tvaezAAnaM ºaemaDaAma ‘apaâe
yo 'yaṁ kālas tasya te 'vyakta-bandho
ceṣṭām āhuś ceṣṭate yena viśvam
nimeṣādir vatsarānto mahīyāṁs
taṁ tveśānaṁ kṣema-dhāma prapadye
yaḥ—that which; ayam—this; kālaḥ—time (minutes, hours, seconds); tasya—of Him; te—of You; avyakta-bandho—O my Lord, who are the inaugurator of the unmanifested (the original mahat-tattva or prakṛti); ceṣṭām—attempt or pastimes; āhuḥ—it is said; ceṣṭate—works; yena—by which; viśvam—the entire creation; nimeṣa-ādiḥ—beginning with minute parts of time; vatsara-antaḥ—up to the limit of a year; mahīyān—powerful; tam—unto Your Lordship; tvā īśānam—unto You, the supreme controller; kṣema-dhāma—the reservoir of all auspiciousness; prapadye—I offer full surrender.
O inaugurator of the material energy, this wonderful creation works under the control of powerful time, which is divided into seconds, minutes, hours and years. This element of time, which extends for many millions of years, is but another form of Lord Viṣṇu. For Your pastimes, You act as the controller of time, but You are the reservoir of all good fortune. Let me offer my full surrender unto Your Lordship.
As stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.52):
yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ
rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ
yasyājñayā bhramati saṁbhṛta-kāla-cakro
govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi
"The sun is the king of all planetary systems and has unlimited potency in the form of heat and light. I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, under whose control even the sun, which is considered to be the eye of the Lord, rotates within the fixed orbit of eternal time." Although we see the cosmic manifestation as gigantic and wonderful, it is within the limitations of kāla, the time factor. This time factor is also controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]). Prakṛti, the cosmic manifestation, is under the control of time. Indeed, everything is under the control of time, and time is controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Supreme Lord has no fear of the onslaughts of time. Time is estimated according to the movements of the sun (savitā). Every minute, every second, every day, every night, every month and every year of time can be calculated according to the sun's movements. But the sun is not independent, for it is under time's control. Bhramati saṁbhṛta-kāla-cakraḥ: the sun moves within the kāla-cakra, the orbit of time. The sun is under the control of time, and time is controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Lord has no fear of time.
The Lord is addressed here as avyakta-bandhu, or the inaugurator of the movements of the entire cosmic manifestation. Sometimes the cosmic manifestation is compared to a potter's wheel. When a potter's wheel is spinning, who has set it in motion? It is the potter, of course, although sometimes we can see only the motion of the wheel and cannot see the potter himself. Therefore the Lord, who is behind the motion of the cosmos, is called avyakta-bandhu. Everything is within the limits of time, but time moves under the direction of the Lord, who is therefore not within time's limit.
TEXT 27
matyaAeR ma{tyauvyaAlaBaIta: palaAyana,
laAek(Ana, s$avaARiªaBaRyaM naADyagAcC$ta,
tvatpaAd"AbjaM ‘aApya yaā{"cC$yaAâ
s$ausTa: zAetae ma{tyaur"smaAd"paEita
martyo mṛtyu-vyāla-bhītaḥ palāyan
lokān sarvān nirbhayaṁ nādhyagacchat
tvat pādābjaṁ prāpya yadṛcchayādya
susthaḥ śete mṛtyur asmād apaiti
martyaḥ—the living entities who are sure to die; mṛtyu-vyāla-bhītaḥ—afraid of the serpent of death; palāyan—running (as soon as a serpent is seen, everyone runs away, fearing immediate death); lokān—to the different planets; sarvān—all; nirbhayam—fearlessness; na adhyagacchat—do not obtain; tvat-pāda-abjam—of Your lotus feet; prāpya—obtaining the shelter; yadṛcchayā—by chance, by the mercy of Your Lordship and Your representative, the spiritual master (guru-kṛpā, kṛṣṇa-kṛpā); adya—presently; su-sthaḥ—being undisturbed and mentally composed; śete—are sleeping; mṛtyuḥ—death; asmāt—from those persons; apaiti—flees.
No one in this material world has become free from the four principles of birth, death, old age and disease, even by fleeing to various planets. But now that You have appeared, My Lord, death is fleeing in fear of You, and the living entities, having obtained shelter at Your lotus feet by Your mercy, are sleeping in full mental peace.
There are different categories of living entities, but everyone is afraid of death. The highest aim of the karmīs is to be promoted to the higher, heavenly planets, where the duration of life is very long. As stated in the Bhagavad-gītā (8.17), sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ: one day (twelve hours) of Brahmā equals 1,000 yugas, and each yuga consists of 4,320,000 years. Similarly, Brahmā has a night of 1,000 times 4,320,000 years. In this way, we may calculate Brahmā's month and year, but even Brahmā, who lives for millions and millions of years (dvi-parārdha-kāla), also must die. According to Vedic śāstra, the inhabitants of the higher planetary systems live for 10,000 years, and just as Brahmā's day is calculated to equal 4,300,000,000 of our years, one day in the higher planetary systems equals six of our months. Karmīs, therefore, try for promotion to the higher planetary systems, but this cannot free them from death. In this material world, everyone from Brahmā to the insignificant ant must die. Therefore this world is called martya-loka. As Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā (8.16), ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino'rjuna: as long as one is within this material world, either on Brahmaloka or on any other loka within this universe, one must undergo the kāla-cakra of one life after another (bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate) [Bg. 8.19]. But if one returns to the Supreme Personality of Godhead (yad gatvā na nivartante [Bg. 15.6]), one need not reenter the limits of time. Therefore, devotees who have taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord can sleep very peacefully with this assurance from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (4.9), tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti: after giving up the present body, a devotee who has understood Kṛṣṇa as He is need not return to this material world.
The constitutional position of the living entity is eternity (na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre, nityaḥ śāśvato 'yam [Bg. 2.20]). Every living entity is eternal. But because of having fallen into this material world, one wanders within the universe, continually changing from one body to another. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says:
brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva
guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja
(Cc. Madhya 19.151)
Everyone is wandering up and down within this universe, but one who is sufficiently fortunate comes in contact with Kṛṣṇa consciousness by the mercy of the spiritual master and takes to the path of devotional service. Then one is assured of eternal life, with no fear of death. When Kṛṣṇa appears, everyone is freed from fear of death, yet Devakī felt, "We are still afraid of Kaṁsa, although You have appeared as our son." She was more or less bewildered as to why this should be so, and she appealed to the Lord to free her and Vasudeva from this fear.
In this connection, it may be noted that the moon is one of the heavenly planets. From the Vedic literature we understand that one who goes to the moon receives a life with a duration of ten thousand years in which to enjoy the fruits of pious activities. If our so-called scientists are going to the moon, why should they come back here? We must conclude without a doubt that they have never gone to the moon. To go to the moon, one must have the qualification of pious activities. Then one may go there and live. If one has gone to the moon, why should he return to this planet, where life is of a very short duration?
TEXT 28
s$a tvaM GaAer"Aāu"ƒas$aenaAtmajaAªas$a,
‡aAih" ‡astaAna, Ba{tyaiva‡aAs$ah"Ais$a
ṝ&paM caedM" paAEś&SaM DyaAnaiDaSNyaM
maA ‘atyaºaM maAMs$aā{"zAAM k{(SaIñ"A:
sa tvaṁ ghorād ugrasenātmajān nas
trāhi trastān bhṛtya-vitrāsa-hāsi
rūpaṁ cedaṁ pauruṣaṁ dhyāna-dhiṣṇyaṁ
mā pratyakṣaṁ māṁsa-dṛśāṁ kṛṣīṣṭhāḥ
saḥ—Your Lordship; tvam—You; ghorāt—terribly fierce; ugrasena-ātmajāt—from Ugrasena's son (Kaṁsa); naḥ—us; trāhi—kindly protect; trastān—who are very much afraid (of him); bhṛtya-vitrāsa-hā asi—You are naturally the destroyer of the fear of Your servants; rūpam—in Your Viṣṇu form; ca—also; idam—this; pauruṣam—as the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dhyāna-dhiṣṇyam—who is appreciated by meditation; mā—not; pratyakṣam—directly visible; māṁsa-dṛśām—to those who see with their material eyes; kṛṣīṣṭhāḥ—please be.
My Lord, because You dispel all the fear of Your devotees, I request You to save us and give us protection from the terrible fear of Kaṁsa. Your form as Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is appreciated by yogīs in meditation. Please make this form invisible to those who see with material eyes.
The word dhyāna-dhiṣṇyam is significant in this verse because the form of Lord Viṣṇu is meditated upon by yogīs (dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]). Devakī requested the Lord, who had appeared as Viṣṇu, to conceal that form, for she wanted to see the Lord as an ordinary child, like a child appreciated by persons who have material eyes. Devakī wanted to see whether the Supreme Personality of Godhead had factually appeared or she was dreaming the Viṣṇu form. If Kaṁsa were to come, she thought, upon seeing the Viṣṇu form he would immediately kill the child, but if he saw a human child he might reconsider. Devakī was afraid of Ugrasena-ātmaja; that is, she was afraid not of Ugrasena and his men, but of the son of Ugrasena. Thus she requested the Lord to dissipate that fear, since He is always ready to give protection (abhayam) to His devotees. "My Lord," she prayed, "I request You to save me from the cruel hands of the son of Ugrasena, Kaṁsa. I am praying to Your Lordship to please rescue me from this fearful condition because You are always ready to give protection to Your servitors." The Lord has confirmed this statement in the Bhagavad-gītā by assuring Arjuna, "You may declare to the world, My devotee shall never be vanquished."
While thus praying to the Lord for rescue, Mother Devakī expressed her motherly affection: "I understand that this transcendental form is generally perceived in meditation by the great sages, but I am still afraid because as soon as Kaṁsa understands that You have appeared, he might harm You. So I request that for the time being You become invisible to our material eyes." In other words, she requested the Lord to assume the form of an ordinary child. "My only cause of fear from my brother Kaṁsa is due to Your appearance. My Lord Madhusūdana, Kaṁsa may know that You are already born. Therefore I request You to conceal this four-armed form of Your Lordship, which holds the four symbols of Viṣṇu—namely the conchshell, the disc, the club and the lotus flower. My dear Lord, at the end of the annihilation of the cosmic manifestation, You put the whole universe within Your abdomen; still, by Your unalloyed mercy, You have appeared in my womb. I am surprised that You imitate the activities of ordinary human beings just to please Your devotee."
Devakī was so afraid of Kaṁsa that she could not believe that Kaṁsa would be unable to kill Lord Viṣṇu, who was personally present. Out of motherly affection, therefore, she requested the Supreme Personality of Godhead to disappear. Although because of the Lord's disappearance Kaṁsa would harass her more and more, thinking that the child born of her was hidden somewhere, she did not want the transcendental child to be harassed and killed. Therefore she requested Lord Viṣṇu to disappear. Later, when harassed, she would think of Him within her mind.
TEXT 29
janma tae mayyas$aAE paApaAe
maA ivaâAnmaDaus$aUd"na
s$amauiã"jae BavaŪe"taAe:
kM(s$aAd"h"maDaIr"DaI:
janma te mayy asau pāpo
mā vidyān madhusūdana
samudvije bhavad-dhetoḥ
kaṁsād aham adhīra-dhīḥ
janma—the birth; te—of Your Lordship; mayi—in my (womb); asau—that Kaṁsa; pāpaḥ—extremely sinful; mā vidyāt—may be unable to understand; madhusūdana—O Madhusūdana; samudvije—I am full of anxiety; bhavat-hetoḥ—because of Your appearance; kaṁsāt—because of Kaṁsa, with whom I have had such bad experience; aham—I; adhīra-dhīḥ—have become more and more anxious.
O Madhusūdana, because of Your appearance, I am becoming more and more anxious in fear of Kaṁsa. Therefore, please arrange for that sinful Kaṁsa to be unable to understand that You have taken birth from my womb.
Devakī addressed the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Madhusūdana. She was aware that the Lord had killed many demons like Madhu who were hundreds and thousands of times more powerful than Kaṁsa, yet because of affection for the transcendental child, she believed that Kaṁsa could kill Him. Instead of thinking of the unlimited power of the Lord, she thought of the Lord with affection, and therefore she requested the transcendental child to disappear.
TEXT 30
opas$aMh"r" ivaṅAtmaªa,
@d"Ae ṝ&pamalaAEik(k(ma,
zAÊḷca‚(gAd"Apaá-
i™ayaA jauíM" catauBauRjama,
upasaṁhara viśvātmann
ado rūpam alaukikam
śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-padma-
śriyā juṣṭaṁ catur-bhujam
upasaṁhara—withdraw; viśvātman—O all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead; adaḥ—that; rūpam—form; alaukikam—which is unnatural in this world; śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-padma—of the conchshell, disc, club and lotus; śriyā—with these opulences; juṣṭam—decorated; catuḥ-bhujam—four hands.
O my Lord, You are the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Your transcendental four-armed form, holding conchshell, disc, club and lotus, is unnatural for this world. Please withdraw this form [and become just like a natural human child so that I may try to hide You somewhere].
Devakī was thinking of hiding the Supreme Personality of Godhead and not handing Him over to Kaṁsa, as she had done with all her previous children. Although Vasudeva had promised to hand over every child to Kaṁsa, this time he wanted to break his promise and hide the child somewhere. But because of the Lord's appearance in this surprising four-armed form, He would be impossible to hide.
TEXT 31
ivaṅM yade"tatsvatanaAE inazAAntae
yaTaAvak(AzAM pauś&Sa: par"Ae BavaAna,
ibaBaitaR s$aAe'yaM mama gABaRgAAe'BaUā,"
@h"Ae na{laAek(sya ivax"mbanaM ih" tata,
viśvaṁ yad etat sva-tanau niśānte
yathāvakāśaṁ puruṣaḥ paro bhavān
bibharti so 'yaṁ mama garbhago 'bhūd
aho nṛ-lokasya viḍambanaṁ hi tat
viśvam—the entire cosmic manifestation; yat etat—containing all moving and nonmoving creations; sva-tanau—within Your body; niśā-ante—at the time of devastation; yathā-avakāśam—shelter in Your body without difficulty; puruṣaḥ—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; paraḥ—transcendental; bhavān—Your Lordship; bibharti—keep; saḥ—that (Supreme Personality of Godhead); ayam—this form; mama—my; garbha-gaḥ—came within my womb; abhūt—it so happened; aho—alas; nṛ-lokasya—within this material world of living entities; viḍambanam—it is impossible to think of; hi—indeed; tat—that (kind of conception).
At the time of devastation, the entire cosmos, containing all created moving and nonmoving entities, enters Your transcendental body and is held there without difficulty. But now this transcendental form has taken birth from my womb. People will not be able to believe this, and I shall become an object of ridicule.
As explained in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, loving service to the Personality of Godhead is of two different kinds: aiśvarya-pūrṇa, full of opulence, and aiśvarya-śithila, without opulence. Real love of Godhead begins with aiśvarya-śithila, simply on the basis of pure love.
premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti
yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ
govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi
(Brahma-saṁhitā 5.38)
Pure devotees, whose eyes are anointed with the ointment of prema, love, want to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Śyāmasundara, Muralīdhara, with a flute swaying in His two hands. This is the form available to the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, who are all in love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Śyāmasundara, not as Lord Viṣṇu, Nārāyaṇa, who is worshiped in Vaikuṇṭha, where the devotees admire His opulence. Although Devakī is not on the Vṛndāvana platform, she is near the Vṛndāvana platform. On the Vṛndāvana platform the mother of Kṛṣṇa is Mother Yaśodā, and on the Mathurā and Dvārakā platform the mother of Kṛṣṇa is Devakī. In Mathurā and Dvārakā the love for the Lord is mixed with appreciation of His opulence, but in Vṛndāvana the opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not exhibited.
There are five stages of loving service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead—śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya. Devakī is on the platform of vātsalya. She wanted to deal with her eternal son, Kṛṣṇa, in that stage of love, and therefore she wanted the Supreme Personality of Godhead to withdraw His opulent form of Viṣṇu. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura illuminates this fact very clearly in his explanation of this verse.
Bhakti, bhagavān and bhakta do not belong to the material world. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (14.26):
māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guṇān samatītyaitān
brahma-bhūyāya kalpate
"One who engages in the spiritual activities of unalloyed devotional service immediately transcends the modes of material nature and is elevated to the spiritual platform." From the very beginning of one's transactions in bhakti, one is situated on the transcendental platform. Vasudeva and Devakī, therefore, being situated in a completely pure devotional state, are beyond this material world and are not subject to material fear. In the transcendental world, however, because of pure devotion, there is a similar conception of fear, which is due to intense love.
As stated in the Bhagavad-gītā (bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]) and as confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ), without bhakti one cannot understand the spiritual situation of the Lord. Bhakti may be considered in three stages, called guṇī-bhūta, pradhānī-bhūta and kevala, and according to these stages there are three divisions, which are called jñāna, jñānamayī and rati, or premā—that is, simple knowledge, love mixed with knowledge, and pure love. By simple knowledge one can perceive transcendental bliss without variety. This perception is called māna-bhūti. When one comes to the stage of jñānamayī, one realizes the transcendental opulences of the Personality of Godhead. But when one reaches pure love, one realizes the transcendental form of the Lord as Lord Kṛṣṇa or Lord Rāma. This is what is wanted. Especially in the mādhurya-rasa, one becomes attached to the Personality of Godhead (śrī-vigraha-niṣṭha-rūpādi). Then loving transactions between the Lord and the devotee begin.
The special significance of Kṛṣṇa's bearing a flute in His hands in Vrajabhūmi, Vṛndāvana, is described as mādhur . . . virājate. The form of the Lord with a flute in His hands is most attractive, and the one who is most sublimely attracted is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Rādhikā. She enjoys supremely blissful association with Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes people cannot understand why Rādhikā's name is not mentioned in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Actually, however, the name Rādhikā can be understood from the word aradhitaḥ in the verse beginning with the words anayārādhito nūnam (SB 10.30.28), which indicate that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī enjoys the highest loving affairs with Kṛṣṇa.
Not wanting to be ridiculed for having given birth to Viṣṇu, Devakī wanted Kṛṣṇa, with two hands, and therefore she requested the Lord to change His form.


Song Prayers by Nalakuvara and Manigriva
TEXT 29
k{(SNA k{(SNA mah"AyaAeigAMs$a,
tvamaAâ: pauś&Sa: par":
vya·(Avya·(imadM" ivaṅM
ṝ&paM tae “aAṭNAA ivaāu":
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa mahā-yogiṁs
tvam ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ paraḥ
vyaktāvyaktam idaṁ viśvaṁ
rūpaṁ te brāhmaṇā viduḥ
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa—O Lord Kṛṣṇa, O Lord Kṛṣṇa; mahā-yogin—O master of mysticism; tvam—You, the exalted personality; ādyaḥ—the root cause of everything; puruṣaḥ—the Supreme Person; paraḥ—beyond this material creation; vyakta-avyaktam—this material cosmic manifestation, consisting of cause and effect, or gross and subtle forms; idam—this; viśvam—whole world; rūpam—form; te—Your; brāhmaṇāḥ—learned brāhmaṇas; viduḥ—know.
O Lord Kṛṣṇa, Lord Kṛṣṇa, Your opulent mysticism is inconceivable. You are the supreme, original person, the cause of all causes, immediate and remote, and You are beyond this material creation. Learned brāhmaṇas know [on the basis of the Vedic statement sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma] that You are everything and that this cosmic manifestation, in its gross and subtle aspects, is Your form.
The two demigods Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, because of their continuing memory, could understand the supremacy of Kṛṣṇa by the grace of Nārada. Now they admitted, "That we should be delivered by the blessings of Nārada Muni was all Your plan. Therefore You are the supreme mystic. Everything—past, present and future—is known to You. Your plan was made so nicely that although we stayed here as twin arjuna trees, You have appeared as a small boy to deliver us. This was all Your inconceivable arrangement. Because You are the Supreme Person, You can do everything."
TEXTS 30-31
tvamaek(: s$avaRBaUtaAnaAM
de"h"AsvaAtmaein‰"yaeṅr":
tvamaeva k(AlaAe BagAvaAna,
ivaSNAur"vyaya wRṅr":
tvaM mah"Ana, ‘ak{(ita: s$aUºmaA
r"ja:s$aÔvatamaAemayaI
tvamaeva pauś&SaAe'Dyaºa:
s$avaRºae‡aivak(Ar"ivata,
tvam ekaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
dehāsv-ātmendriyeśvaraḥ
tvam eva kālo bhagavān
viṣṇur avyaya īśvaraḥ
tvaṁ mahān prakṛtiḥ sūkṣmā
rajaḥ-sattva-tamomayī
tvam eva puruṣo 'dhyakṣaḥ
sarva-kṣetra-vikāra-vit
tvam—Your Lordship; ekaḥ—one; sarva-bhūtānām—of all living entities; deha—of the body; asu—of the life force; ātma—of the soul; indriya—of the senses; īśvaraḥ—the Supersoul, the controller; tvam—Your Lordship; eva—indeed; kālaḥ—the time factor; bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viṣṇuḥ—all-pervading; avyayaḥ—imperishable; īśvaraḥ—controller; tvam—Your Lordship; mahān—the greatest; prakṛtiḥ—the cosmic manifestation; sūkṣmā—subtle; rajaḥ-sattva-tamaḥ-mayī—consisting of three modes of nature (passion, goodness and ignorance); tvam eva—Your Lordship is indeed; puruṣaḥ—the Supreme Person; adhyakṣaḥ—the proprietor; sarva-kṣetra—in all living entities; vikāra-vit—knowing the restless mind.
You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the controller of everything. The body, life, ego and senses of every living entity are Your own self. You are the Supreme Person, Viṣṇu, the imperishable controller. You are the time factor, the immediate cause, and You are material nature, consisting of the three modes passion, goodness and ignorance. You are the original cause of this material manifestation. You are the Supersoul, and therefore You know everything within the core of the heart of every living entity.
Śrīpāda Madhvācārya has quoted from the Vāmana Purāṇa as follows:
rūpyatvāt tu jagad rūpaṁ
viṣṇoḥ sākṣāt sukhātmakam
nitya-pūrṇaṁ samuddiṣṭaṁ
svarūpaṁ paramātmanaḥ
TEXT 32
gA{÷maANAEstvamaƒaA÷Ae
ivak(ArE": ‘aAk{(taEgAuRNAE:
k(Ae invah"AhR"ita ivaÁaAtauM
‘aAifs$aŪM" gAuNAs$aMva{ta:
gṛhyamāṇais tvam agrāhyo
vikāraiḥ prākṛtair guṇaiḥ
ko nv ihārhati vijñātuṁ
prāk siddhaṁ guṇa-saṁvṛtaḥ
gṛhyamāṇaiḥ—accepting the body made of material nature as existing at the present moment because of being visible; tvam—You; agrāhyaḥ—not confined in a body made of material nature; vikāraiḥ—agitated by the mind; prākṛtaiḥ guṇaiḥ—by the material modes of nature (sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa); kaḥ—who is there; nu—after that; iha—in this material world; arhati—who deserves; vijñātum—to know; prāk siddham—that which existed before the creation; guṇa-saṁvṛtaḥ—because of being covered by the material qualities.
O Lord, You exist before the creation. Therefore, who, trapped by a body of material qualities in this material world, can understand You?
As it is said:
ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi
na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ
sevonmukhe hi jihvādau
svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ
 [Cc. Madhya 17.136]
Kṛṣṇa's name, attributes and form are Absolute Truth, existing before the creation. Therefore, how can those who are created-that is, those entrapped in bodies created of material elements—understand Kṛṣṇa perfectly? This is not possible. But, sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ: Kṛṣṇa reveals Himself to those engaged in devotional service. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (18.55) by the Lord Himself: bhaktyā mām abhijānāti. Even the descriptions of Kṛṣṇa in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam are sometimes misunderstood by less intelligent men with a poor fund of knowledge. Therefore, the best course by which to know Him is to engage oneself in pure devotional activities. The more one advances in devotional activities, the more one can understand Him as He is. If from the material platform one could understand Kṛṣṇa, then, since Kṛṣṇa is everything (sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma), one could understand Kṛṣṇa by seeing anything within this material world. But that is not possible.
mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ
jagad avyakta-mūrtinā
mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni
na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ
(Bg. 9.4)
Everything is resting on Kṛṣṇa, and everything is Kṛṣṇa, but this is not to be realized by persons on the material platform.
TEXT 33
tasmaE tauByaM BagAvatae
vaAs$aude"vaAya vaeDas$ae
@AtmaâAetagAuNAEzC$ªa-
maih"°ae “aṭNAe nama:
tasmai tubhyaṁ bhagavate
vāsudevāya vedhase
ātma-dyota-guṇaiś channa-
mahimne brahmaṇe namaḥ
tasmai—(because You are not to be understood from the material platform, we simply offer obeisances) unto Him; tubhyam—unto You; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudevāya—unto Vāsudeva, the origin of Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha; vedhase—unto the origin of creation; ātma-dyota-guṇaiḥ channa-mahimne—unto You whose glories are covered by Your personal energy; brahmaṇe—unto the Supreme Brahman; namaḥ—our respectful obeisances.
O Lord, whose glories are covered by Your own energy, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are Saṅkarṣaṇa, the origin of creation, and You are Vāsudeva, the origin of the caturvyūha. Because You are everything and are therefore the Supreme Brahman, we simply offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
Instead of trying to understand Kṛṣṇa in detail, it is better to offer our respectful obeisances unto Him, for He is the origin of everything and He is everything. Because we are covered by the material modes of nature, He is very difficult for us to understand unless He reveals Himself to us. Therefore it is better for us to acknowledge that He is everything and offer obeisances unto His lotus feet.
TEXTS 34-35
yasyaAvataAr"A ÁaAyantae
zAr"Ire"SvazAr"Iir"NA:
taEstaEr"taulyaAitazAyaEr,"
vaIyaE=&deR"ih"Svas$aṆḷtaE:
s$a BavaAna, s$avaRlaAek(sya
BavaAya ivaBavaAya ca
@vataINAAe<'zABaAgAena
s$aAm‘ataM paitar"AizASaAma,
yasyāvatārā jñāyante
śarīreṣv aśarīriṇaḥ
tais tair atulyātiśayair
vīryair dehiṣv asaṅgataiḥ
sa bhavān sarva-lokasya
bhavāya vibhavāya ca
avatīrṇo 'ṁśa-bhāgena
sāmprataṁ patir āśiṣām
yasya—of whom; avatārāḥ—the different incarnations, like Matsya, Kūrma and Varāha; jñāyante—are speculated; śarīreṣu—in different bodies, differently visible; aśarīriṇaḥ—they are not ordinary material bodies, but are all transcendental; taiḥ taiḥ—by such bodily activities; atulya—incomparable; ati-śayaiḥ—unlimited; vīryaiḥ—by strength and power; dehiṣu—by those who actually have material bodies; asaṅgataiḥ—which activities, enacted in different incarnations, are impossible to be performed; saḥ—the same Supreme; bhavān—Your Lordship; sarva-lokasya—of everyone; bhavāya—for the elevation; vibhavāya—for the liberation; ca—and; avatīrṇaḥ—have now appeared; aṁśa-bhāgena—in full potency, with different parts and parcels; sāmpratam—at the present moment; patiḥ āśiṣām—You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all auspiciousness.
Appearing in bodies like those of an ordinary fish, tortoise and hog, You exhibit activities impossible for such creatures to perform—extraordinary, incomparable, transcendental activities of unlimited power and strength. These bodies of Yours, therefore, are not made of material elements, but are incarnations of Your Supreme Personality. You are the same Supreme Personality of Godhead, who have now appeared, with full potency, for the benefit of all living entities within this material world.
As stated in the Bhagavad-gītā (4.7-8):
yadā yadā hi dharmasya
glānir bhavati bhārata
abhyutthānam adharmasya
tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham
paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ
vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām
dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya
sambhavāmi yuge yuge
Kṛṣṇa appears as an incarnation when real spiritual life declines and when rogues and thieves increase to disturb the situation of the world. Unfortunate, less intelligent persons, bereft of devotional service, cannot understand the Lord's activities, and therefore such persons describe these activities as kalpanā-mythology or imagination-because they are rascals and the lowest of men (na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]). Such men cannot understand that the events described by Vyāsadeva in the purāṇas and other śāstras are not fictitious or imaginary, but factual.
Kṛṣṇa, in His full, unlimited potency, here shows that He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for although the two trees were so large and sturdy that even many elephants could not move them, Kṛṣṇa, as a child, exhibited such extraordinary strength that they fell down with a great sound. From the very beginning, by killing Pūtanā, Śakaṭāsura and Tṛṇāvartāsura, by causing the trees to fall, and by showing the entire universe within His mouth, Kṛṣṇa proved that He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The lowest of men (mūḍhas), because of sinful activities, cannot understand this, but devotees can accept it without a doubt. Thus the position of a devotee is different from that of a nondevotee.
TEXT 36
nama: par"mak(lyaANA
nama: par"mamaṆḷla
vaAs$aude"vaAya zAAntaAya
yaāU"naAM patayae nama:
namaḥ parama-kalyāṇa
namaḥ parama-maṅgala
vāsudevāya śāntāya
yadūnāṁ pataye namaḥ
namaḥ—we therefore offer our respectful obeisances; parama-kalyāṇa—You are the supreme auspiciousness; namaḥ—our respectful obeisances unto You; parama-maṅgala—whatever You do is good; vāsudevāya—unto the original Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva; śāntāya—unto the most peaceful; yadūnām—of the Yadu dynasty; pataye—unto the controller; namaḥ—our respectful obeisances unto You.
O supremely auspicious, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You, who are the supreme good. O most famous descendant and controller of the Yadu dynasty, O son of Vasudeva, O most peaceful, let us offer our obeisances unto Your lotus feet.
The word parama-kalyāṇa is significant because Kṛṣṇa, in any of His incarnations, appears in order to protect the sādhus (paritrāṇāya sādhūnām [Bg. 4.8]). The sādhus, saintly persons or devotees, are always harassed by nondevotees, and Kṛṣṇa appears in His incarnations to give them relief. This is His first concern. If we study the history of Kṛṣṇa's life, we shall find that for most of His life He predominantly engaged in killing demons one after another.
TEXT 37
@naujaAnaIih" naAE BaUmaMs$a,
tavaAnaucar"ik(Æḷr"AE
d"zARnaM naAE BagAvata
[%Saer"As$aId"nauƒah"Ata,
anujānīhi nau bhūmaṁs
tavānucara-kiṅkarau
darśanaṁ nau bhagavata
ṛṣer āsīd anugrahāt
anujānīhi—may we have permission; nau—we; bhūman—O greatest universal form; tava anucara-kiṅkarau—because of being servants of Your most confidential devotee Nārada Muni; darśanam—to see personally; nau—of us; bhagavataḥ—of You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣeḥ—of the great saint Nārada; āsīt—there was (in the form of a curse); anugrahāt—from the mercy.
O supreme form, we are always servants of Your servants, especially of Nārada Muni. Now give us permission to leave for our home. It is by the grace and mercy of Nārada Muni that we have been able to see You face to face.
Unless delivered or blessed by a devotee, one cannot realize that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye. According to this verse of Bhagavad-gītā (7.3), there are so many siddhas or yogīs who cannot understand Kṛṣṇa; instead, they misunderstand Him. But if one takes shelter of a devotee descending from the paramparā system of Nārada (svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ [SB 6.3.20]), one can then understand who is an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this age, many pseudo incarnations are advertised simply for having exhibited some magical performances, but except for persons who are servants of Nārada and other servants of Kṛṣṇa, no one can understand who is God and who is not. This is confirmed by Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. Chāḍiyā vaiṣṇava-sevā nistāra pāyeche kebā: no one is delivered from the material conception of life unless favored by a Vaiṣṇava. Others can never understand, neither by speculation nor by any other bodily or mental gymnastics.
TEXT 38
vaANAI gAuNAAnauk(Tanae ™avaNAAE k(TaAyaAM
h"staAE ca k(maRs$au manastava paAd"yaAenaR:
sma{tyaAM izAr"stava inavaAs$ajagAt‘aNAAmae
ā{"ií": s$ataAM d"zAR"nae'stau BavaÔanaUnaAma,
vāṇī guṇānukathane śravaṇau kathāyāṁ
hastau ca karmasu manas tava pādayor naḥ
smṛtyāṁ śiras tava nivāsa-jagat-praṇāme
dṛṣṭiḥ satāṁ darśane 'stu bhavat-tanūnām
vāṇī—words, the power of speech; guṇa-anukathane—always engaged in talking about Your pastimes; śravaṇau—the ear, or aural reception; kathāyām—in talks about You and Your pastimes; hastau—hands and legs and other senses; ca—also; karmasu—engaging them in executing Your mission; manaḥ—the mind; tava—Your; pādayoḥ—of Your lotus feet; naḥ—our; smṛtyām—in remembrance always engaged in meditation; śiraḥ—the head; tava—Your; nivāsa-jagat-praṇāme—because You are all-pervading, You are everything, and our heads should bow down, not looking for enjoyment; dṛṣṭiḥ—the power of sight; satām—of the Vaiṣṇavas; darśane—in seeing; astu—let all of them be engaged in this way; bhavat-tanūnām—who are nondifferent from You.
Henceforward, may all our words describe Your pastimes, may our ears engage in aural reception of Your glories, may our hands, legs and other senses engage in actions pleasing to You, and may our minds always think of Your lotus feet. May our heads offer our obeisances to everything within this world, because all things are also Your different forms, and may our eyes see the forms of Vaiṣṇavas, who are nondifferent from You.
Here the process of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead is given. This process is bhakti.
śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam
arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ
sakhyam ātma-nivedanam
(SB 7.5.23)
Everything should be engaged in the service of the Lord. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170] (Nārada Pañcarātra). Everything—the mind, the body and all the sense organs—should be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. This is to be learned from expert devotees like Nārada, Svayambhū and Śambhu. This is the process. We cannot manufacture our own way of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for it is not that everything one manufactures or concocts will lead to understanding God. Such a proposition—yata mata, tata patha—is foolish. Kṛṣṇa says, bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ: "Only by executing the activities of bhakti can one understand Me." (SB 11.14.21) This is called ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167], remaining engaged favorably in the service of the Lord.
14. Brahmā's Prayers to Lord Kṛṣṇa
This chapter describes the prayers Brahmā offered to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is also known as Nanda-nandana.
For His satisfaction, Brahmā first praised the beauty of the Lord's transcendental limbs and then declared that His original identity of sweetness is even more difficult to comprehend than His opulence. Only by the devotional process of hearing and chanting transcendental sounds received from Vedic authorities can one realize the Personality of Godhead. It is fruitless to try to realize God through processes outside the scope of Vedic authority.
The mystery of the Personality of Godhead, who is the reservoir of unlimited spiritual qualities, is inconceivable; it is even more difficult to understand than the impersonal Supreme. Thus only by the mercy of God can one understand His glories. Finally realizing this, Brahmā repeatedly condemned his own actions and recognized that Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the ultimate shelter of the universe, is Brahmā's own father, the original Nārāyaṇa. In this way Brahmā begged the Lord's forgiveness.
Brahmā then glorified the inconceivable opulence of the Personality of Godhead and described the ways in which Brahmā and Śiva differ from Lord Viṣṇu, the reason for the Supreme Lord's appearance in various species of demigods, animals and so on, the eternal nature of the pastimes of the Personality of Godhead, and the temporality of the material world. By knowing the Supreme Personality in truth, the individual spirit soul can achieve liberation from bondage. In actuality, however, both liberation and bondage are unreal, for it is only from the living entity's conditioned outlook that his bondage and liberation are produced. Thinking the personal form of Lord Kṛṣṇa illusory, fools reject His lotus feet and look elsewhere to find the Supreme Self. But the futility of their search is the obvious proof of their foolishness. There is simply no way to understand the truth of the Personality of Godhead without His mercy.
Having established this conclusion, Lord Brahmā analyzed the great good fortune of the residents of Vraja and then personally prayed to be born there even as a blade of grass, a bush or a creeper. Indeed, the homes of the residents of Vṛndāvana are not prisons of material existence but rather abodes envied even by the jñānīs and yogīs. On the other hand, any home without a connection to Lord Kṛṣṇa is in fact a prison cell of material existence. Finally, Brahmā offered his whole self at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord and, praising Him again and again, circumambulated Him and took his leave.
Lord Kṛṣṇa then gathered the animals Brahmā stole and led them to the place on the Yamunā's bank where the cowherd boys had been taking lunch. The same friends who had been present before were sitting there now. By the power of Kṛṣṇa's illusory energy, they were not at all aware of what had happened. Thus when Kṛṣṇa arrived with the calves, the boys told Him, "You've returned so quickly! Very good. As long as You were gone we couldn't take even a morsel of food, so come and eat."
Laughing at the words of the cowherd boys, Lord Kṛṣṇa began taking His meal in their company. While eating, Kṛṣṇa pointed out to His young friends the skin of the python, and the boys thought, "Kṛṣṇa has just now killed this terrible snake." Indeed, later they related to the residents of Vṛndāvana the incident of Kṛṣṇa's killing the Agha demon. In this way, the cowherd boys described pastimes that Lord Kṛṣṇa had performed in His bālya age (one to five), even though His paugaṇḍa age (six to ten) had begun.
Śukadeva Gosvāmī concludes this chapter by explaining how the gopīs loved Lord Kṛṣṇa even more than they loved their own sons.


Song Prayers by Lord Bramha to Lord Krsna
TEXT 1
™aI“aṭAevaAca
naAEmaIx"Ya tae'”avapauSae taix"d"mbar"Aya
gAuÃaAvataMs$apair"ipacC$las$anmauKaAya
vanya›ajae k(valavae‡aivaSaANAvaeNAu-
laºmai™ayae ma{āu"pade" pazAupaAṆḷjaAya
śrī-brahmovāca
naumīḍya te 'bhra-vapuṣe taḍid-ambarāya
guñjāvataṁsa-paripiccha-lasan-mukhāya
vanya-sraje kavala-vetra-viṣāṇa-veṇu-
lakṣma-śriye mṛdu-pade paśupāṅgajāya
śrī-brahmā uvāca—Lord Brahmā said; naumi—I offer praise; īḍya—O most worshipable one; te—unto You; abhra—like a dark cloud; vapuṣe—whose body; taḍit—like lightning; ambarāya—whose garment; guñjā—made of small berries; avataṁsa—with ornaments (for the ears); paripiccha—and peacock feathers; lasat—resplendent; mukhāya—whose face; vanya-sraje—wearing garlands of forest flowers; kavala—a morsel of food; vetra—a stick; viṣāṇa—a buffalo-horn bugle; veṇu—and a flute; lakṣma—characterized by; śriye—whose beauty; mṛdu—soft; pade—whose feet; paśu-pa—of the cowherd (Nanda Mahārāja); aṅga-jāya—unto the son.
Lord Brahmā said: My dear Lord, You are the only worshipable Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore I offer my humble obeisances and prayers just to please You. O son of the king of the cowherds, Your transcendental body is dark blue like a new cloud, Your garment is brilliant like lightning, and the beauty of Your face is enhanced by Your guñjā earrings and the peacock feather on Your head. Wearing garlands of various forest flowers and leaves, and equipped with a herding stick, a buffalo horn and a flute, You stand beautifully with a morsel of food in Your hand.
In the previous chapter Brahmā, the creator of the universe, tried to bewilder the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa, by stealing His cowherd boyfriends and calves. But by a slight exhibition of Kṛṣṇa's own mystic potency, Brahmā himself was completely bewildered, and now with great humility and devotion he offers his humble obeisances and prayers unto the Lord.
The word kavala in this verse refers to a morsel of rice mixed with yogurt that Kṛṣṇa held in His left hand. According to Sanātana Gosvāmī, the Lord held a cowherding stick and a buffalo horn pressed under His left arm, and His flute was placed under His belt. Beautiful young Kṛṣṇa, decorated with multicolored forest minerals, exhibited opulences far greater than those of Vaikuṇṭha. Although Brahmā had seen innumerable four-armed forms of the Lord, he now surrendered unto the lotus feet of the two-armed form of Kṛṣṇa, who appeared as the son of Nanda Mahārāja. Brahmā offered his prayers to that form.
TEXT 2
@syaAipa de"va vapauSaAe mad"nauƒah"sya
svaecC$Amayasya na tau BaUtamayasya k(Ae'ipa
naezAe maih" tvavais$atauM manas$aAntare"NA
s$aAºaAÔavaEva ik(mautaAtmas$auKaAnauBaUtae:
asyāpi deva vapuṣo mad-anugrahasya
svecchā-mayasya na tu bhūta-mayasya ko 'pi
neśe mahi tv avasituṁ manasāntareṇa
sākṣāt tavaiva kim utātma-sukhānubhūteḥ
asya—of this; api—even; deva—O Lord; vapuṣaḥ—the body; mat-anugrahasya—which has shown mercy to me; sva-icchā-mayasya—which appears in response to the desires of Your pure devotees; na—not; tu—on the other hand; bhūta-mayasya—a product of matter; kaḥ—Brahmā; api—even; na īśe—I am not able; mahi—the potency; tu—indeed; avasitum—to estimate; manasā—with my mind; antareṇa—which is controlled and withdrawn; sākṣāt—directly; tava—Your; eva—indeed; kim uta—what to speak; ātma—within Yourself; sukha—of happiness; anubhūteḥ—of Your experience.
My dear Lord, neither I nor anyone else can estimate the potency of this transcendental body of Yours, which has shown such mercy to me and which appears just to fulfill the desires of Your pure devotees. Although my mind is completely withdrawn from material affairs, I cannot understand Your personal form. How, then, could I possibly understand the happiness You experience within Yourself?
In Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Chapter Fourteen, Śrīla Prabhupāda explains that in the present verse Lord Brahmā expressed the following prayerful sentiment: "Your appearance as a cowherd child is for the benefit of the devotees, and although I have committed an offense at Your lotus feet by stealing away Your boys and calves, I can understand that You have bestowed Your mercy upon me. This shows Your transcendental quality of being very affectionate toward Your devotees. But in spite of Your great affection for me, I cannot estimate the potency of Your bodily activities. It is to be understood that when I, Lord Brahmā, the supreme personality of this universe, cannot estimate the childlike body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then what to speak of others? And if I cannot estimate the spiritual potency of Your childlike body, then what can I understand about Your transcendental pastimes? Therefore, as it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, anyone who can understand a little of the transcendental pastimes, appearance and disappearance of the Lord immediately becomes eligible to enter the kingdom of God after quitting the material body. This statement is confirmed in the Vedas, where it is stated:  Simply by understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can overcome the chain of repeated birth and death. I therefore recommend that people should not try to understand You by their speculative knowledge."
When Brahmā disrespected the supreme status of the Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa first bewildered him by exhibiting the Lord's own transcendental power. Then, having humbled His devotee Brahmā, Kṛṣṇa gave him His personal audience.
According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Lord Kṛṣṇa's transcendental body can also function through the agency of His plenary expansions, called viṣṇu-tattva. As stated by Brahmā himself in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.32): aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti. This verse indicates not only that the Lord can perform any bodily function with any of His limbs but also that He can see through the eyes of His Viṣṇu expansions or, indeed, through the eyes of any living entity, and similarly that He can hear through the ears of any Viṣṇu or jīva expansion. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura points out that although the Lord can perform any function with any one of His senses, in His transcendental pastimes as Śrī Kṛṣṇa He generally sees with His eyes, touches with His hands, hears with His ears and so on. Thus He behaves like the most beautiful and charming young cowherd boy.
The Vedic knowledge expands from Lord Brahmā, who is described in the first verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as ādi-kavi, the primeval Vedic scholar. Yet Brahmā could not understand the transcendental body of Lord Kṛṣṇa, because it is beyond the reach of ordinary Vedic knowledge. Among all the transcendental forms of the Lord, the two-armed form of Govinda-Kṛṣṇa—is original and supreme. Thus Lord Govinda's pastimes of stealing butter, drinking the gopīs' breast-milk, tending the calves, playing His flute and playing childhood sports are extraordinary even in comparison with the activities of the Lord's Viṣṇu expansions.
TEXT 3
ÁaAnae ‘ayaAs$amaud"paAsya namanta Wva
jaIvainta s$anmauKair"taAM Bavad"IyavaAtaARma,
sTaAnae isTataA: ™auitagAtaAM tanauvaAx.~manaAeiBar,"
yae ‘aAyazAAe'ijata ijataAe'pyais$a taEiṣlaAefyaAma,
jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva
jīvanti san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām
sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir
ye prāyaśo 'jita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyām
jñāne—for knowledge; prayāsam—the endeavor; udapāsya—giving up completely; namantaḥ—offering obeisances; eva—simply; jīvanti—live; sat-mukharitām—chanted by the pure devotees; bhavadīya-vārtām—topics related to You; sthāne—in their material position; sthitāḥ—remaining; śruti-gatām—received by hearing; tanu—with their body; vāk—words; manobhiḥ—and mind; ye—who; prāyaśaḥ—for the most part; ajita—O unconquerable one; jitaḥ—conquered; api—nevertheless; asi—You become; taiḥ—by them; tri-lokyām—within the three worlds.
Those who, even while remaining situated in their established social positions, throw away the process of speculative knowledge and with their body, words and mind offer all respects to descriptions of Your personality and activities, dedicating their lives to these narrations, which are vibrated by You personally and by Your pure devotees, certainly conquer Your Lordship, although You are otherwise unconquerable by anyone within the three worlds.
Here the word udapāsya clearly indicates that one should not even slightly endeavor to understand the Absolute Truth by the process of mental speculation, for it invariably carries one to an imperfect, impersonal understanding of God. The word jīvanti indicates that a devotee who always hears about Lord Kṛṣṇa will go back home, back to Godhead, even if he can do nothing except maintain his existence and hear topics concerning the Lord.
Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has explained the words tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ ("by the body, words and mind") in three ways. In reference to devotees, through their body, words and mind they are able to conquer Lord Kṛṣṇa. Thus becoming perfect in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they can touch His lotus feet with their hands, call Him to come with their words, and attain His direct audience within their mind simply by thinking about Him.
In the case of nondevotees, the words tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ refer to the word ajita, "unconquered," and indicate that those not engaged in the loving service of Lord Kṛṣṇa cannot conquer the Absolute Truth by their bodily strength, verbal expertise or mental power. Despite all their endeavors, the ultimate truth remains beyond their reach.
In reference to the word jitaḥ, "conquered," the words tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ indicate that the pure devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa conquer His body, words and mind. Lord Kṛṣṇa's body is conquered because He always remains by the side of His pure devotees; Lord Kṛṣṇa's words are conquered because He always chants the glories of His devotees; and Lord Kṛṣṇa's mind is conquered because He always thinks about His loving devotees.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has explained the words tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ in regard to the word namantaḥ, "offering obeisances." He explains that the devotees can take full advantage of the transcendental topics of the Lord by offering all respects to those topics with their body, words and mind. One should engage his body by touching the ground with his hands and head while offering obeisances to the topics of the Lord; one should engage his words by praising transcendental literatures such as Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, as well as the devotees who are preaching such literatures; and one should engage his mind by feeling great reverence and pleasure while hearing the transcendental topics of the Lord. In this way, a sincere devotee who has acquired even a small amount of transcendental knowledge about Lord Kṛṣṇa can conquer Him and thus go back home, back to Godhead, for eternal life at the Lord's side.
TEXT 4
™aeya:s$a{itaM Bai·(maud"sya tae ivaBaAe
iflazyainta yae ke(valabaAeDalabDayae
taeSaAmas$aAE flaezAla Wva izASyatae
naAnyaâTaA sTaUlatauSaAvaGaAitanaAma,
śreyaḥ-sṛtiṁ bhaktim udasya te vibho
kliśyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye
teṣām asau kleśala eva śiṣyate
nānyad yathā sthūla-tuṣāvaghātinām
śreyaḥ—of supreme benefit; sṛtim—the path; bhaktim—devotional service; udasya—rejecting; te—they; vibho—O almighty Lord; kliśyanti—struggle; ye—who; kevala—exclusive; bodha—of knowledge; labdhaye—for the achievement; teṣām—for them; asau—this; kleśalaḥ—botheration; eva—merely; śiṣyate—remains; na—nothing; anyat—other; yathā—just as; sthūla-tuṣa—empty husks; avaghātinām—for those who are beating.
My dear Lord, devotional service unto You is the best path for self-realization. If someone gives up that path and engages in the cultivation of speculative knowledge, he will simply undergo a troublesome process and will not achieve his desired result. As a person who beats an empty husk of wheat cannot get grain, one who simply speculates cannot achieve self-realization. His only gain is trouble.
Loving service to the Supreme Person is the natural and eternal function of every living entity. If a person renounces his own constitutional function and instead laboriously seeks so-called enlightenment through impersonal, speculative knowledge, his result is simply the trouble and bother that come from following an artificial process. A fool may beat an empty husk, not knowing that the grain has already been removed. Similarly foolish is the person who throws his mind again and again into the pursuit of knowledge without surrendering to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for it is the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is the very substance and goal of knowledge, just as grain is the substance and goal of the entire agricultural effort. Vedic knowledge or, indeed, material science without the Personality of Godhead is exactly like an empty and useless husk of wheat.
One may argue that by practicing yoga or cultivating impersonal knowledge one can acquire prestige, wealth, mystic powers or even impersonal liberation. But these so-called gains are actually useless, because they do not situate the living being in his constitutional position of loving service to the Supreme Lord. Therefore such results, being superfluous to the living being's essential nature, are impermanent. As stated in the Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa (62.19), patreṣu puṣpeṣu phaleṣu toyeṣv akrīta-labhyeṣu vadaiva satsu/ bhaktyā su-labhye puruṣe purāṇe muktyai kim arthaṁ kriyate prayatnaḥ: "Since the primeval Personality of Godhead is easily attained by offering Him such things as leaves, flowers, fruits and water, which are all found without difficulty, why does one need to endeavor for liberation separately?"
Although the process of devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa is very simple, it is extremely difficult for stubborn conditioned souls to completely humble themselves before the Supreme Personality of Godhead and absorb themselves twenty-four hours a day in His loving service. The mood of loving service is anathema to belligerent conditioned souls determined to defy God and enjoy. When such stubborn conditioned souls attempt to bypass surrendering to God through proud attempts at philosophical speculation, austerity, and yoga, they are turned back to the material platform by the powerful laws of God and violently merged into the heaving ocean of insignificance called the material world.
TEXT 5
paure"h" BaUmana, bah"vaAe'ipa yaAeigAnas$a,
tvad"ipaRtaeh"A inajak(maRlabDayaA
ivabauDya BaftyaEva k(TaAepanaItayaA
‘apaeid"re"'ÃaAe'cyauta tae gAitaM par"Ama,
pureha bhūman bahavo 'pi yoginas
tvad-arpitehā nija-karma-labdhayā
vibudhya bhaktyaiva kathopanītayā
prapedire 'ñjo 'cyuta te gatiṁ parām
purā—previously; iha—in this world; bhūman—O almighty Lord; bahavaḥ—many; api—indeed; yoginaḥ—followers of the path of yoga; tvat—unto You; arpita—having offered; īhāḥ—all their endeavors; nija-karma—by their prescribed duties; labdhayā—which is achieved; vibudhya—coming to understand; bhaktyā—by devotional service; eva—indeed; kathā-upanītayā—cultivated through hearing and chanting topics about You; prapedire—they achieved by surrender; añjaḥ—easily; acyuta—O infallible one; te—Your; gatim—destination; parām—supreme.
O almighty Lord, in the past many yogīs in this world achieved the platform of devotional service by offering all their endeavors unto You and faithfully carrying out their prescribed duties. Through such devotional service, perfected by the processes of hearing and chanting about You, they came to understand You, O infallible one, and could easily surrender to You and achieve Your supreme abode.
TEXT 6
taTaAipa BaUmanmaih"maAgAuNAsya tae
ivabaAeā,"DaumahR"tyamalaAntar"AtmaiBa:
@ivai‚(yaAtsvaAnauBavaAd"ṝ&pataAe
÷nanyabaAeDyaAtmatayaA na caAnyaTaA
tathāpi bhūman mahimāguṇasya te
viboddhum arhaty amalāntar-ātmabhiḥ
avikriyāt svānubhavād arūpato
hy ananya-bodhyātmatayā na cānyathā
tathā api—nevertheless; bhūman—O limitless one; mahimā—the potency; aguṇasya—of Him who has no material qualities; te—of You; viboddhum—to understand; arhati—one is able; amala—spotless; antaḥ-ātmabhiḥ—with mind and senses; avikriyāt—not based on material differentiations; sva-anubhavāt—by perception of the Supreme Soul; arūpataḥ—without attachment to material forms; hi—indeed; ananya-bodhya-ātmatayā—as self-manifested, without the help of any other illuminating agent; na—not; ca—and; anyathā—otherwise.
Nondevotees, however, cannot realize You in Your full personal feature. Nevertheless, it may be possible for them to realize Your expansion as the impersonal Supreme by cultivating direct perception of the Self within the heart. But they can do this only by purifying their mind and senses of all conceptions of material distinctions and all attachment to material sense objects. Only in this way will Your impersonal feature manifest itself to them.
It is difficult for conditioned souls to understand all the transcendental features of the Supreme Lord. As confirmed in the First Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11): brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. The transcendental existence of God is understood progressively as the impersonal effulgence, the localized Supersoul in one's heart, and finally the Supreme Personality of Godhead existing in His eternal abode. Lord Kṛṣṇa's transcendental existence is beyond the qualities of material nature. Thus here the Lord is referred to as aguṇasya, without material qualities.
Even by practicing yoga or engaging in advanced philosophical speculation, one will find it very difficult to understand clearly the transcendental existence beyond the modes of material nature. And these processes are virtually useless for understanding the Lord's own unlimited transcendental qualities, which are far beyond the impersonal conception of spiritual existence. Only by the mercy of the pure devotees of the Lord or by associating with the Lord Himself can one begin the process of realizing the personal feature of God—a process that culminates in pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the final and supreme perfection of knowledge.
TEXT 7
gAuNAAtmanastae'ipa gAuNAAna, ivamaAtauM
ih"taAvataI[%nasya k( wRizAre"'sya
k(Alaena yaEvaAR ivaimataA: s$auk(lpaEr,"
BaUpaAMzAva: Kae imaih"k(A âuBaAs$a:
guṇātmanas te 'pi guṇān vimātuṁ
hitāvatīṛnasya ka īśire 'sya
kālena yair vā vimitāḥ su-kalpair
bhū-pāṁśavaḥ khe mihikā dyu-bhāsaḥ
guṇa-ātmanaḥ—of the possessor of all superior qualities; te—You; api—certainly; guṇān—the qualities; vimātum—to count; hita-avatīrṇasya—who have descended for the benefit of all living entities; ke—who; īśire—are able; asya—of the universe; kālena—in due course of time; yaiḥ—by whom; vā—or; vimitāḥ—counted; su-kalpaiḥ—by great scientists; bhū-pāṁśavaḥ—the atoms of an earthly planet; khe—in the sky; mihikāḥ—the particles of snow; dyu-bhāsaḥ—the illumination of stars and planets.
In time, learned philosophers or scientists might be able to count all the atoms of the earth, the particles of snow, or perhaps even the shining molecules radiating from the sun, the stars and other luminaries. But among these learned men, who could possibly count the unlimited transcendental qualities possessed by You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who have descended onto the surface of the earth for the benefit of all living entities?
Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī explains that Lord Kṛṣṇa is guṇātmā, "the soul of all superior qualities," because He gives them life. For example, one may discuss in an abstract way such qualities as generosity, intelligence and mercy, but they come to life only when a living person exhibits them. Thus Lord Kṛṣṇa is guṇātmā because He descends to the material world and reestablishes religious principles by exhibiting all godly qualities Himself and inspiring them in others. A living entity who develops the transcendental qualities found in the Lord receives immeasurable benefit and eventually goes with the Lord back to His own abode, where all living beings are liberated and fully endowed with the transcendental nature.
Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī further explains that the Lord manifests a specific spiritual quality for the benefit of each living entity. Since there are innumerable living entities within the confines of the material creation, the Lord manifests infinite qualities. Thus every conditioned soul can appreciate the Supreme Lord in a particular way.
The example is given here that even if the most learned scholars could someday count the particles of earth, snow and light, they would still fail to understand the qualities of the Lord. In this example earth, snow and light are progressively more subtle; thus it is to be understood that there is an increasing difficulty in counting their virtually infinite particles.
According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, great personalities like Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa actually have counted the number of atoms on the earth, and even the molecules in the entire universe. Yet even such a personality as Saṅkarṣaṇa, who has been continuously chanting the glories of the Lord since time immemorial, has not even approached a final count of those glories.
Lord Kṛṣṇa exhibits His most astonishing qualities during His childhood pastimes in Vṛndāvana, where He steals butter from the cowherd ladies, dances with His girlfriends, and plays with His cowherd boyfriends as their most dear companion. Although appearing like ordinary human activities, such sublime pastimes embody Lord Kṛṣṇa's immeasurable and innumerable beautiful transcendental qualities, which are the life and soul of the pure devotees.
TEXT 8
taÔae'nauk(mpaAM s$aus$amaIºamaANAAe
BauÃaAna WvaAtmak{(taM ivapaAk(ma,
ô$ã"AgvapauiBaRivaRd"Daªamastae
jaIvaeta yaAe maui·(pade" s$a d"AyaBaAk,(
tat te ’nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo
bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam
hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk
tat—therefore; te—Your; anukampām—compassion; su-samīkṣamāṇaḥ—earnestly hoping for; bhuñjānaḥ—enduring; eva—certainly; ātma-kṛtam—done by himself; vipākam—the fruitive results; hṛt—with his heart; vāk—words; vapurbhiḥ—and body; vidadhan—offering; namaḥ—obeisances; te—unto You; jīveta—lives; yaḥ—anyone who; mukti-pade—to the position of liberation; saḥ—he; dāya-bhāk—the rightful heir.
My dear Lord, one who earnestly waits for You to bestow Your causeless mercy upon him, all the while patiently suffering the reactions of his past misdeeds and offering You respectful obeisances with his heart, words and body, is surely eligible for liberation, for it has become his rightful claim.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī explains in his commentary that just as a legitimate son has to simply remain alive to gain an inheritance from his father, one who simply remains alive in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, following the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga, automatically becomes eligible to receive the mercy of the Personality of Godhead. In other words, he will be promoted to the kingdom of God.
The word su-samīkṣamāṇa indicates that a devotee earnestly awaits the mercy of the Supreme Lord even while suffering the painful effects of previous sinful activities. Lord Kṛṣṇa explains in the Bhagavad-gītā that a devotee who fully surrenders unto Him is no longer liable to suffer the reactions of his previous karma. However, because in his mind a devotee may still maintain the remnants of his previous sinful mentality, the Lord removes the last vestiges of the enjoying spirit by giving His devotee punishments that may sometimes resemble sinful reactions. The purpose of the entire creation of God is to rectify the living entity's tendency to enjoy without the Lord, and therefore the particular punishment given for a sinful activity is specifically designed to curtail the mentality that produced the activity. Although a devotee has surrendered to the Lord's devotional service, until he is completely perfect in Kṛṣṇa consciousness he may maintain a slight inclination to enjoy the false happiness of this world. The Lord therefore creates a particular situation to eradicate this remaining enjoying spirit. This unhappiness suffered by a sincere devotee is not technically a karmic reaction; it is rather the Lord's special mercy for inducing His devotee to completely let go of the material world and return home, back to Godhead.
A sincere devotee earnestly desires to go back to the Lord's abode. Therefore he willingly accepts the Lord's merciful punishment and continues offering respects and obeisances to the Lord with his heart, words and body. Such a bona fide servant of the Lord, considering all hardship a small price to pay for gaining the personal association of the Lord, certainly becomes a legitimate son of God, as indicated here by the words dāya-bhāk. Just as one cannot approach the sun without becoming fire, one cannot approach the supreme pure, Lord Kṛṣṇa, without undergoing a rigid purificatory process, which may appear like suffering but which is in fact a curative treatment administered by the personal hand of the Lord.
TEXT 9
pazyaezA mae'naAyaRmananta @Aâe
par"Atmaina tvayyaipa maAiyamaAiyaina
maAyaAM ivatatyaeiºataumaAtmavaEBavaM
÷hM" ik(yaAnaEcC$imavaAicaRr"¢aAE
paśyeśa me 'nāryam ananta ādye
parātmani tvayy api māyi-māyini
māyāṁ vitatyekṣitum ātma-vaibhavaṁ
hy ahaṁ kiyān aiccham ivārcir agnau
paśya—just see; īśa—O Lord; me—my; anāryam—contemptible behavior; anante—against the unlimited; ādye—the primeval; para-ātmani—the Supersoul; tvayi—You; api—even; māyi-māyini—for the masters of illusion; māyām—(my) illusory potency; vitatya—spreading; īkṣitum—to see; ātma—Your; vaibhavam—power; hi—indeed; aham—I; kiyān—how much; aiccham—I desired; iva—just like; arciḥ—a small spark; agnau—in comparison to the whole fire.
My Lord, just see my uncivilized impudence! To test Your power I tried to extend my illusory potency to cover You, the unlimited and primeval Supersoul, who bewilder even the masters of illusion. What am I compared to You? I am just like a small spark in the presence of a great fire.
A great fire produces many sparks, which are insignificant in comparison to it. Indeed, if one of the small sparks were to try to burn the original fire, the attempt would be simply ludicrous. Similarly, even the creator of the entire universe, Lord Brahmā, is an insignificant spark of the potency of God, and therefore Brahmā's attempt to bewilder the Supreme Lord was certainly ludicrous.
Brahmā here addresses Lord Kṛṣṇa as īśa, which indicates that Kṛṣṇa is not only the supreme master of everyone but is also specifically the master of Brahmā, who creates the universe directly under the guidance of the Lord and who, indeed, is born directly from the Lord's own body.
Brahmā felt ashamed of his impudent attempt at deluding Lord Kṛṣṇa, and he was therefore perfectly willing to be punished or forgiven by the Lord, according to His decision. If Lord Kṛṣṇa does not mercifully punish His devotees when they act improperly, their foolishness will simply increase and gradually completely overwhelm their devotional sentiments. Therefore Lord Kṛṣṇa kindly disciplines His devotees and maintains them on the progressive path back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 10
@ta: ºamasvaAcyauta mae r"jaAeBauvaAe
÷jaAnatastvatpa{TagAIzAmaAinana:
@jaAvalaepaAnDatamaAe'nDacaºauSa
WSaAe'nauk(mpyaAe maiya naATavaAinaita
ataḥ kṣamasvācyuta me rajo-bhuvo
hy ajānatas tvat-pṛthag-īśa-māninaḥ
ajāvalepāndha-tamo-'ndha-cakṣuṣa
eṣo 'nukampyo mayi nāthavān iti
ataḥ—therefore; kṣamasva—please excuse; acyuta—O infallible Lord; me—me; rajaḥ-bhuvaḥ—who have taken birth in the mode of passion; hi—indeed; ajānataḥ—being ignorant; tvat—from You; pṛthak—separate; īśa—a controller; māninaḥ—presuming myself; aja—the unborn creator; avalepa—the covering; andha-tamaḥ—by such darkness of ignorance; andha—blinded; cakṣuṣaḥ—my eyes; eṣaḥ—this person; anukampyaḥ—should be shown mercy; mayi—Me; nātha-vān—having as his master; iti—thus thinking.
Therefore, O infallible Lord, kindly excuse my offenses. I have taken birth in the mode of passion and am therefore simply foolish, presuming myself a controller independent of Your Lordship. My eyes are blinded by the darkness of ignorance, which causes me to think of myself as the unborn creator of the universe. But please consider that I am Your servant and therefore worthy of Your compassion.
In his commentary, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that Brahmā wanted to present the following argument to the Lord: "My dear Lord, because I have acted so badly I certainly deserve to be punished. On the other hand, because I am so ignorant You should consider me an innocent fool and be merciful to me. Thus, although I deserve both punishment and forgiveness, I humbly beg You to exercise tolerance in this matter and simply forgive me and show me Your mercy."
The words nāthavān iti indicate that Lord Brahmā wanted to humbly remind Lord Kṛṣṇa that He was, after all, Brahmā's father and master and should therefore forgive the unfortunate transgressions of His humble servant. Every conditioned soul, whether he be Lord Brahmā or an insignificant ant, falsely identifies himself with the material world and in this way forgets his eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Brahmā, because of his prestigious position as the cosmic creator, also tends to identify himself as the lord of this world, and thus he sometimes forgets his position as an insignificant servant of the Supreme Lord. Now, by Lord Kṛṣṇa's mercy, this false identification is being rectified and Lord Brahmā is remembering his constitutional position as the eternal servant of God.
TEXT 11
¸(AhM" tamaAemah"d"hM"Kacar"Ai¢avaABaUR-
s$aMvaeií"taANx"Gaq%s$aæaivataistak(Aya:
¸e(ā{"igvaDaAivagAiNAtaANx"par"ANAucayaAR-
vaAtaADvar"Aemaivavar"sya ca tae maih"tvama,
kvāhaṁ tamo-mahad-ahaṁ-kha-carāgni-vār-bhū-
saṁveṣṭitāṇḍa-ghaṭa-sapta-vitasti-kāyaḥ
kvedṛg-vidhāvigaṇitāṇḍa-parāṇu-caryā-
vātādhva-roma-vivarasya ca te mahitvam
kva—where; aham—I; tamaḥ—the material nature; mahat—the total material energy; aham—false ego; kha—ether; cara—air; agni—fire; vāḥ—water; bhū—earth; saṁveṣṭita—surrounded by; aṇḍa-ghaṭa—a potlike universe; sapta-vitasti—seven spans; kāyaḥ—body; kva—where; īdṛk—such; vidhā—like; avigaṇita—unlimited; aṇḍa—universes; para-aṇu—like the atomic dust; caryā—moving; vāta-adhva—airholes; roma—of hair on the body; vivarasya—of the holes; ca—also; te—Your; mahitvam—greatness.
What am I, a small creature measuring seven spans of my own hand? I am enclosed in a potlike universe composed of material nature, the total material energy, false ego, ether, air, fire, water and earth. And what is Your glory? Unlimited universes pass through the pores of Your body just as particles of dust pass through the openings of a screened window.
In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, Chapter Five, Text 72, Śrīla Prabhupāda gives the following purport for this verse: "When Lord Brahmā, after having stolen all Kṛṣṇa's calves and cowherd boys, returned and saw that the calves and boys were still roaming with Kṛṣṇa, he offered this prayer in his defeat. A conditioned soul—even one so great as Brahmā, who manages the affairs of the entire universe—cannot compare to the Personality of Godhead, for He can produce numberless universes simply by the spiritual rays emanating from the pores of His body. Material scientists should take lessons from the utterances of Śrī Brahmā regarding our insignificance in comparison with God. In these prayers of Brahmā there is much to learn for those who are falsely puffed up by the accumulation of power."
In Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Chapter Fourteen, Śrīla Prabhupāda further comments on this verse: "Lord Brahmā realized his actual position. He is certainly the supreme teacher of this universe, in charge of the production of material nature, consisting of the complete material energy, false ego, sky, air, fire, water and earth. Such a universe may be gigantic, but it can be measured, just as we measure our body as seven spans. Generally, everyone's personal bodily measurement is calculated to be seven spans of his hand. This particular universe may appear to be a very gigantic body, but it is nothing but the measurement of seven spans for Lord Brahmā.
"Aside from this universe, there are unlimited other universes outside the jurisdiction of this particular Lord Brahmā. Just as innumerable infinitesimal atomic fragments pass through the holes of a screened window, so millions and trillions of universes in their seedling form are coming out from the bodily pores of Mahā-Viṣṇu, and that Mahā-Viṣṇu is but a part of the plenary expansion of Kṛṣṇa. Under these circumstances, although Lord Brahmā is the supreme creature within this universe, what is his importance in the presence of Lord Kṛṣṇa?"
TEXT 12
otºaepaNAM gABaRgAtasya paAd"yaAe:
ikM( k(lpatae maAtaur"DaAeºajaAgAs$ae
ik(maistanaAistavyapade"zABaUiSataM
tavaAista ku(ºae: ik(yad"pyananta:
utkṣepaṇaṁ garbha-gatasya pādayoḥ
kiṁ kalpate mātur adhokṣajāgase
kim asti-nāsti-vyapadeśa-bhūṣitaṁ
tavāsti kukṣeḥ kiyad apy anantaḥ
utkṣepaṇam—the kicking; garbha-gatasya—of a child in the womb; pādayoḥ—of the legs; kim—what; kalpate—amounts to; mātuḥ—for the mother; adhokṣaja—O transcendental Lord; āgase—as an offense; kim—what; asti—it exists; na asti—it does not exist; vyapadeśa—by the designations; bhūṣitam—decorated; tava—Your; asti—there is, kukṣeḥ—of the abdomen; kiyat—how much; api—even; anantaḥ—external.
O Lord Adhokṣaja, does a mother take offense when the child within her womb kicks with his legs? And is there anything in existence—whether designated by various philosophers as real or as unreal—that is actually outside Your abdomen?
Śrīla Prabhupāda comments as follows on this verse in Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Chapter Fourteen: "Lord Brahmā therefore compared himself to a little child within the womb of his mother. If the child within the womb plays with his hands and legs, and while playing touches the body of the mother, is the mother offended with the child? Of course she isn't. Similarly, Lord Brahmā may be a very great personality, and yet not only Brahmā but everything that be is existing within the womb of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord's energy is all-pervading: there is no place in the creation where it is not acting. Since everything is existing within the energy of the Lord, the Brahmā of this universe or the Brahmās of the many other millions and trillions of universes are existing within the energy of the Lord; therefore the Lord is considered to be the mother, and everything existing within the womb of the mother is considered to be the child. And the good mother is never offended with the child, even if he touches the body of the mother by kicking his legs."
TEXT 13
jagAt‡ayaAntaAed"iDas$amplavaAede"
naAr"AyaNAsyaAed"r"naAiBanaAlaAta,
ivainagARtaAe'jaistvaita vaAx.~ na vaE ma{SaA
ik(ntvaIṅr" tvaªa ivainagARtaAe'isma
jagat-trayāntodadhi-samplavode
nārāyaṇasyodara-nābhi-nālāt
vinirgato 'jas tv iti vāṅ na vai mṛṣā
kintv īśvara tvan na vinirgato 'smi
jagat-traya—of the three worlds; anta—in the dissolution; udadhi—of all the oceans; samplava—of the total deluge; ude—in the water; nārāyaṇasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa; udara—growing from the abdomen; nābhi—from the navel; nālāt—out of the lotus stem; vinirgataḥ—came out; ajaḥ—Brahmā; tu—indeed; iti—thus speaking; vāk—the words; na—are not; vai—certainly; mṛṣā—false; kintu—thus; īśvara—O Lord; tvat—from You; na—not; vinirgataḥ—specifically emanated; asmi—am I.
My dear Lord, it is said that when the three planetary systems are merged into the water at the time of dissolution, Your plenary portion, Nārāyaṇa, lies down on the water, gradually a lotus flower grows from His navel, and Brahmā takes birth upon that lotus flower. Certainly, these words are not false. Thus am I not born from You?
Although every living being is a child of God, Lord Brahmā here makes a special claim because he takes birth on a lotus flower that emanates from the navel of Nārāyaṇa, the Personality of Godhead. Ultimately, all living beings are equally expansions of the transcendental body of the Supreme Lord. But Brahmā has an intimate relationship with the Lord because of the activities of universal creation, and so he uses the prefix vi in the word vinirgata to beg the Lord's special mercy. Lord Brahmā is called aja because he is not born from any mother but rather emanates directly from the body of the Lord. As Śrīla Prabhupāda states in Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, "It is naturally concluded that the mother of Brahmā is Nārāyaṇa." On these grounds, Lord Brahmā is requesting special forgiveness for his offenses.
TEXT 14
naAr"AyaNAstvaM na ih" s$avaR$de"ih"naAma,
@AtmaAsyaDaIzAAiKalalaAek(s$aAºaI
naAr"AyaNAAe'ṆMḷ nar"BaUjalaAyanaAta,
ta»aAipa s$atyaM na tavaEva maAyaA
nārāyaṇas tvaṁ na hi sarva-dehinām
ātmāsy adhīśākhila-loka-sākṣī
nārāyaṇo 'ṅgaṁ nara-bhū-jalāyanāt
tac cāpi satyaṁ na tavaiva māyā
nārāyaṇaḥ—the Supreme Lord Nārāyaṇa; tvam—You; na—not; hi—whether; sarva—of all; dehinām—embodied living beings; ātmā—the Supersoul; asi—You are; adhīśa—O supreme controller; akhila—of all; loka—planets; sākṣī—the witness; nārāyaṇaḥ—Lord Śrī Nārāyaṇa; aṅgam—the expanded plenary portion; nara—from the Supreme Personality; bhū—originating; jala—of the water; ayanāt—because of being the manifesting source; tat—that (expansion); ca—and; api—indeed; satyam—true; na—not; tava—Your; eva—at all; māyā—illusory energy.
Are You not the original Nārāyaṇa, O supreme controller, since You are the Soul of every embodied being and the eternal witness of all created realms? Indeed, Lord Nārāyaṇa is Your expansion, and He is called Nārāyaṇa because He is the generating source of the primeval water of the universe. He is real, not a product of Your illusory Māyā.
In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, Chapter Two, Text 30, Śrīla Prabhupāda comments on this verse as follows: "This statement was spoken by Lord Brahmā in his prayers to Lord Kṛṣṇa after Lord defeated him by displaying His mystic powers. Brahmā had tried to test Lord Kṛṣṇa to see if He was really the Supreme Personality of Godhead playing as a cowherd boy. Brahmā stole all the other boys and their cows from the pasturing grounds, but when he returned to the pastures he saw that all the boys and cows were still there, for Lord Kṛṣṇa had created them all again. When Brahmā saw this mystic power of Lord Kṛṣṇa, he admitted defeat and offered prayers to the Lord, addressing Him as the proprietor and seer of everything in the creation and as the Supersoul who is within each and every living entity and is dear to all. Lord Kṛṣṇa is Nārāyaṇa, the father of Brahmā, because Lord Kṛṣṇa's plenary expansion Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, after placing Himself on the Garbha Ocean, created Brahmā from His own body. Mahā-Viṣṇu in the Causal Ocean and Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, the Supersoul in everyone's heart, are also transcendental expansions of the Supreme Truth."
In his commentary on this verse, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has elaborately explained the expansion of the Viṣṇu, or Nārāyaṇa, incarnations from the original form of Godhead, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The essence is that although Lord Brahmā was born from Lord Nārāyaṇa, Brahmā now understands that Nārāyaṇa is Himself a mere expansion of the original Personality of Godhead, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT 15
ta»aeṀalasTaM tava s$aṀagAã"pau:
ikM( mae na ā{"íM" BagAvaMstadE"va
ikM( vaA s$auā{"íM" ô$id" mae tadE"va
ikM( naAe s$apaâeva paunavyaRd"izAR
tac cej jala-sthaṁ tava saj jagad-vapuḥ
kiṁ me na dṛṣṭaṁ bhagavaṁs tadaiva
kiṁ vā su-dṛṣṭaṁ hṛdi me tadaiva
kiṁ no sapady eva punar vyadarśi
tat—that; cet—if; jala-stham—situated upon the water; tava—Your; sat—real; jagat—sheltering the entire universe; vapuḥ—the transcendental body; kim—why; me—by me; na dṛṣṭam—was not seen; bhagavan—O Supreme Lord; tadā eva—at that very time; kim—why; vā—or; su-dṛṣṭam—perfectly seen; hṛdi—within the heart; me—by me; tadā eva—just then; kim—why; na—not; u—on the other hand; sapadi—suddenly; eva—indeed; punaḥ—again; vyadarśi—was seen.
My dear Lord, if Your transcendental body, which shelters the entire universe, is actually lying upon the water, then why were You not seen by me when I searched for You? And why, though I could not envision You properly within my heart, did You then suddenly reveal Yourself?
Lord Brahmā here refers to his experience at the dawn of cosmic creation. As described in the Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Lord Brahmā took birth on the seat of a giant lotus whose stem emanated from the navel of Nārāyaṇa. Brahmā was bewildered as to his whereabouts, function and identity, and therefore he tried to trace out the source of the lotus stem, searching for clear information. Unable to find the Personality of Godhead, he returned to his seat and engaged in severe austerities, having been ordered to do so by the transcendental voice of the Lord, who could be heard but not seen. After long meditation, Brahmā saw the Lord but then again lost sight of Him. Thus Brahmā concludes that the transcendental body of the Personality of Godhead is not material but rather an eternal, spiritual form endowed with inconceivable mystic potencies. In other words, Lord Brahmā should not have challenged the Personality of Godhead, the Lord of all mystic power.
TEXT 16
@‡aEva maAyaADamanaAvataAre"
÷sya ‘apaÂasya baih": s$Pu(q%sya
k{(tµasya caAntajaRQ&re" jananyaA
maAyaAtvamaeva ‘ak(q%Ik{(taM tae
atraiva māyā-dhamanāvatāre
hy asya prapañcasya bahiḥ sphuṭasya
kṛtsnasya cāntar jaṭhare jananyā
māyātvam eva prakaṭī-kṛtaṁ te
atra—in this; eva—indeed; māyā-dhamana—O subduer of Māyā; avatāre—in the incarnation; hi—certainly; asya—of this; prapañcasya—created material manifestation; bahiḥ—externally; sphuṭasya—which is visible; kṛtsnasya—entire; ca—and; antaḥ—within; jaṭhare—Your abdomen; jananyāḥ—unto Your mother; māyātvam—Your bewildering potency; eva—indeed; prakaṭī-kṛtam—has been demonstrated; te—by You.
My dear Lord, in this incarnation You have proved that You are the supreme controller of Māyā. Although You are now within this universe, the whole universal creation is within Your transcendental body—a fact You demonstrated by exhibiting the universe within Your abdomen before Your mother, Yaśodā.
Lord Brahmā here describes the inconceivable spiritual potency of the Lord. We may find a pot within a house, but we can hardly expect to find the house within the same pot. By the Lord's spiritual potency, however, He can appear within this universe and simultaneously exhibit all the universes within His body. One may argue that since the universes seen by Mother Yaśodā within Lord Kṛṣṇa's abdomen were within the Lord's body, they are different from the illusory material universes manifest externally. Here Lord Brahmā refutes that argument, however. Lord Kṛṣṇa is māyā-dhamana, the supreme controller of illusion. By the Lord's own supreme mystic potency, He can bewilder even illusion herself, and thus the Lord actually exhibited all the material universes within His body. This is māyātvam, the supreme bewildering potency of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 17
yasya ku(ºaAivadM" s$ava<
s$aAtmaM BaAita yaTaA taTaA
taÔvayyapaIh" tats$ava<
ik(imadM" maAyayaA ivanaA
yasya kukṣāv idaṁ sarvaṁ
sātmaṁ bhāti yathā tathā
tat tvayy apīha tat sarvaṁ
kim idaṁ māyayā vinā
yasya—of whom; kukṣau—within the abdomen; idam—this cosmic manifestation; sarvam—all; sa-ātmam—including Yourself; bhāti—is manifested; yathā—as; tathā—so; tat—that; tvayi—within You; api—although; iha—here externally; tat—that cosmic manifestation; sarvam—whole; kim—what; idam—this; māyayā—the influence of Your inconceivable energy; vinā—without.
Just as this entire universe, including You, was exhibited within Your abdomen, so it is now manifested here externally in the same exact form. How could such things happen unless arranged by Your inconceivable energy?
Śrīla Prabhupāda comments on this verse as follows in Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead: "Lord Brahmā stressed herein that without accepting the inconceivable energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one cannot explain things as they are."
TEXT 18
@âEva tvaā{"tae'sya ikM( mama na tae maAyaAtvamaAd"izARtama,
Wk(Ae'is$a ‘aTamaM tataAe ˜ajas$auô$ã"ts$aA: s$amastaA @ipa
taAvantaAe'is$a catauBauRjaAstad"iKalaE: s$aAkM( mayaAepaAis$ataAs$a,
taAvantyaeva jagAntyaBaUstad"imataM “aṭAã"yaM izASyatae
adyaiva tvad ṛte 'sya kiṁ mama na te māyātvam ādarśitam
eko 'si prathamaṁ tato vraja-suhṛd-vatsāḥ samastā api
tāvanto 'si catur-bhujās tad akhilaiḥ sākaṁ mayopāsitās
tāvanty eva jaganty abhūs tad amitaṁ brahmādvayaṁ śiṣyate
adya—today; eva—just; tvat ṛte—apart from You; asya—of this universe; kim—what; mama—to me; na—not; te—by You; māyātvam—the basis in Your inconceivable potency; ādarśitam—shown; ekaḥ—alone; asi—You are; prathamam—first of all; tataḥ—then; vraja-suhṛt—Your cowherd boyfriends of Vṛndāvana; vatsāḥ—and the calves; samastāḥ—all; api—even; tāvantaḥ—of the same number; asi—You became; catuḥ-bhujāḥ—four-handed forms of Lord Viṣṇu; tat—then; akhilaiḥ—by all; sākam—together with; mayā—myself; upāsitāḥ—being worshiped; tāvanti—of the same number; eva—also; jaganti—universes; abhūḥ—You became; tat—then; amitam—the unlimited; brahma—Absolute Truth; advayam—one without a second; śiṣyate—You now remain.
Have You not shown me today that both You Yourself and everything within this creation are manifestations of Your inconceivable potency? First You appeared alone, and then You manifested Yourself as all of Vṛndāvana's calves and cowherd boys, Your friends. Next You appeared as an equal number of four-handed Viṣṇu forms, who were worshiped by all living beings, including me, and after that You appeared as an equal number of complete universes. Finally, You have now returned to Your unlimited form as the Supreme Absolute Truth, one without a second.
As stated in the Vedic literature, sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma: everything that exists is an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus everything is ultimately part and parcel of the Lord's spiritual existence. By Lord Kṛṣṇa's causeless mercy, Lord Brahmā personally experienced that all existence, being the potency of God, is nondifferent from Him.
TEXT 19
@jaAnataAM tvatpad"vaImanaAtmanya,
@AtmaAtmanaA BaAis$a ivatatya maAyaAma,
s$a{í"AivavaAhM" jagAtaAe ivaDaAna
wva tvamaeSaAe'nta wva i‡anae‡a:
ajānatāṁ tvat-padavīm anātmany
ātmātmanā bhāsi vitatya māyām
sṛṣṭāv ivāhaṁ jagato vidhāna
iva tvam eṣo 'nta iva trinetraḥ
ajānatām—to persons who are in ignorance; tvat-padavīm—of Your transcendental position; anātmani—in the material energy; ātmā—Yourself; ātmanā—by Yourself; bhāsi—appear; vitatya—expanding; māyām—Your inconceivable energy; sṛṣṭau—in the matter of creation; iva—as if; aham—I, Brahmā; jagataḥ—of the universe; vidhāne—in the maintenance; iva—as if; tvam eṣaḥ—Yourself; ante—in the annihilation; iva—as if; tri-netraḥ—Lord Śiva.
To persons ignorant of Your actual transcendental position, You appear as part of the material world, manifesting Yourself by the expansion of Your inconceivable energy. Thus for the creation of the universe You appear as me [Brahmā], for its maintenance You appear as Yourself [Viṣṇu], and for its annihilation You appear as Lord Trinetra [Śiva].
Although the impersonal Māyāvādī philosophers think that the demigods are illusory, Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and Lord Viṣṇu are stated here to be expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and are thus real. Indeed, they are the extraordinarily powerful controllers of the universe. The ultimate truth is a supreme and beautiful person, and thus throughout the creation of God we will always find the personal touch.
TEXT 20
s$aure"Sva{iSaSvaIzA taTaEva na{Svaipa
itayaRºau yaAd":svaipa tae'janasya
janmaAs$ataAM āu"maRd"inaƒah"Aya
‘aBaAe ivaDaAta: s$ad"nauƒah"Aya ca
sureṣv ṛṣiṣv īśa tathaiva nṛṣv api
tiryakṣu yādaḥsv api te 'janasya
janmāsatāṁ durmada-nigrahāya
prabho vidhātaḥ sad-anugrahāya ca
sureṣu—among the demigods; ṛṣiṣu—among the great sages; īśa—O Lord; tathā—as well as; eva—indeed; nṛṣu—among the human beings; api—and; tiryakṣu—among animals; yādaḥsu—among aquatics; api—also; te—of You; ajanasya—who never takes material birth; janma—the birth; asatām—of the nondevotees; durmada—the false pride; nigrahāya—for the purpose of subduing; prabho—O master; vidhātaḥ—O creator; sat—to the faithful devotees; anugrahāya—for the purpose of showing mercy; ca—and.
O Lord, O supreme creator and master, You have no material birth, yet to defeat the false pride of the faithless demons and show mercy to Your saintly devotees, You take birth among the demigods, sages, human beings, animals and even the aquatics.
Among the demigods Lord Kṛṣṇa appears in such forms as Vāmanadeva, among the sages as Paraśurāma, among human beings as Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself and as Lord Rāmacandra, and among animals as the boar incarnation. Lord Kṛṣṇa appears among the aquatics as Matsya, the gigantic fish. Indeed, the plenary expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are innumerable, as the Lord relentlessly comes down within the universes to smash the false pride of the atheists and show mercy to the saintly devotees.
In another sense, the Lord never appears, since He exists eternally. His appearance is like that of the sun, which is always present in the sky but which periodically appears to our vision.
TEXT 21
k(Ae vaeiÔa BaUmana, BagAvana, par"Atmana,
yaAegAeṅr"AetaIBaRvataiṣlaAefyaAma,
¸( vaA k(TaM vaA k(ita vaA k(de"ita
ivastaAr"yana, ‚(Lx"is$a yaAegAmaAyaAma,
ko vetti bhūman bhagavan parātman
yogeśvarotīr bhavatas tri-lokyām
kva vā kathaṁ vā kati vā kadeti
vistārayan krīḍasi yoga-māyām
kaḥ—who; vetti—knows; bhūman—O supreme great one; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; para-ātman—O Supreme Soul; yoga-īśvara—O master of mystic power; ūtīḥ—the pastimes; bhavataḥ—of Your Lordship; tri-lokyām—in the three worlds; kva—where; vā—or; katham—how; vā—or; kati—how many; vā—or; kadā—when; iti—thus; vistārayan—expanding; krīḍasi—You play; yoga-māyām—Your spiritual energy.
O supreme great one! O Supreme Personality of Godhead! O Supersoul, master of all mystic power! Your pastimes are taking place continuously in these three worlds, but who can estimate where, how and when You are employing Your spiritual energy and performing these innumerable pastimes? No one can understand the mystery of how Your spiritual energy acts.
Brahmā previously stated that Lord Kṛṣṇa incarnates among the demigods, human beings, animals, fish and so on. This does not mean, however, that the Lord is degraded by His incarnations. As Brahmā clarifies here, no conditioned soul can understand the transcendental nature of the Lord's activities, which He enacts through His spiritual potency. Although the Lord is bhūman, the supremely great one, He is still Bhagavān, the supremely beautiful personality exhibiting pastimes of love in His own abode. At the same time He is Paramātmā, the all-pervading Supersoul, who witnesses and sanctions all the activities of conditioned souls. The Lord's multiple identity is explained by the term yogeśvara. The Absolute Truth is the master of all mystic potencies, and although He is one and supreme, He manifests His greatness and opulence in many different ways.
Such elevated spiritual matters can hardly be understood by foolish persons primitively identifying themselves with the insignificant material body. These conditioned souls, such as atheistic scientists, consider their own puffed-up intelligence supreme. Gullibly placing their firm faith in material illusion, they are captured by the modes of nature and driven far away from knowledge of God.
TEXT 22
tasmaAid"dM" jagAd"zAeSamas$atsvaṝ&paM
sva«aABamastaiDaSaNAM pauś&āu":Kaāu":Kama,
tvayyaeva inatyas$auKabaAeDatanaAvanantae
maAyaAta oâd"ipa yats$aid"vaAvaBaAita
tasmād idaṁ jagad aśeṣam asat-svarūpaṁ
svapnābham asta-dhiṣaṇaṁ puru-duḥkha-duḥkham
tvayy eva nitya-sukha-bodha-tanāv anante
māyāta udyad api yat sad ivāvabhāti
tasmāt—therefore; idam—this; jagat—cosmic manifestation; aśeṣam—entire; asat-svarūpam—whose existence is unreal in the sense of temporary; svapna-ābham—like a dream; asta-dhiṣaṇam—wherein awareness becomes covered over; puru-duḥkha-duḥkham—full of repeated miseries; tvayi—within You; eva—indeed; nitya—eternal; sukha—happy; bodha—conscious; tanau—whose personal appearances; anante—who is unlimited; māyātaḥ—by the illusory energy; udyat—coming forth; api—although; yat—which; sat—real; iva—as if; avabhāti—appears.
Therefore this entire universe, which like a dream is by nature unreal, nevertheless appears real, and thus it covers one's consciousness and assails one with repeated miseries. This universe appears real because it is manifested by the potency of illusion emanating from You, whose unlimited transcendental forms are full of eternal happiness and knowledge.
As an object of enjoyment or a permanent residence for the conditioned souls, the material universe is certainly illusion, nothing more than a dream. One may give the analogy that the vision of abundant water in a desert is no more than a dream, although real water exists elsewhere. Similarly, the vision of home, happiness and reality within matter is certainly no better than a foolish dream in which repeated miseries appear.
In another sense, however, the universe is real. In his commentary on Vedānta-sūtra, Śrīla Madhvācārya has confirmed this by quoting the following statement from the Vedic śruti-mantras: satyaṁ hy evedaṁ viśvam asṛjata. "This universe, created by the Lord, is real." The perfect authority of the Vedas thus certifies this universe to be real; nevertheless, because our knowledge is stolen by illusion (as indicated here by the words asta-dhiṣaṇam), we cannot properly understand this universe or the Supreme Lord who has created it. As the expansion of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the universe is real and is meant for being engaged in His service. One who accepts the kingdom of God as home, the Lord Himself as the object of love, and the material universe as paraphernalia for being engaged in the Lord's service dwells within eternal reality wherever he may go within the material and spiritual worlds.
TEXT 23
Wk(stvamaAtmaA pauś&Sa: paur"ANA:
s$atya: svayaMjyaAeitar"nanta @Aâ:
inatyaAe'ºar"Ae'ja›as$auKaAe inar"Ãana:
paUNAARã"yaAe mau·( opaAiDataAe'ma{ta:
ekas tvam ātmā puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ
satyaḥ svayaṁ-jyotir ananta ādyaḥ
nityo 'kṣaro 'jasra-sukho nirañjanaḥ
pūrṇādvayo mukta upādhito 'mṛtaḥ
ekaḥ—one; tvam—You; ātmā—the Supreme Soul; puruṣaḥ—the Supreme Person; purāṇaḥ—the oldest; satyaḥ—the Absolute Truth; svayam-jyotiḥ—self-manifested; anantaḥ—without end; ādyaḥ—without beginning; nityaḥ—eternal; akṣaraḥ—indestructible; ajasra-sukhaḥ—whose happiness cannot be obstructed; nirañjanaḥ—devoid of contamination; pūrṇa—complete; advayaḥ—without a second; muktaḥ—free; upādhitaḥ—from all material designations; amṛtaḥ—deathless.
You are the one Supreme Soul, the primeval Supreme Personality, the Absolute Truth—self-manifested, endless and beginningless. You are eternal and infallible, perfect and complete, without any rival and free from all material designations. Your happiness can never be obstructed, nor have You any connection with material contamination. Indeed, You are the indestructible nectar of immortality.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī explains how the various terms of this verse demonstrate that the transcendental body of Lord Kṛṣṇa is free from the characteristics of material bodies. All material bodies go through six phases: birth, growth, maturity, reproduction, decline and destruction. But Lord Kṛṣṇa does not take material birth, since He is the original reality, a fact clearly indicated here by the word ādya, "original." We take our material birth within a particular material atmosphere, in material bodies that are amalgamations of various material elements. Since Lord Kṛṣṇa existed long before the creation of any material atmosphere or element, there is no question of material birth for His transcendental body.
Similarly, the word pūrṇa, meaning "full and complete," refutes the concept that Lord Kṛṣṇa could grow, since He is ever-existing in fullness. When one's material body becomes mature, one can no longer enjoy as in youth; but the words ajasra-sukha, "enjoying unobstructed happiness," indicate that Lord Kṛṣṇa's body never reaches so-called middle age, since it is always full of spiritual youthful bliss. The word akṣara, "undiminishing," refutes the possibility that Lord Kṛṣṇa's body grows old or declines, and the word amṛta, "immortal," negates the possibility of death.
In other words, Lord Kṛṣṇa's transcendental body is free from the transformations of material bodies. The Lord does, however, create innumerable worlds and expand Himself as innumerable living entities. But the Lord's so-called reproduction is completely spiritual and does not take place at a certain phase of bodily existence; rather, it constitutes the Lord's eternal proclivity to expand His spiritual bliss and glories.
As the Lord states in śruti, pūrvam evāham ihāsam: "I alone existed in the beginning." Therefore here the Lord is called puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ, "the primeval enjoyer. "This original puruṣa expands Himself as the Supersoul and enters every living being. Still, He is ultimately the Absolute Truth, Kṛṣṇa, as stated in the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad: yaḥ sākṣāt para-brahmeti govindaṁ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaṁ vṛndāvana-sura-bhūruha-talāsīnam. "The Absolute Truth Himself is Govinda, who has an eternal form of bliss and knowledge and who is sitting beneath the shady desire trees of Vṛndāvana." This Absolute Truth is beyond material ignorance and beyond even ordinary spiritual knowledge, as stated in the same Gopāla-tāpanī śruti: vidyāvidyābhyāṁ bhinnaḥ. Thus, in many ways the supremacy of Lord Kṛṣṇa has been established in the Vedic literature, and it is here confirmed by Lord Brahmā himself.
TEXT 24
WvaMivaDaM tvaAM s$ak(laAtmanaAmaipa
svaAtmaAnamaAtmaAtmatayaA ivacaºatae
gAuvaRkR(labDaAepainaSats$aucaºauSaA
yae tae tar"ntaIva BavaAna{taAmbauiDama,
evaṁ-vidhaṁ tvāṁ sakalātmanām api
svātmānam ātmātmatayā vicakṣate
gurv-arka-labdhopaniṣat-sucakṣuṣā
ye te tarantīva bhavānṛtāmbudhim
evam-vidham—as thus described; tvām—You; sakala—of all; ātmanām—souls; api—indeed; sva-ātmānam—the very Soul; ātma-ātmatayā—as the Supersoul; vicakṣate—they see; guru—from the spiritual master; arka—who is like the sun; labdha—received; upaniṣat—of confidential knowledge; su-cakṣuṣā—by the perfect eye; ye—who; te—they; taranti—cross over; iva—easily; bhava—of material existence; anṛta—which is not real; ambudhim—the ocean.
Those who have received the clear vision of knowledge from the sunlike spiritual master can see You in this way, as the very Soul of all souls, the Supersoul of everyone's own self. Thus understanding Your original personality, they are able to cross over the ocean of illusory material existence.
As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (4.9),
janma karma ca me divyam
evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ
tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma
naiti mām eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
TEXT 25
@AtmaAnamaevaAtmatayaAivajaAnataAM
taenaEva jaAtaM inaiKalaM ‘apaiÂatama,
ÁaAnaena BaUyaAe'ipa ca tat‘alaIyatae
r"jjvaAmahe"BaAeRgABavaABavaAE yaTaA
ātmānam evātmatayāvijānatāṁ
tenaiva jātaṁ nikhilaṁ prapañcitam
jñānena bhūyo 'pi ca tat pralīyate
rajjvām aher bhoga-bhavābhavau yathā
ātmānam—Yourself; eva—indeed; ātmatayā—as the Supreme Soul; avijānatām—for those who do not understand; tena—by that; eva—alone; jātam—is generated; nikhilam—the entire; prapañcitam—material existence; jñānena—by knowledge; bhūyaḥ api—once again; ca—and; tat—that material existence; pralīyate—disappears; rajjvām—within a rope; aheḥ—of a snake; bhoga—of the body; bhava-abhavau—the apparent appearance and disappearance; yathā—just as.
A person who mistakes a rope for a snake becomes fearful, but he then gives up his fear upon realizing that the so-called snake does not exist. Similarly, for those who fail to recognize You as the Supreme Soul of all souls, the expansive illusory material existence arises, but knowledge of You at once causes it to subside.
Those submerged in illusion see material existence as infinite, just as one who is submerged in water sees only water all around him. For example, material scientists and philosophers, submerged deep within the ocean of material illusion, imagine that material nature extends infinitely in all directions. In fact, the material creation is a finite ocean of ignorance in which foolish living entities, such as material scientists, are unceremoniously dunked by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
To be trapped in a world in which all things are born and die is certainly a fearful experience. Anyone trapped in a dark place naturally becomes fearful. Since material life is always covered by the darkness of ignorance, every conditioned soul is fearful. The material nature is not ultimate reality, and thus analysis of matter can never provide answers to ultimate questions. This dark, snakelike existence called material life immediately disappears as soon as one opens his eyes to the bright light of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
TEXT 26
@ÁaAnas$aMÁaAE BavabanDamaAeºaAE
ã"AE naAma naAnyaAE sta [%taÁaBaAvaAta,
@ja›aicatyaAtmaina ke(valae pare"
ivacaAyaRmaANAe tar"NAAivavaAh"naI
ajñāna-saṁjñau bhava-bandha-mokṣau
dvau nāma nānyau sta ṛta-jña-bhāvāt
ajasra-city ātmani kevale pare
vicāryamāṇe taraṇāv ivāhanī
ajñāna—manifesting from ignorance; saṁjñau—which designations; bhava-bandha—bondage to material existence; mokṣau—and liberation; dvau—the two; nāma—indeed; na—not; anyau—separate; staḥ—are; ṛta—true; jña-bhāvāt—from knowledge; ajasra-citi—whose awareness is unimpeded; ātmani—the spirit soul; kevale—who is separate from matter; pare—who is pure; vicāryamāṇe—when he is properly distinguished; taraṇau—within the sun; iva—just as; ahanī—day and night.
The conception of material bondage and the conception of liberation are both manifestations of ignorance. Being outside the scope of true knowledge, they cease to exist when one correctly understands that the pure spirit soul is distinct from matter and always fully conscious. At that time bondage and liberation no longer have any significance, just as day and night have no significance from the perspective of the sun.
Material bondage is illusion because the living entity actually has no real relationship with the material world. Because of false ego, the conditioned soul identifies himself with matter. Therefore so-called liberation is simply the giving up of an illusion rather than release from actual bondage. Yet even if we think that the suffering of material illusion is real and that liberation is thus a meaningful release from suffering, the mere absence of material existence is still insignificant compared to the achievement of factual spiritual life, which is the positive eternal reality opposed to the negative illusion of material life. Ultimately, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or pure love of Godhead, is the only significant, meaningful and permanent status for every living entity.
Since the darkness of night is caused by the absence of the sun, one would not experience night within the sun itself, nor would one experience individual days separated by nights. Similarly, within the pure living entity there is no material darkness and thus no experience of liberation from such darkness. When the conditioned soul comes to this platform of pure consciousness, he becomes fit to associate with the supreme pure, the Personality of Godhead Himself, in the Lord's own abode.
TEXT 27
tvaAmaAtmaAnaM parM" matvaA
par"maAtmaAnamaeva ca
@AtmaA paunabaRih"ma{Rgya
@h"Ae'ÁajanataAÁataA
tvām ātmānaṁ paraṁ matvā
param ātmānam eva ca
ātmā punar bahir mṛgya
aho 'jña-janatājñatā
tvām—You; ātmānam—the real self; param—something else; matvā—thinking; param—something else; ātmānam—Yourself; eva—indeed; ca—also; ātmā—the Supreme Self; punaḥ—again; bahiḥ—outside; mṛgyaḥ—must be searched out; aho—oh; ajña—ignorant; janatā—of persons; ajñatā—the ignorance.
Just see the foolishness of those ignorant persons who consider You to be some separated manifestation of illusion and who consider the self, which is actually You, to be something else, the material body. Such fools conclude that the supreme soul is to be searched for somewhere outside Your supreme personality.
Lord Brahmā is amazed at the gross ignorance of conditioned souls who consider Lord Kṛṣṇa's supreme spiritual body to be material. Ignorant of the spiritual form of the Lord, such persons also consider their own material bodies to be the self, and therefore they conclude that spiritual reality is to be found somewhere beyond the supreme personality of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes such fools consider Lord Kṛṣṇa to be one of many individual souls who together constitute a single impersonal spiritual entity. Unfortunately, such speculators are not inclined to hear from the Lord Himself or from the Lord's authorized representatives, such as Lord Brahmā. Because they whimsically speculate on the nature of the Supreme, their ultimate result is confusion and ignorance, which they euphemistically describe as "the mystery of life."
TEXT 28
@ntaBaR"vae'nanta Bavantamaeva
÷taÔyajantaAe ma{gAyainta s$anta:
@s$antamapyantyaih"mantare"NA
s$antaM gAuNAM taM ik(mau yainta s$anta:
antar-bhave 'nanta bhavantam eva
hy atat tyajanto mṛgayanti santaḥ
asantam apy anty ahim antareṇa
santaṁ guṇaṁ taṁ kim u yanti santaḥ
antaḥ-bhave—within the body; ananta—O unlimited Lord; bhavantam—Yourself; eva—indeed; hi—certainly; atat—everything separate from You; tyajantaḥ—rejecting; mṛgayanti—search out; santaḥ—the saintly devotees; asantam—unreal; api—even; anti—present nearby; ahim—(the illusion of) a snake; antareṇa—without (negating); santam—real; guṇam—the rope; tam—that; kim u—whether; yanti—appreciate; santaḥ—persons who are spiritually situated.
O unlimited Lord, the saintly devotees seek You out within their own bodies by rejecting everything separate from You. Indeed, how can discriminating persons appreciate the real nature of a rope lying before them until they refute the illusion that it is a snake?
One may argue that a person should cultivate self-realization and at the same time pursue sense gratification for the material body. This proposition is herein refuted by the example of misidentifying a rope as a snake. One who mistakes a rope for a snake becomes fearful and thinks of the so-called snake. But upon discovering that the so-called snake is actually a rope, he experiences a different emotion—relief—and can then ignore the rope. Similarly, because we misunderstand the material body to be the self, we are experiencing many emotions in relation to the body. Upon discovering, however, that the body is simply a bag of material chemicals, we carefully note how this illusion was created and then lose interest in the body. Discovering that we are actually an eternal soul within the body, we naturally focus our attention on that real self.
Those who are saintly and wise always cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness, spiritual knowledge, having transcended the foolish misidentification of the body as the self. Such Kṛṣṇa conscious persons go on to realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who dwells within the material body as the Supersoul—the witness and guide of every living entity. Realization of the Supersoul and the individual soul is so pleasing and satisfying that a self-realized person automatically gives up everything irrelevant to his spiritual advancement.
TEXT 29
@TaAipa tae de"va pad"Ambaujaã"ya-
‘as$aAd"laezAAnaugA{h"Ita Wva ih"
jaAnaAita taÔvaM BagAvanmaih"°aAe
na caAnya Wk(Ae'ipa icarM" ivaicanvana,
athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-
prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi
jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno
na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan
atha—therefore; api—indeed; te—Your; deva—my Lord; pada-ambuja-dvaya—of the two lotus feet; prasāda—of the mercy; leśa—by only a trace; anugṛhītaḥ—favored; eva—certainly; hi—indeed; jānāti—one knows; tattvam—the truth; bhagavat—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahimnaḥ—of the greatness; na—never; ca—and; anyaḥ—another; ekaḥ—one; api—although; ciram—for a long period; vicinvan—speculating.
My Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus feet, he can understand the greatness of Your personality. But those who speculate to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are unable to know You, even though they continue to study the Vedas for many years.
This translation is quoted from Śrīla Prabhupāda's Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā, Chapter Six, Text 84.
Lord Kṛṣṇa is very eager to bestow His mercy upon the conditioned living beings, who are uselessly struggling with the Lord's illusory energy, Māyā. The conditioned soul struggles for happiness through sense gratification and for knowledge through mental speculation. Both processes ultimately bring him to a morose and hopeless condition. If the conditioned soul surrenders to the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa and thus acquires even a trace of His causeless mercy, the whole situation is changed, and the living entity can begin his real life of bliss and knowledge in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
TEXT 30
tad"stau mae naATa s$a BaUir"BaAgAAe
Bavae'‡a vaAnya‡a tau vaA itar"êAma,
yaenaAh"maek(Ae'ipa BavaṀanaAnaAM
BaUtvaA inaSaevae tava paAd"paīavama,
tad astu me nātha sa bhūri-bhāgo
bhave 'tra vānyatra tu vā tiraścām
yenāham eko 'pi bhavaj-janānāṁ
bhūtvā niṣeve tava pāda-pallavam
tat—therefore; astu—may it be; me—my; nātha—O master; saḥ—that; bhūri-bhāgaḥ—greatest good fortune; bhave—in the birth; atra—this; vā—or; anyatra—in some other birth; tu—indeed; vā—or; tiraścām—among the animals; yena—by which; aham—I; ekaḥ—one; api—even; bhavat—or Your; janānām—devotees; bhūtvā—becoming; niṣeve—I may fully engage in serving; tava—Your; pāda-pallavam—lotus feet.
My dear Lord, I therefore pray to be so fortunate that in this life as Lord Brahmā or in another life, wherever I take my birth, I may be counted as one of Your devotees. I pray that wherever I may be, even among the animal species, I can engage in devotional service to Your lotus feet.
TEXT 31
@h"Ae'itaDanyaA ˜ajagAAer"maNya:
stanyaAma{taM paItamataIva tae maud"A
yaAs$aAM ivaBaAe vats$atar"AtmajaAtmanaA
yaÔa{æayae'âAipa na caAlamaDvar"A:
aho 'ti-dhanyā vraja-go-ramaṇyaḥ
stanyāmṛtaṁ pītam atīva te mudā
yāsāṁ vibho vatsatarātmajātmanā
yat-tṛptaye 'dyāpi na cālam adhvarāḥ
aho—oh; ati-dhanyāḥ—most fortunate; vraja—of Vṛndāvana; go—the cows; ramaṇyaḥ—and the gopīs; stanya—the breast-milk; amṛtam—which is like nectar; pītam—has been drunk; atīva—fully; te—by You; mudā—with satisfaction; yāsām—of whom; vibho—O almighty Lord; vatsatara-ātmaja-ātmanā—in the form of the calves and the sons of the cowherd women; yat—whose; tṛptaye—for the satisfaction; adya api—even until now; na—not; ca—and; alam—sufficient; adhvarāḥ—the Vedic sacrifices.
O almighty Lord, how greatly fortunate are the cows and ladies of Vṛndāvana, the nectar of whose breast-milk You have happily drunk to Your full satisfaction, taking the form of their calves and children! All the Vedic sacrifices performed from time immemorial up to the present day have not given You as much satisfaction.
TEXT 32
@h"Ae BaAgyamah"Ae BaAgyaM
nand"gAAepa˜ajaAEk(s$aAma,
yainma‡aM par"maAnandM"
paUNA< “aṭ s$anaAtanama,
aho bhāgyam aho bhāgyaṁ
nanda-gopa-vrajaukasām
yan-mitraṁ paramānandaṁ
pūrṇaṁ brahma sanātanam
aho—what great; bhāgyam—fortune; aho—what great; bhāgyam—fortune; nanda—of Mahārāja Nanda; gopa—of the other cowherd men; vraja-okasām—of the inhabitants of Vrajabhūmi; yat—of whom; mitram—the friend; parama-ānandam—the supreme bliss; pūrṇam—complete; brahma—the Absolute Truth; sanātanam—eternal.
How greatly fortunate are Nanda Mahārāja, the cowherd men and all the other inhabitants of Vrajabhūmi! There is no limit to their good fortune, because the Absolute Truth, the source of transcendental bliss, the eternal Supreme Brahman, has become their friend.
This translation is quoted from Śrīla Prabhupāda's Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā, Chapter Six, Text 149.
TEXT 33
WSaAM tau BaAgyamaih"maAcyauta taAvad"AstaAma,
Wk(Ad"zAEva ih" vayaM bata BaUir"BaAgAA:
Wtaā,"Da{SaIk(caSakE(r"s$ak{(itpabaAma:
zAvaARd"yaAe'x.~„yaud"jamaDvama{taAs$avaM tae
eṣāṁ tu bhāgya-mahimācyuta tāvad āstām
ekādaśaiva hi vayaṁ bata bhūri-bhāgāḥ
etad-dhṛṣīka-caṣakair asakṛt pibāmaḥ
śarvādayo 'ṅghry-udaja-madhv-amṛtāsavaṁ te
eṣām—of these (residents of Vṛndāvana); tu—however; bhāgya—of the good fortune; mahimā—the greatness; acyuta—O infallible Supreme Lord; tāvat—so much; āstām—let it be; ekādaśa—the eleven; eva hi—indeed; vayam—we; bata—oh; bhūri-bhāgāḥ—are most fortunate; etat—of these devotees; hṛṣīka—by the senses; caṣakaiḥ—(which are like) drinking cups; asakṛt—repeatedly; pibāmaḥ—we are drinking; śarva-ādayaḥ—Lord Śiva and the other chief demigods; aṅghri-udaja—of the lotus feet; madhu—the honey; amṛta-āsavam—which is a nectarean, intoxicating beverage; te—of You.
Yet even though the extent of the good fortune of these residents of Vṛndāvana is inconceivable, we eleven presiding deities of the various senses, headed by Lord Śiva, are also most fortunate, because the senses of these devotees of Vṛndāvana are the cups through which we repeatedly drink the nectarean, intoxicating beverage of the honey of Your lotus feet.
TEXT 34
taṁU"ir"BaAgyaimah" janma ik(mapyaq%vyaAM
yaÕ"Aeku(lae'ipa k(tamaAx.~i„ar"jaAe'iBaSaek(ma,
yaṀaIivataM tau inaiKalaM BagAvaAnmauku(nd"s$a,
tvaâAipa yatpad"r"ja: ™auitama{gyamaeva
tad bhūri-bhāgyam iha janma kim apy aṭavyāṁ
yad gokule 'pi katamāṅghri-rajo-'bhiṣekam
yaj-jīvitaṁ tu nikhilaṁ bhagavān mukundas
tv adyāpi yat-pada-rajaḥ śruti-mṛgyam eva
tat—that; bhūri-bhāgyam—the greatest good fortune; iha—here; janma—the birth; kim api—any whatsoever; aṭavyām—in the forest (of Vṛndāvana); yat—which; gokule—in Gokula; api—even; katama—of any (of the devotees); aṅghri—of the feet; rajaḥ—by the dust; abhiṣekam—bathing; yat—whose; jīvitam—life; tu—indeed; nikhilam—whole; bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mukundaḥ—Lord Mukunda; tu—but; adya api—even until now; yat—whose; pāda-rajaḥ—dust of the feet; śruti—by the Vedas; mṛgyam—sought after; eva—certainly.
My greatest possible good fortune would be to take any birth whatever in this forest of Gokula and have my head bathed by the dust falling from the lotus feet of any of its residents. Their entire life and soul is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mukunda, the dust of whose lotus feet is still being searched for in the Vedic mantras.
This verse indicates that Lord Brahmā desires to take birth even as the smallest blade of grass in Vṛndāvana so that the holy residents of the Lord's abode may walk upon his head and bless him with the dust of their feet. Being realistic, Lord Brahmā does not aspire to directly achieve the dust of Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet; rather, he aspires for the mercy of the Lord's devotees. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that Brahmā is willing to take birth even as a stone in a paved footpath in the Lord's abode. Since Brahmā is the creator of the entire universe, we can just imagine the glorious position of the residents of Vṛndāvana.
The Lord's devotees achieve their exalted position by unalloyed devotion and love. One cannot achieve such spiritual opulence by any puffed-up material process of personal improvement. In Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrīla Prabhupāda reveals the mind of Brahmā as follows: "But if I am not so fortunate as to take birth within the forest of Vṛndāvana, I beg to be allowed to take birth outside the immediate area of Vṛndāvana so that when the devotees go out they will walk over me. Even that would be a great fortune for me. I am just aspiring for a birth in which I will be smeared by the dust of the devotees' feet."
TEXT 35
WSaAM GaAeSainavaAis$anaAmauta BavaAna, ikM( de"va r"Ataeita nazA,
caetaAe ivaṅP(laAtP(laM tvad"parM" ku(‡aApyayanmau÷ita
s$aãe"SaAid"va paUtanaAipa s$aku(laA tvaAmaeva de"vaAipataA
yaŪ"AmaATaRs$auô$it‘ayaAtmatanaya‘aANAAzAyaAstvatk{(tae
eṣāṁ ghoṣa-nivāsinām uta bhavān kiṁ deva rāteti naś
ceto viśva-phalāt phalaṁ tvad-aparaṁ kutrāpy ayan muhyati
sad-veṣād iva pūtanāpi sa-kulā tvām eva devāpitā
yad-dhāmārtha-suhṛt-priyātma-tanaya-prāṇāśayās tvat-kṛte
eṣām—to these; ghoṣa-nivāsinām—residents of the cowherd community; uta—indeed; bhavān—Your Lordship; kim—what; deva—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; rātā—will give; iti—thinking thus; naḥ—our; cetaḥ—mind; viśva-phalāt—than the supreme source of all benedictions; phalam—a reward; tvat—than You; aparam—other; kutra api—anywhere; ayat—considering; muhyati—becomes bewildered; sat-veṣāt—by disguising herself as a devotee; iva—indeed; pūtanā—the demoness Pūtanā; api—even; sa-kulā—along with her family members, Bakāsura and Aghāsura; tvām—You; eva—certainly; deva—O Lord; āpitā—was made to attain; yat—whose; dhāma—homes; artha—wealth; suhṛt—friends; priya—dear relatives; ātma—bodies; tanaya—children; prāṇa—life air; āśayāḥ—and minds; tvat-kṛte—dedicated to You.
My mind becomes bewildered just trying to think of what reward other than You could be found anywhere. You are the embodiment of all benedictions, which You bestow upon these residents of the cowherd community of Vṛndāvana. You have already arranged to give Yourself to Pūtanā and her family members in exchange for her disguising herself as a devotee. So what is left for You to give these devotees of Vṛndāvana, whose homes, wealth, friends, dear relations, bodies, children and very lives and hearts are all dedicated only to You?
TEXT 36
taAva‰"AgAAd"ya: staenaAs$a,
taAvatk(Ar"AgA{hM" gA{h"ma,
taAvanmaAeh"Ae'x.~i„ainagAx"Ae
yaAvatk{(SNA na tae janaA:
tāvad rāgādayaḥ stenās
tāvat kārā-gṛhaṁ gṛham
tāvan moho 'ṅghri-nigaḍo
yāvat kṛṣṇa na te janāḥ
tāvat—for that long; rāga-ādayaḥ—material attachment and so on; stenāḥ—thieves; tāvat—for that long; kārā-gṛham—a prison; gṛham—one's home; tāvat—for that long; mohaḥ—the bewilderment of family affection; aṅghri—upon their feet; nigaḍaḥ—shackles; yāvat—as long as; kṛṣṇa—O Lord Kṛṣṇa; na—do not become; te—Your (devotees); janāḥ—any persons.
My dear Lord Kṛṣṇa, until people become Your devotees, their material attachments and desires remain thieves, their homes remain prisons, and their affectionate feelings for their family members remain foot-shackles.
Apparently, the residents of Vṛndāvana, the abode of Lord Kṛṣṇa, are simple householders engaged in ordinary affairs such as herding cows, cooking, rearing children and performing religious ceremonies. However, all these activities are intensely engaged in the loving service of Lord Kṛṣṇa. The residents of Vṛndāvana perform all activities in pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness and thus exist on the most exalted platform of liberated life. Otherwise, the same activities performed without Kṛṣṇa consciousness constitute ordinary bondage to the material world.
Thus, one should not misunderstand the exalted position of the residents of Vṛndāvana, nor should one consider oneself highly religious simply because one performs ordinary domestic affairs very enthusiastically, but without Kṛṣṇa consciousness. By focusing our passionate attachment on our family and society, we are completely deviated from the progressive path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Conversely, if we engage our family in the loving service of the Lord, our endeavors to maintain our family become part and parcel of our progressive spiritual duties.
In conclusion, by studying the extraordinary status of the residents of Vṛndāvana, we can see that the essential quality of their lives is pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness—the rendering of loving service to the Lord without a trace of material desire or mental speculation. Such loving service to the original Personality of Godhead immediately creates the atmosphere of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, the kingdom of God.
TEXT 37
‘apaÂaM inaS‘apaÂaAe'ipa
ivax"mbayais$a BaUtalae
‘apaªajanataAnand"-
s$and"AehM" ‘aiTatauM ‘aBaAe
prapañcaṁ niṣprapañco 'pi
viḍambayasi bhū-tale
prapanna-janatānanda-
sandohaṁ prathituṁ prabho
prapañcam—that which is material; niṣprapañcaḥ—completely transcendental to material existence; api—although; viḍambayasi—You imitate; bhū-tale—on the surface of the earth; prapanna—who are surrendered; janatā—of people; ānanda-sandoham—the great variety of different kinds of ecstasies; prathitum—in order to spread; prabho—O master.
My dear master, although You have nothing to do with material existence, You come to this earth and imitate material life just to expand the varieties of ecstatic enjoyment for Your surrendered devotees.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura points out that just as a lamp does not seem to shine as brightly in sunlight as it does in the shade, or as a diamond does not seem as brilliant on a silver platter as it does on a plate of blue glass, the Lord's pastimes as Govinda do not seem as amazing in the transcendental abode of Vaikuṇṭha as they do within the material realm of Māyā. Lord Kṛṣṇa comes to the earth and acts toward His pure devotees exactly like a devoted son, boyfriend, husband, father, friend and so on, and within the darkness of material existence these brilliant, liberated pastimes give unlimited ecstasy to the surrendered devotees of the Lord.
In his Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrīla Prabhupāda quotes Lord Brahmā as follows: "I can also understand that Your appearance as a small cowherd boy, a child of the cowherd men, is not at all a material activity. You are so much obliged by their affection that You are here to enthuse them with more loving service by Your transcendental presence. "
TEXT 38
jaAnanta Wva jaAnantau
ikM( baó"ftyaA na mae ‘aBaAe
manas$aAe vapauSaAe vaAcaAe
vaEBavaM tava gAAecar":
jānanta eva jānantu
kiṁ bahūktyā na me prabho
manaso vapuṣo vāco
vaibhavaṁ tava go-caraḥ
jānantaḥ—persons who think they are aware of Your unlimited potency; eva—certainly; jānantu—let them think like that; kim—what is the use; bahu-uktyā—with many words; na—not; me—my; prabho—O Lord; manasaḥ—of the mind; vapuṣaḥ—of the body; vācaḥ—of the words; vaibhavam—opulences; tava—Your; go-caraḥ—within the range.
There are people who say, "I know everything about Kṛṣṇa." Let them think that way. As far as I am concerned, I do not wish to speak very much about this matter. O my Lord, let me say this much: As far as Your opulences are concerned, they are all beyond the reach of my mind, body and words.
This translation is quoted from Śrīla Prabhupāda's Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līla, Chapter Twenty-one, Text 27.
TEXT 39
@naujaAnaIih" maAM k{(SNA
s$ava< tvaM vaeits$a s$avaRā{"k,(
tvamaeva jagAtaAM naATaAe
jagAde"taÔavaAipaRtama,
anujānīhi māṁ kṛṣṇa
sarvaṁ tvaṁ vetsi sarva-dṛk
tvam eva jagatāṁ nātho
jagad etat tavārpitam
anujānīhi—please give leave; mām—to me; kṛṣṇa—O Lord Kṛṣṇa; sarvam—everything; tvam—You; vetsi—know; sarva-dṛk—all-seeing; tvam—You; eva—alone; jagatām—of all the universes; nāthaḥ—the master; jagat—universe; etat—this; tava—to You; arpitam—is offered.
My dear Kṛṣṇa, I now humbly request permission to leave. Actually, You are the knower and seer of all things. Indeed, You are the Lord of all the universes, and yet I offer this one universe unto You.
In his Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrīla Prabhupāda has quoted Lord Brahmā as follows: "My dear Lord, although You are the Supreme Lord of all creation, I sometimes falsely think that I am the master of this universe. I may be master of this universe, but there are innumerable universes, and there are also innumerable Brahmās who preside over these universes. But actually You are the master of them all. As the Supersoul in everyone's heart, You know everything. Please, therefore, accept me as Your surrendered servant. I hope that You will excuse me for disturbing You in Your pastimes with Your friends and calves. Now if You will kindly allow me, I will immediately leave so You can enjoy Your friends and calves without my presence."
The words sarvaṁ tvaṁ vetsi sarva-dṛk are very significant here. Lord Kṛṣṇa knows everything and sees everything, and therefore Lord Brahmā did not need to remain in Vṛndāvana to maintain his personal loving contact with the Lord. In fact, as the creator of the universe, Lord Brahmā was somewhat out of place in the simple, blissful atmosphere of Vṛndāvana, where Lord Kṛṣṇa was exhibiting His supreme opulences in herding cows, enjoying picnics, playing games and so on.
Upon seeing the intense love the residents of Vṛndāvana had for Lord Kṛṣṇa, Brahmā felt unqualified to remain there. He was not eager to give up the Lord's association, but he felt it better to return to his personal devotional service in Brahmaloka. Somewhat embarrassed and unhappy over his foolish attempt at bewildering the Lord, Brahmā preferred to resume his transcendental loving service rather than try to enjoy the Lord's presence.
TEXT 40
™aIk{(SNA va{iSNAku(lapauSk(r"jaAeSad"Aiyana,
ºmaAinajaRr"iã"japazAUd"iDava{iŪ"k(Air"na,
oŪ"maRzAAvaRr"h"r" iºaitar"Aºas$a‹augA,
@Ak(lpamaAkR(mahR"na, BagAvaªamastae
śrī-kṛṣṇa vṛṣṇi-kula-puṣkara-joṣa-dāyin
kṣmā-nirjara-dvija-paśūdadhi-vṛddhi-kārin
uddharma-śārvara-hara kṣiti-rākṣasa-dhrug
ā-kalpam ārkam arhan bhagavan namas te
śrī-kṛṣṇa—O Lord Kṛṣṇa; vṛṣṇi-kula—of the Yadu dynasty; puṣkara—to the lotus; joṣa—pleasure; dāyin—O You who bestow; kṣmā—of the earth; nirjara—the demigods; dvija—the brāhmaṇas; paśu—and of the animals; udadhi—of the great oceans; vṛddhi—the increase; kārin—O You who cause; uddharma—of atheistic principles; śārvara—of the darkness; hara—O dispeller; kṣiti—upon the earth; rākṣasa—of the demons; dhruk—the opponent; ā-kalpam—until the end of the universe; ā-arkam—as long as the sun shines; arhan—O supremely worshipable Deity; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaḥ—I offer my respectful obeisances; te—unto You.
My dear Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You bestow happiness upon the lotuslike Vṛṣṇi dynasty and expand the great oceans consisting of the earth, the demigods, the brāhmaṇas and the cows. You dispel the dense darkness of irreligion and oppose the demons who have appeared on this earth. O Supreme Personality of Godhead, as long as this universe exists and as long as the sun shines, I will offer my obeisances unto You.
According to Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Lord Brahmā is here engaged in the ecstasy of nāma-saṅkīrtana, glorifying various holy names of Lord Kṛṣṇa that indicate His variegated pastimes. Lord Kṛṣṇa expertly suppressed the demoniac population of the earth, which became unbearable with the advent of demoniac politicians like Kaṁsa, Jarāsandha and Śiśupāla. Similarly, in modern society there are many so-called God-fearing people who are actually attracted to demoniac existence. Such persons become enlivened with the setting of the sun and go out in the darkness to enjoy life in restaurants, nightclubs, discotheques, hotels and so on, which are all simply meant for illicit sex, intoxication, gambling and meat-eating. Then there are those who openly defy God and His laws, declaring themselves atheists and demons. Both the covert and the overt enemies of the Lord constitute an unholy burden for the earth, and Lord Kṛṣṇa descends to expertly remove this burden.
Here Lord Brahmā indirectly states that Lord Kṛṣṇa should remove Brahmā's own subtle atheism, which had led him to try to exert illusory power over Lord Kṛṣṇa. According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Lord Brahmā, in his shame, felt himself to be like a brahma-rākṣasa from Satyaloka who had come to the earth to disturb Lord Kṛṣṇa and His intimate friends and calves. Brahmā is lamenting that although Lord Kṛṣṇa is most exalted, the Lord of all lords, because He had appeared before Brahmā in such a simple and innocent feature—decorated with a stick, a conchshell, ornaments, red clay, a peacock feather and so on, and sporting with His cowherd boyfriends—Brahmā dared to challenge Him. Concerning Brahmā's prayers, of which this verse is the conclusion, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura states, "May these prayers of Brahmā, which take away all doubts and broadcast all the definitive conclusions of devotional service, become the expert craftsmanship of the foundation of my consciousness."


Song Prayers by Naga-patnis 
TEXT 33
naAgApatnya Ocau:
nyaAyyaAe ih" d"Nx": k{(taik(ilbaSae'ismaMs$a,
tavaAvataAr": Kalainaƒah"Aya
ir"paAe: s$autaAnaAmaipa taulyaā{"ií"r,"
Dats$ae d"maM P(lamaevaAnauzAMs$ana,
nāga-patnya ūcuḥ
nyāyyo hi daṇḍaḥ kṛta-kilbiṣe 'smiṁs
tavāvatāraḥ khala-nigrahāya
ripoḥ sutānām api tulya-dṛṣṭir
dhatse damaṁ phalam evānuśaṁsan
nāga-patnyaḥ ūcuḥ—the wives of the serpent said; nyāyyaḥ—fair and just; hi—indeed; daṇḍaḥ—punishment; kṛta-kilbiṣe—to him who has committed offense; asmin—this person; tava—Your; avatāraḥ—descent into this world; khala—of the envious; nigrahāya—for the subjugation; ripoḥ—to an enemy; sutānām—to Your own sons; api—also; tulya-dṛṣṭiḥ—having equal vision; dhatse—You give; damam—punishment; phalam—the ultimate result; eva—indeed; anuśaṁsam—considering.
The wives of the Kāliya serpent said: The punishment this offender has been subjected to is certainly just. After all, You have incarnated within this world to curb down envious and cruel persons. You are so impartial that You look equally upon Your enemies and Your own sons, for when You impose a punishment on a living being You know it to be for his ultimate benefit.
TEXT 34
@nauƒah"Ae'yaM Bavata: k{(taAe ih" naAe
d"Nx"Ae's$ataAM tae Kalau k(lmaSaApah":
yaÚ"nd"zAUk(tvamamauSya de"ih"na:
‚(AeDaAe'ipa tae'nauƒah" Wva s$ammata:
anugraho 'yaṁ bhavataḥ kṛto hi no
daṇḍo 'satāṁ te khalu kalmaṣāpahaḥ
yad dandaśūkatvam amuṣya dehinaḥ
krodho 'pi te 'nugraha eva sammataḥ
anugrahaḥ—mercy; ayam—this; bhavataḥ—by You; kṛtaḥ—done; hi—indeed; naḥ—to us; daṇḍaḥ—punishment; asatām—of the evil; te—by You; khalu—indeed; kalmaṣa-apahaḥ—the dispelling of their contamination; yat—because; dandaśūkatvam—the condition of appearing as a serpent; amuṣya—of this Kāliya; dehinaḥ—the conditioned soul; krodhaḥ—anger; api—even; te—Your; anugrahaḥ—as mercy; eva—actually; sammataḥ—is accepted.
What You have done here is actually mercy for us, since the punishment You give to the wicked certainly drives away all their contamination. Indeed, because this conditioned soul, our husband, is so sinful that he has assumed the body of a serpent, Your anger toward him is obviously to be understood as Your mercy.
Śrīla Madhvācārya points out in this connection that when a pious person suffers in this world, he realizes, "The punishment the Supreme Lord is meting out to me is actually His causeless mercy." Envious persons, however, even after being punished by the Lord for their purification, continue to envy Him and be resentful, and this attitude is the reason for their continued failure to understand the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 35
tapa: s$autaæaM ik(manaena paUva<
inar"stamaAnaena ca maAnade"na
DamaAeR'Ta vaA s$avaRjanaAnauk(mpayaA
yataAe BavaAMstauSyaita s$avaRjaIva:
tapaḥ sutaptaṁ kim anena pūrvaṁ
nirasta-mānena ca māna-dena
dharmo 'tha vā sarva-janānukampayā
yato bhavāṁs tuṣyati sarva-jīvaḥ
tapaḥ—austerity; su-taptam—properly performed; kim—what; anena—by this Kāliya; pūrvam—in previous lives; nirasta-mānena—being free from false pride; ca—and; māna-dena—giving respect to others; dharmaḥ—religious duty; atha vā—or else; sarva-jana—to all persons; anukampayā—with compassion; yataḥ—by which; bhavān—Your good self; tuṣyati—is satisfied; sarva-jīvaḥ—the source of life for all beings.
Did our husband carefully perform austerities in a previous life, with his mind free of pride and full of respect for others? Is that why You are pleased with him? Or did he in some previous existence carefully execute religious duties with compassion for all living beings, and is that why You, the life of all living beings, are now satisfied with him?
In this regard Śrīla Prabhupāda comments in his Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Chapter Sixteen: "The Nāga-patnīs confirm that one cannot come in contact with Kṛṣṇa without having executed pious activities in devotional service in one's previous lives. As Lord Caitanya advised in His Śikṣāṣṭaka, one has to execute devotional service by humbly chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street and not expecting honor for oneself but offering all kinds of honor to others. The Nāga-patnīs were astonished that, although Kāliya had the body of a serpent as the result of grievous sinful activities, at the same time he was in contact with the Lord to the extent that the Lord's lotus feet were touching his hoods, a blessing that must certainly be the result of extraordinary pious activities. These two contradictory facts astonished them."
TEXT 36
k(syaAnauBaAvaAe'sya na de"va ivaáhe"
tavaAx.~i„are"NAus$par"zAAiDak(Ar":
yaã"AHC$yaA ™aIlaRlanaAcar"ÔapaAe
ivah"Aya k(AmaAna, s$auicarM" Da{ta˜ataA
kasyānubhāvo 'sya na deva vidmahe
tavāṅghri-reṇu-sparaśādhikāraḥ
yad-vāñchayā śrīr lalanācarat tapo
vihāya kāmān su-ciraṁ dhṛta-vratā
kasya—of what; anubhāvaḥ—a result; asya—of the serpent (Kāliya); na—not; deva—my Lord; vidmahe—we know; tava—Your; aṅghri—of the lotus feet; reṇu—of the dust; sparaśa—for touching; adhikāraḥ—qualification; yat—for which; vāñchayā—with the desire; śrīḥ—the goddess of fortune; lalanā—(the topmost) woman; ācarat—performed; tapaḥ—austerity; vihāya—giving up; kāmān—all desires; su-ciram—for a long time; dhṛta—upheld; vratā—her vow.
O Lord, we do not know how the serpent Kāliya has attained this great opportunity of being touched by the dust of Your lotus feet. For this end, the goddess of fortune performed austerities for centuries, giving up all other desires and observing austere vows.
TEXT 37
na naAk(pa{ñM" na ca s$aAvaRBaAEmaM
na paAr"maeñ"YaM na r"s$aAiDapatyama,
na yaAegAis$aŪ"Ir"paunaBaRvaM vaA
vaAHC$inta yatpaAd"r"ja:‘apaªaA:
na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca sārva-bhaumaṁ
na pārameṣṭhyaṁ na rasādhipatyam
na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā
vāñchanti yat-pāda-rajaḥ-prapannāḥ
na—not; nāka-pṛṣṭham—heaven; na ca—nor; sārva-bhaumam—supreme sovereignty on earth; na—not; pārameṣṭhyam—the topmost position of Brahmā; na—not; rasa-adhipatyam—rulership over the lower planets; na—not; yoga-siddhīḥ—the perfections of yogic practice; apunaḥ-bhavam—freedom from rebirth; vā—or; vāñchanti—desire; yat—whose; pāda—of the lotus feet; rajaḥ—the dust; prapannāḥ—those who have attained.
Those who have attained the dust of Your lotus feet never hanker for the kingship of heaven, limitless sovereignty on earth, the position of Brahmā or rulership over the lower planetary systems. They are not interested even in the perfections of yoga or in liberation itself.
TEXT 38
tade"Sa naATaApa āu"r"ApamanyaEs$a,
tamaAejaina: ‚(AeDavazAAe'pyah"IzA:
s$aMs$aAr"ca‚e( ”amata: zAr"Iir"NAAe
yaid"cC$ta: syaAiã"Bava: s$amaºa:
tad eṣa nāthāpa durāpam anyais
tamo-janiḥ krodha-vaśo 'py ahīśaḥ
saṁsāra-cakre bhramataḥ śarīriṇo
yad-icchataḥ syād vibhavaḥ samakṣaḥ
tat—that; eṣaḥ—this Kāliya; nātha—O Lord; āpa—has achieved; durāpam—difficult to achieve; anyaiḥ—by others; tamaḥ-janiḥ—who was born in the mode of ignorance; krodha-vaśaḥ—who was under the sway of anger; api—even; ahi-īśaḥ—the king of serpents; saṁsāra-cakre—within the cycle of material existence; bhramataḥ—wandering; śarīriṇaḥ—for the embodied living entity; yat—by which (dust of Your lotus feet); icchataḥ—who has material desires; syāt—manifests; vibhavaḥ—all opulences; samakṣaḥ—before his eyes.
O Lord, although this Kāliya, the king of the serpents, has taken birth in the mode of ignorance and is controlled by anger, he has achieved that which is difficult for others to achieve. Embodied souls, who are full of desires and are thus wandering in the cycle of birth and death, can have all benedictions manifested before their eyes simply by receiving the dust of Your lotus feet.
It is very rare for a conditioned soul to free himself from the contamination of illusion and thus become established in perfect consciousness of the Absolute Truth. And yet this benediction was achieved by the serpent Kāliya because the Lord personally danced upon the serpent's hoods with His lotus feet. Although we conditioned souls may not receive the mercy of having the Lord dance on our head, we can receive the dust of the lotus feet of the Absolute through the Lord's representative, the bona fide spiritual master, and thus go back home, back to Godhead, forever freed from the misery and ignorance of the mundane universe.
TEXT 39
namastauByaM BagAvatae
pauś&SaAya mah"Atmanae
BaUtaAvaAs$aAya BaUtaAya
par"Aya par"maAtmanae
namas tubhyaṁ bhagavate
puruṣāya mahātmane
bhūtāvāsāya bhūtāya
parāya paramātmane
namaḥ—obeisances; tubhyam—to You; bhagavate—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruṣāya—who are present within as the Supersoul; mahā-ātmane—who are all-pervasive; bhūta-āvāsāya—who are the shelter of the material elements (beginning with the ethereal sky); bhūtāya—who exist even prior to the creation; parāya—to the supreme cause; parama-ātmane—who are beyond all material cause.
We offer our obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although present in the hearts of all living beings as the Supersoul, You are all-pervasive. Although the original shelter of all created material elements, You exist prior to their creation. And although the cause of everything, You are transcendental to all material cause and effect, being the Supreme Soul.
The beautiful Sanskrit poetry of this verse should be chanted out loud for the transcendental pleasure of the reciter and the hearer.
TEXT 40
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnanaIDayae
“aṭNAe'nantazA·(yae
@gAuNAAyaAivak(Ar"Aya
namastae ‘aAk{(taAya ca
jñāna-vijñāna-nīdhaye
brahmaṇe 'nanta-śaktaye
aguṇāyāvikārāya
namas te prākṛtāya ca
jñāna—of consciousness; vijñāna—and spiritual potency; nidhaye—to the ocean; brahmaṇe—to the Absolute Truth; ananta-śaktaye—whose potencies are unlimited; aguṇāya—to Him who is never affected by the qualities of matter; avikārāya—who does not undergo any material transformation; namaḥ—obeisances; te—unto You; prākṛtāya—to the prime mover of material nature; ca—and.
Obeisances unto You, the Absolute Truth, who are the reservoir of all transcendental consciousness and potency and the possessor of unlimited energies. Although completely free of material qualities and transformations, You are the prime mover of material nature.
Those who consider themselves intellectual, philosophic or rational should carefully note here that the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the ocean of all knowledge and consciousness. Thus surrendering unto the Supreme Lord does not entail giving up the method of rationally comprehending reality. Rather, one merges into the ocean of rational, logical comprehension. The Supreme Lord is the perfection of all sciences and all forms of knowledge, and only envious and trivial minds would deny this obvious fact.
TEXT 41
k(AlaAya k(AlanaABaAya
k(AlaAvayavas$aAiºaNAe
ivaṅAya taāu"pa‰"í)e"
tatk(‡aeR ivaṅhe"tavae
kālāya kāla-nābhāya
kālāvayava-sākṣiṇe
viśvāya tad-upadraṣṭre
tat-kartre viśva-hetave
kālāya—unto time; kāla-nābhāya—unto Him who is the shelter of time; kāla-avayava—of the various phases of time; sākṣiṇe—to the witness; viśvāya—to the form of the universe; tad-upadraṣṭre—to the observer of it; tat-kartre—to the creator of it; viśva—of the universe; hetave—to the total cause.
Obeisances unto You, who are time itself, the shelter of time and the witness of time in all its phases. You are the universe, and also its separate observer. You are its creator, and also the totality of all its causes.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearing in different incarnations, can never be limited by time, since He is time itself, the shelter of time, and the witness of time in all its phases.
TEXTS 42-43
BaUtamaA‡aein‰"ya‘aANA-
manaAebauŪ"YaAzAyaAtmanae
i‡agAuNAenaAiBamaAnaena
gAUX#svaAtmaAnauBaUtayae
namaAe'nantaAya s$aUºmaAya
kU(q%sTaAya ivapaiêtae
naAnaAvaAd"Anaur"AeDaAya
vaAcyavaAcak(zA·(yae
bhūta-mātrendriya-prāṇa-
mano-buddhy-āśayātmane
tri-guṇenābhimānena
gūḍha-svātmānubhūtaye
namo 'nantāya sūkṣmāya
kūṭa-sthāya vipaścite
nānā-vādānurodhāya
vācya-vācaka-śaktaye
bhūta—of the physical elements; mātra—the subtle basis of perception; indriya—the senses; prāṇa—the vital air of life; manaḥ—the mind; buddhi—the intelligence; āśaya—and of material consciousness; ātmane—to the ultimate soul; tri-guṇena—by the three modes of material nature; abhimānena—by false identification; gūḍha—who causes to become covered over; sva—one's own; ātma—of the self; anubhūtaye—perception; namaḥ—obeisances; anantāya—to the unlimited Lord; sūkṣmāya—to the supremely subtle; kūṭa-sthāya—who is fixed in the center; vipaścite—to the omniscient one; nānā—various; vāda—philosophies; anurodhāya—who sanctions; vācya—of expressed ideas; vācaka—and expressing words; śaktaye—who possesses the potencies.
Obeisances unto You, who are the ultimate soul of the physical elements, of the subtle basis of perception, of the senses, of the vital air of life, and of the mind, intelligence and consciousness. By Your arrangement the infinitesimal spirit souls falsely identify with the three modes of material nature, and their perception of their own true self thus becomes clouded. We offer our obeisances unto You, the unlimited Supreme Lord, the supremely subtle one, the omniscient Personality of Godhead, who are always fixed in unchanging transcendence, who sanction the opposing views of different philosophies, and who are the power upholding expressed ideas and the words that express them.
TEXT 44
nama: ‘amaANAmaUlaAya
k(vayae zAAṣyaAenayae
‘ava{ÔaAya inava{ÔaAya
inagAmaAya namaAe nama:
namaḥ pramāṇa-mūlāya
kavaye śāstra-yonaye
pravṛttāya nivṛttāya
nigamāya namo namaḥ
namaḥ—obeisances; pramāṇa—of authoritative evidence; mūlāya—to the basis; kavaye—to the author; śāstra—of the revealed scripture; yonaye—to the source; pravṛttāya—which encourages sense gratification; nivṛttāya—which encourages renunciation; nigamāya—to Him who is the origin of both kinds of scripture; namaḥ namaḥ—repeated obeisances.
We offer our obeisances again and again to You, who are the basis of all authoritative evidence, who are the author and ultimate source of the revealed scriptures, and who have manifested Yourself in those Vedic literatures encouraging sense gratification as well as in those encouraging renunciation of the material world.
If we did not have the powers of perception and cognition, evidence could not be transmitted, and if we had no tendency to believe in particular modes of evidence, persuasion could not take place. All of these processes—perception, cognition, persuasion and transmission—take place through the various potencies of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa is Himself the greatest scholar and intellectual being. He manifests the transcendental scriptures within the hearts of great devotees like Brahmā and Nārada, and in addition He incarnates as Vedavyāsa, the compiler of all Vedic knowledge. In multifarious ways the Lord generates a variety of religious scriptures, which gradually bring the conditioned souls through the various phases of re-entry into the kingdom of God.
TEXT 45
nama: k{(SNAAya r"AmaAya
vas$aude"vas$autaAya ca
‘aâu°aAyaAinaś&Ū"Aya
s$aAtvataAM patayae nama:
namaḥ kṛṣṇāya rāmāya
vasudeva-sutāya ca
pradyumnāyāniruddhāya
sātvatāṁ pataye namaḥ
namaḥ—obeisances; kṛṣṇāya—to Lord Kṛṣṇa; rāmāya—to Lord Rāma; vasudeva-sutāya—the son of Vasudeva; ca—and; pradyumnāya—to Lord Pradyumna; aniruddhāya—to Lord Aniruddha; sātvatām—of the devotees; pataye—to the Lord; namaḥ—obeisances.
We offer our obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Rāma, the sons of Vasudeva, and to Lord Pradyumna and Lord Aniruddha. We offer our respectful obeisances unto the master of all the saintly devotees of Viṣṇu.
TEXT 46
namaAe gAuNA‘ad"IpaAya
gAuNAAtmacC$Ad"naAya ca
gAuNAva{ÔyaupalaºyaAya
gAuNA‰"í)e" svas$aMivade"
namo guṇa-pradīpāya
guṇātma-cchādanāya ca
guṇa-vṛtty-upalakṣyāya
guṇa-draṣṭre sva-saṁvide
namaḥ—obeisances; guṇa-pradīpāya—to Him who manifests various qualities; guṇa—by the material modes; ātma—Himself; chādanāya—who disguises; ca—and; guṇa—of the modes; vṛtti—by the functioning; upalakṣyāya—who can be ascertained; guṇa-draṣṭre—to the separate witness of the material modes; sva—to His own devotees; saṁvide—who is known.
Obeisances to You, O Lord, who manifest varieties of material and spiritual qualities. You disguise Yourself with the material qualities, and yet the functioning of those same material qualities ultimately reveals Your existence. You stand apart from the material qualities as a witness and can be fully known only by Your devotees.
The word guṇa conveys various meanings: the three basic qualities of material nature, i.e., goodness, passion and ignorance; excellent qualities one manifests because of piety and spiritual achievement; or the internal senses, such as the mind and intelligence. The word pradīpāya means "unto Him who manifests or illumines." Thus here the Nāga-patnīs are addressing the Supreme Lord as "He who manifests all material and spiritual qualities and who causes the living entities to be conscious." One can see the Lord by going beyond the screen of material nature, and therefore He is called guṇātma-cchādanāya. If one methodically and intelligently studies the functioning of the material qualities, he will ultimately conclude that there is a Supreme Personality of Godhead and that He exhibits His illusory potency to bewilder those who do not surrender unto Him.
The Lord is never affected by the modes of nature, being their witness, and thus He is called guṇa-draṣṭre. The word sva indicates "one's own," and thus sva-saṁvide means that Lord Kṛṣṇa can be known only by His own people, the devotees, and also that ultimately only the Lord can know Himself perfectly. Therefore we should take Lord Kṛṣṇa's instructions in the Bhagavad-gītā and immediately come to the right conclusion: full surrender to the Lord's lotus feet. Thus we should humbly glorify the Lord, following the example of the Nāga-patnīs.
TEXT 47
@vyaAk{(taivah"Ar"Aya
s$avaRvyaAk{(tais$aŪ"yae
ô$SaIke(zA namastae'stau
maunayae maAEnazAIilanae
avyākṛta-vihārāya
sarva-vyākṛta-siddhaye
hṛṣīkeśa namas te 'stu
munaye mauna-śīline
avyākṛta-vihārāya—to Him whose glories are unfathomable; sarva-vyākṛta—the creation and manifestation of all things; siddhaye—to Him who can be understood as existent on the basis of; hṛṣīka-īśa—O motivator of the senses; namaḥ—obeisances; te—unto You; astu—let there be; munaye—to the silent; mauna-śīline—to Him who acts in silence.
O Lord Hṛṣīkeśa, master of the senses, please let us offer our obeisances unto You, whose pastimes are inconceivably glorious. Your existence can be inferred from the necessity for a creator and revealer of all cosmic manifestations. But although Your devotees can understand You in this way, to the nondevotees You remain silent, absorbed in self-satisfaction.
TEXT 48
par"Avar"gAitaÁaAya
s$avaARDyaºaAya tae nama:
@ivaṅAya ca ivaṅAya
taÛ"í)e"'sya ca he"tavae
parāvara-gati-jñāya
sarvādhyakṣāya te namaḥ
aviśvāya ca viśvāya
tad-draṣṭre 'sya ca hetave
para-avara—of all things, both superior and inferior; gati—the destinations; jñāya—to Him who knows; sarva—of all things; adhyakṣāya—to the regulator; te—You; namaḥ—our obeisances; aviśvāya—to Him who is distinct from the universe; ca—and; viśvāya—in whom the illusion of material creation manifests; tat-draṣṭre—to the witness of such illusion; asya—of this world; ca—and; hetave—to the root cause.
Obeisances unto You, who know the destination of all things, superior and inferior, and who are the presiding regulator of all that be. You are distinct from the universal creation, and yet You are the basis upon which the illusion of material creation evolves, and also the witness of this illusion. Indeed, You are the root cause of the entire world.
The words para and avara indicate superior, subtle elements and inferior, gross ones. The words also indicate superior personalities—devotees of the Lord—and inferior personalities, who are unaware of the glories of God. Lord Kṛṣṇa knows the destiny of all superior and inferior entities, animate and inanimate, and as the Supreme Absolute Truth He remains in His unique position above everything, as indicated by the word sarvādhyakṣāya.
TEXT 49
tvaM ÷sya janmaisTaitas$aMyamaAna, ivaBaAe
gAuNAEr"naIh"Ae'k{(tak(AlazAi·(Da{k,(
taÔatsvaBaAvaAna, ‘aitabaAeDayana, s$ata:
s$amaIºayaAmaAeGaivah"Ar" wRh"s$ae
tvaṁ hy asya janma-sthiti-saṁyamān vibho
guṇair anīho 'kṛta-kāla-śakti-dhṛk
tat-tat-svabhāvān pratibodhayan sataḥ
samīkṣayāmogha-vihāra īhase
tvam—You; hi—indeed; asya—of this universe; janma-sthiti-saṁyamān—the creation, maintenance and destruction; vibho—O almighty Lord; guṇaiḥ—by the modes of nature; anīhaḥ—although uninvolved in any material endeavor; akṛta—beginningless; kāla-śakti—of the potency of time; dhṛk—the holder; tat-tat—of each of the modes; sva-bhāvān—the distinctive characteristics; pratibodhayan—awakening; sataḥ—which are already present in their dormant state; samīkṣayā—by Your glance; amogha-vihāraḥ—whose playful activities are impeccable; īhase—You act.
O almighty Lord, although You have no reason to become involved in material activity, still You act through Your eternal potency of time to arrange for the creation, maintenance and destruction of this universe. You do this by awakening the distinct functions of each of the modes of nature, which before the creation lie dormant. Simply by Your glance You perfectly execute all these activities of cosmic control in a sporting mood.
Sceptics may question why the Supreme Lord has created the material world, which is full of birth, maintenance and death. Here the Nāga-patnīs point out that the Lord's pastimes are amogha, beyond any discrepancy. Śrī Kṛṣṇa actually desires that all conditioned souls live with Him in His eternal kingdom, but those forgetful souls who are inimical to their loving relationship with God must go to the material world and be subjected to the conditions of time. The fortunate conditioned souls are startled into remembrance of their actual position as loving servants of the Lord, and from within the heart the Lord then encourages them to come back home, back to Godhead, where time is conspicuous by its absence and where eternal, blissful existence supersedes the dramatic but disturbing functions of cosmic creation and annihilation.
TEXT 50
tasyaEva tae'maUstanavaiṣlaAefyaAM
zAAntaA @zAAntaA ota maUX#yaAenaya:
zAAntaA: i‘ayaAstae ÷DaunaAivatauM s$ataAM
sTaAtauê tae DamaRpar"Ips$ayaeh"ta:
tasyaiva te 'mūs tanavas tri-lokyāṁ
śāntā aśāntā uta mūḍha-yonayaḥ
śāntāḥ priyās te hy adhunāvituṁ satāṁ
sthātuś ca te dharma-parīpsayehataḥ
tasya—of Him; eva—indeed; te—of You; amūḥ—these; tanavaḥ—material bodies; tri-lokyām—throughout the three worlds; śāntāḥ—peaceful (in the mode of goodness); aśāntāḥ—not peaceful (in the mode of passion); uta—and also; mūḍha-yonayaḥ—born in ignorant species; śāntāḥ—the peaceful persons in the mode of goodness; priyāḥ—dear; te—to You; hi—certainly; adhunā—now; avitum—to protect; satām—of the saintly devotees; sthātuḥ—who are present; ca—and; te—of You; dharma—their principles of religion; parīpsayā—with the desire of maintaining; īhataḥ—who is acting.
Therefore all material bodies throughout the three worlds—those that are peaceful, in the mode of goodness; those that are agitated, in the mode of passion; and those that are foolish, in the mode of ignorance—all are Your creations. Still, those living entities whose bodies are in the mode of goodness are especially dear to You, and it is to maintain them and protect their religious principles that You are now present on the earth.
TEXT 51
@par"ADa: s$ak{(ṁ"‡aAR
s$aAeX#vya: sva‘ajaAk{(ta:
ºantaumahR"is$a zAAntaAtmana,
maUX#sya tvaAmajaAnata:
aparādhaḥ sakṛd bhartrā
soḍhavyaḥ sva-prajā-kṛtaḥ
kṣantum arhasi śāntātman
mūḍhasya tvām ajānataḥ
aparādhaḥ—the offense; sakṛt—just once; bhartrā—by the master; soḍhavyaḥ—should be tolerated; sva-prajā—by his own subject; kṛtaḥ—committed; kṣantum—to tolerate; arhasi—it is befitting for You; śānta-ātman—O You who are always peaceful; mūḍhasya—of the foolish one; tvām—You; ajānataḥ—who does not understand.
At least once, a master should tolerate an offense committed by his child or subject. O supreme peaceful Soul, You should therefore forgive our foolish husband, who did not understand who You are.
Because of their extreme anxiety, in this verse Kāliya's wives mention the same idea twice: that the Supreme Lord should kindly forgive their foolish husband. The Supreme Lord is śāntātmā, the supreme peaceful Soul, and therefore the Nāga-patnīs suggest it would be proper for Him to overlook, at least this once, the great offense committed by the ignorant Kāliya.
TEXT 52
@naugA{õ"ISva BagAvana,
‘aANAAMstyajaita paªagA:
ṣINAAM na: s$aADauzAAecyaAnaAM
paita: ‘aANA: ‘ad"IyataAma,
anugṛhṇīṣva bhagavan
prāṇāṁs tyajati pannagaḥ
strīṇāṁ naḥ sādhu-śocyānāṁ
patiḥ prāṇaḥ pradīyatām
anugṛhṇīṣva—please show mercy; bhagavan—O Supreme Lord; prāṇān—his life airs; tyajati—is giving up; pannagaḥ—the serpent; strīṇām—for women; naḥ—us; sādhu-śocyānām—who are to be pitied by saintly personalities; patiḥ—the husband; prāṇaḥ—life itself; pradīyatām—should be given back.
O Supreme Lord, please be merciful. It is proper for the saintly to feel compassion for women like us. This serpent is about to give up his life. Please give us back our husband, who is our life and soul.
TEXT 53
ivaDaeih" tae ik(Æḷr"INAAma,
@nauñe"yaM tavaAÁayaA
yacC)$Ū"yaAnauitañ"na, vaE
maucyatae s$avaRtaAe BayaAta,
vidhehi te kiṅkarīṇām
anuṣṭheyaṁ tavājñayā
yac-chraddhayānutiṣṭhan vai
mucyate sarvato bhayāt
vidhehi—please order; te—Your; kiṅkarīṇām—by the maidservants; anuṣṭheyam—what should be done; tava—Your; ājñayā—by the command; yat—which; śraddhayā—with faith; anutiṣṭhan—executing; vai—certainly; mucyate—one will become freed; sarvataḥ—from all; bhayāt—fear.
Now please tell us, Your maidservants, what we should do. Certainly anyone who faithfully executes Your order is automatically freed from all fear.
The surrender of Kāliya's wives was now complete, and Lord Kṛṣṇa immediately gave them His mercy, as described in the following verses.

Song Prayers by Kaliya Naga 
TEXT 56
k(Ailaya ovaAca
vayaM KalaA: s$ah"AetpaÔyaA
tamas$aA d"IGaRmanyava:
svaBaAvaAe āu"styajaAe naATa
laAek(AnaAM yad"s$aØ"h":
kāliya uvāca
vayaṁ khalāḥ sahotpattyā
tamasā dīrgha-manyavaḥ
svabhāvo dustyajo nātha
lokānāṁ yad asad-grahaḥ
kāliyaḥ uvāca—Kāliya said; vayam—we; khalāḥ—envious; saha utpattyā—by our very birth; tāmasāḥ—of ignorant nature; dīrgha-manyavaḥ—constantly angry; svabhāvaḥ—one's material nature; dustyajaḥ—is very difficult to give up; nātha—O Lord; lokānām—for ordinary persons; yat—because of which; asat—of the unreal and impure; grahaḥ—the acceptance.
The serpent Kāliya said: Our very birth as a snake has made us envious, ignorant and constantly angry. O my Lord, it is so difficult for people to give up their conditioned nature, by which they identify with that which is unreal.
Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī points out that because of his wretched condition, Kāliya was unable to compose original prayers to the Lord, and thus he paraphrased some of the prayers offered by his wives. The word asad-graha indicates that a conditioned soul seizes upon impermanent and impure things such as his own body, the bodies of others, and other countless varieties of material sense objects. The ultimate result of such material attachment is frustration, disappointment and anguish—a fact that has now become crystal clear to the poor serpent Kāliya.
TEXT 57
tvayaA s$a{í"imadM" ivaṅM
DaAtagAuRNAivas$ajaRnama,
naAnaAsvaBaAvavaIyaAE=jaAe-
yaAeinabaIjaAzAyaAk{(ita
tvayā sṛṣṭam idaṁ viśvaṁ
dhātar guṇa-visarjanam
nānā-svabhāva-vīryaujo-
yoni-bījāśayākṛti
tvayā—by You; sṛṣṭam—created; idam—this; viśvam—universe; dhātaḥ—O supreme provider; guṇa—of the material modes; visarjanam—the variegated creation; nānā—various; sva-bhāva—personal natures; vīrya—varieties of sensory strength; ojaḥ—and physical strength; yoni—wombs; bīja—seeds; āśaya—mentalities; ākṛti—and forms.
O supreme creator, it is You who generate this universe, composed of the variegated arrangement of the material modes, and in the process You manifest various kinds of personalities and species, varieties of sensory and physical strength, and varieties of mothers and fathers with variegated mentalities and forms.
Commenting on this verse, Śrīla Madhvācārya has quoted the Nārada Purāṇa as follows: "From Hiraṇyagarbha, Brahmā, comes the second creation of this universe, but the universe is primarily created by Viṣṇu Himself. Viṣṇu is thus the primary creator, and four-headed Brahmā is merely the secondary creator."
TEXT 58
vayaM ca ta‡a BagAvana,
s$apaAR jaAtyauś&manyava:
k(TaM tyajaAmastvanmaAyaAM
āu"styajaAM maAeih"taA: svayama,
vayaṁ ca tatra bhagavan
sarpā jāty-uru-manyavaḥ
kathaṁ tyajāmas tvan-māyāṁ
dustyajāṁ mohitāḥ svayam
vayam—we; ca—and; tatra—within that material creation; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarpāḥ—serpents; jāti—by species; uru-manyavaḥ—too much absorbed in anger; katham—how; tyajāmaḥ—we can give up; tvat-māyām—Your illusory potency; dustyajām—which is impossible to give up; mohitāḥ—bewildered; svayam—on our own.
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, among all the species within Your material creation, we serpents are by nature always enraged. Being thus deluded by Your illusory energy, which is very difficult to give up, how can we possibly give it up on our own?
Kāliya is here indirectly begging for the Lord's mercy, realizing that on his own he can never become free from illusion and suffering. Only by surrendering to the Lord and obtaining His mercy can one be released from the painful conditions of material life.
TEXT 59
BavaAna, ih" k(Ar"NAM ta‡a
s$avaRÁaAe jagAd"Iṅr":
@nauƒahM" inaƒahM" vaA
manyas$ae taiã"Daeih" na:
bhavān hi kāraṇaṁ tatra
sarva-jño jagad-īśvaraḥ
anugrahaṁ nigrahaṁ vā
manyase tad vidhehi naḥ
bhavān—Your good self; hi—certainly; kāraṇam—the cause; tatra—in that matter (the removal of illusion); sarva-jñaḥ—the knower of everything; jagat-īśvaraḥ—the supreme controller of the universe; anugraham—favor; nigraham—punishment; vā—or; manyase—(whatever) You consider; tat—that; vidhehi—arrange; naḥ—for us.
O Lord, since You are the omniscient Lord of the universe, You are the actual cause of freedom from illusion. Please arrange for us whatever You consider proper, whether it be mercy or punishment.


Song Prayers bt Cowherd Boys to Krsna
TEXT 9
k{(SNA k{(SNA mah"AvaIr"
he" r"AmaAmaAeGa iva‚(ma
d"AvaAi¢anaA d"÷maAnaAna,
‘apaªaAMṣAtaumahR"Ta:
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa mahā-vīra
he rāmāmogha vikrama
dāvāgninā dahyamānān
prapannāṁs trātum arhathaḥ
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa; mahā-vīra—O most powerful one; he rāma—O Rāma; amogha-vikrama—You whose prowess is never thwarted; dāva-agninā—by the forest fire; dahyamānān—who are being burned; prapannān—who are surrendered; trātum arhathaḥ—please save.
[The cowherd boys said:] O Kṛṣṇa ! Kṛṣṇa! Most powerful one ! O Rāma! You whose prowess never fails! Please save Your devotees, who are about to be burned by this forest fire and have come to take shelter of You!
TEXT 10
naUnaM tvaḶ"AnDavaA: k{(SNA
na caAhR"ntyavas$aAid"tauma,
vayaM ih" s$avaRDamaRÁa
tvaªaATaAstvatpar"AyaNAA:
nūnaṁ tvad-bāndhavāḥ kṛṣṇa
na cārhanty avasāditum
vayaṁ hi sarva-dharma-jña
tvan-nāthās tvat-parāyaṇāḥ
nūnam—certainly; tvat—Your; bāndhavāḥ—friends; kṛṣṇa—our dear Śrī Kṛṣṇa; na—never; ca—and; arhanti—deserve; avasāditum—to suffer destruction; vayam—we; hi—moreover; sarva-dharma-jña—O perfect knower of the nature of all beings; tvat-nāthāḥ—having You as our Lord; tvat-parāyaṇāḥ—devoted to You.
Kṛṣṇa! Certainly Your own friends shouldn't be destroyed. O knower of the nature of all things, we have accepted You as our Lord, and we are souls surrendered unto You!

Song Venu Geet
TEXT 7
¢âaIgAAepya Ocau:
@¨¬aNvataAM P(laimadM" na parM" ivad"Ama:
s$aKya: pazAUnanaivavaezAyataAevaRyasyaE:
vaf¢ÔaM .ajaezAs$autayaAer"nauvaeNAujauiM"
yaEvaAR inapaItamanaur"©©(k(q%A¨¬amaAe¨¬ama
śrī-gopya ūcuḥ
akṣaṇvatāṁ phalam idaṁ na paraṁ vidāmaḥ
sakhyaḥ paśūn anuviveśayator vayasyaiḥ
vaktraṁ vrajeśa-sutayor anuveṇu-juṣṭaṁ
yair vā nipītam anurakta-kaṭākṣa-mokṣam
śrī-gopyaḥ ūcuḥ—the gopīs said; akṣaṇvatām—of those who have eyes; phalam—the fruit; idam—this; na—not; param—other; vidāmaḥ—we know; sakhyaḥ—O friends; paśūn—the cows; anuviveśayatoḥ—causing to enter one forest after another; vayasyaiḥ—with Their friends of the same age; vaktram—the faces; vraja-īśa—of Mahārāja Nanda; sutayoḥ—of the two sons; anu-veṇu-juṣṭam—possessed of flutes; yaiḥ—by which; vā—or; nipītam—imbibed; anurakta—loving; kaṭa-akṣa—glances; mokṣam—giving off.
The cowherd girls said: O friends, those eyes that see the beautiful faces of the sons of Mahārāja Nanda are certainly fortunate. As these two sons enter the forest, surrounded by Their friends, driving the cows before Them, They hold Their flutes to Their mouths and glance lovingly upon the residents of Vṛndāvana. For those who have eyes, we think there is no greater object of vision.
This translation is quoted from Śrīla Prabhupāda's Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.155).
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has commented as follows: "The gopīs meant to say, 'O friends, if you simply remain in the shackles of family life in this material world, what will you ever get to see? The creator has granted us these eyes, so let us see the most wonderful thing there is to see, Kṛṣṇa.' "
The gopīs were aware that their mothers or other elder persons might hear their romantic words and disapprove, and thus they said, akṣaṇvatāṁ phalam: "To see Kṛṣṇa is the goal for all persons and not simply ourselves." In other words, the gopīs indicated that since Kṛṣṇa is the supreme object of love for everyone, why couldn't they also love Him in spiritual ecstasy?
According to the ācāryas, a different gopī spoke this and each of the following verses (through Text 19).
TEXT 8
caUta‘avaAlabahR"stabak(AetpalaAbja
maAlaAnaupa{·(pair"DaAnaivaica‡avaezAAE
maDyae ivare"jataur"laM pazAupaAlagAAeñ"YaAM
r"Ṇeḷ yaTaA naq%var"AE ¸(ca gAAyamaAnaAE
cūta-pravāla-barha-stabakotpalābja-
mālānupṛkta-paridhāna-vicitra-veśau
madhye virejatur alaṁ paśu-pāla-goṣṭhyāṁ
raṅge yathā naṭa-varau kvaca gāyamānau
cūta—of a mango tree; pravāla—with young sprouts; barha—peacock feathers; stabaka—bunches of flowers; utpala—lotuses; abja—and lilies; mālā—with garlands; anupṛkta—touched; paridhāna—Their garments; vicitra—with great variety; veśau—being dressed; madhye—in the midst; virejatuḥ—the two of Them shone forth; alam—magnificently; paśu-pāla—of the cowherd boys; goṣṭhyām—within the assembly; raṅge—upon a stage; yathā—just as; naṭa-varau—two most excellent dancers; kvaca—sometimes; gāyamānau—Themselves singing.
Dressed in a charming variety of garments, upon which Their garlands rest, and decorating Themselves with peacock feathers, lotuses, lilies, newly grown mango sprouts and clusters of flower buds, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma shine forth magnificently among the assembly of cowherd boys. They look just like the best of dancers appearing on a dramatic stage, and sometimes They sing.
The gopīs continue singing their ecstatic song as they remember the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa. The gopīs wanted to go to the forest where Kṛṣṇa was performing His pastimes and, while remaining concealed, peer through the leaves of the creepers and see the wonder of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma dancing and singing with Their boyfriends. This was their desire, but because they could not go, they sang this song in ecstatic love.
TEXT 9
gAAepya: ik(maAcar"d"yaM ku(zAlaM sma vaeNAur,"
d"AmaAed"r"ADar"s$auDaAmaipa gAAeipak(AnaAma,
BauṜeḷ svayaM yad"vaizAí"r"s$aM œ"id"nyaAe
ô$SyaÔvacaAe'™au maumaucaustar"vaAe yaTaAyaR:
gopyaḥ kim ācarad ayaṁ kuśalaṁ sma veṇur
dāmodarādhara-sudhām api gopikānām
bhuṅkte svayaṁ yad avaśiṣṭa-rasaṁ hradinyo
hṛṣyat-tvaco 'śru mumucus taravo yathāryāḥ
gopyaḥ—O gopīs; kim—what; ācarat—performed; ayam—this; kuśalam—auspicious activities; sma—certainly; veṇuḥ—the flute; dāmodara—of Kṛṣṇa; adhara-sudhām—the nectar of the lips; api—even; gopikānām—which is owed to the gopīs; bhuṅkte—enjoys; svayam—independently; yat—from which; avaśiṣṭa—remaining; rasam—the taste only; hradinyaḥ—the rivers; hṛṣyat—feeling jubilant; tvacaḥ—whose bodies; aśru—tears; mumucuḥ—shed; taravaḥ—the trees; yathā—exactly like; āryāḥ—old forefathers.
My dear gopīs, what auspicious activities must the flute have performed to enjoy the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips independently and leave only a taste for us gopīs, for whom that nectar is actually meant! The forefathers of the flute, the bamboo trees, shed tears of pleasure. His mother, the river on whose bank the bamboo was born, feels jubilation, and therefore her blooming lotus flowers are standing like hair on her body.
This translation is quoted from Śrīla Prabhupāda's Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya 16.140).
In the guise of releasing flowing sap, the bamboo trees are actually crying tears of ecstasy upon seeing their child become an exalted devotee-flute of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Sanātana Gosvāmī gives an alternate explanation: The trees are crying because they are unhappy at not being able to play with Kṛṣṇa themselves. One may object that the trees in Vṛndāvana should not lament for that which is impossible for them to obtain, just as a beggar certainly doesn't lament because he is forbidden to meet the king. But the trees are actually just like intelligent persons who suffer when they cannot obtain the goal of life. Thus the trees are crying because they cannot get the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips.
TEXT 10
va{nd"AvanaM s$aiKa BauvaAe ivatanaAeita k(L[%itaM
yaÚe"vak(Ls$autapad"AmbaujalabDalaiºma
gAAeivand"vaeNAumanau maÔamayaUr"na{tyaM 
‘aeºyaAi‰"s$aAnvavar"taAnyas$amastas$aÔvama,
vṛndāvanaṁ sakhi bhuvo vitanoti kīrtiṁ
yad devakī-suta-padāmbuja-labdha-lakṣmi
govinda-veṇum anu matta-mayūra-nṛtyaṁ 
prekṣyādri-sānv-avaratānya-samasta-sattvam
vṛndāvanam—Vṛndāvana; sakhi—O friend; bhuvaḥ—of the earth; vitanoti—spreads; kīrtim—the glories; yat—because; devakī-suta—of the son of Devakī; pada-ambuja—from the lotus feet; labdha—received; lakṣmi—the treasure; govinda-veṇum—the flute of Govinda; anu—upon hearing; matta—maddened; mayūra—of the peacocks; nṛtyam—in which there is the dancing; prekṣya—seeing; adri-sānu—upon the peaks of the hills; avarata—stunned; anya—other; samasta—all; sattvam—creatures.
O friend, Vṛndāvana is spreading the glory of the earth, having obtained the treasure of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī. The peacocks dance madly when they hear Govinda's flute, and when other creatures see them from the hilltops, they all become stunned.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī explains that because activities such as those described in this verse do not occur in any other world, the earth is unique. In fact, the earth's glories are being spread by wonderful Vṛndāvana because it is the place of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes.
The name Devakī also refers to Mother Yaśodā, as stated in the Bṛhad-viṣṇu Purāṇa:
dve nāmnī nanda-bhāryāyā
yaśodā devakīti ca
ataḥ sakhyam abhūt tasya
devakyā śauri-jāyayā
"The wife of Nanda had two names, Yaśodā and also Devakī. Therefore it was natural that she [the wife of Nanda] develop friendship with Devakī, the wife of Śauri [Vasudeva]."
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains kṛṣṇa-līlā as follows: "In Vṛndāvana, the peacocks request Kṛṣṇa, 'Govinda, please make us dance.' Thus Kṛṣṇa plays His flute, and they surround Him in a circle and dance in time with the rhythm of His melody. And while standing in the midst of their dancing, He also sings and dances. Then those peacocks, who are fully satisfied with His musical performance, out of gratitude offer for His pleasure their own divine feathers. In the usual manner of musical performers, Kṛṣṇa gladly accepts these presentations and places a feather upon the turban atop His head. Gentle animals such as deer and doves greatly relish the transcendental entertainment presented by Kṛṣṇa, and to get a good view they flock to the peaks of hills. Then, as they watch the breathtaking program, they become stunned in ecstasy."
Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī comments that because in Vṛndāvana Kṛṣṇa goes barefoot and can thus directly mark the earth with the symbols of His lotus feet, that transcendental land is even more glorious than Vaikuṇṭha, where Viṣṇu wears slippers.
TEXT 11
DanyaA: sma maUX#gAtayaAe'ipa h"ir"Nya WtaA
yaA nand"nand"namaupaAÔaivaica‡avaezAma,
@Ak(NyaR vaeNAur"iNAtaM s$ah"k{(SNAs$aAr"A:
paUjaAM d"DauivaRr"icataAM ‘aNAyaAvalaAekE(:
dhanyāḥ sma mūḍha-gatayo 'pi hariṇya etā
yā nanda-nandanam upātta-vicitra-veśam
ākarṇya veṇu-raṇitaṁ saha-kṛṣṇa-sārāḥ
pūjāṁ dadhur viracitāṁ praṇayāvalokaiḥ
dhanyāḥ—fortunate, blessed; sma—certainly; mūḍha-gatayaḥ—having taken birth in an ignorant animal species; api—although; hariṇyaḥ—she-deer; etāḥ—these; yāḥ—who; nanda-nandanam—the son of Mahārāja Nanda; upātta-vicitra-veśam—dressed very attractively; ākarṇya—hearing; veṇu-raṇitam—the sound of His flute; saha-kṛṣṇa-sārāḥ—accompanied by the black deer (their husbands); pūjām dadhuḥ—they worshiped; viracitām—performed; praṇaya-avalokaiḥ—by their affectionate glances.
Blessed are all these foolish deer because they have approached Mahārāja Nanda's son, who is gorgeously dressed and is playing on His flute. Indeed, both the doe and the bucks worship the Lord with looks of love and affection.
This translation is quoted from Śrīla Prabhupāda's Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 17.36).
According to the ācāryas, the gopīs were thinking as follows: "The female deer can approach Kṛṣṇa along with their husbands because Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate object of affection for the male deer. Because of their affection for Kṛṣṇa, they are encouraged by seeing their wives attracted to Him and thus consider their household lives fortunate. Indeed, they become joyful upon seeing how their wives are searching after Kṛṣṇa, and, following along, they urge their wives to go to the Lord. On the other hand, our husbands are jealous of Kṛṣṇa, and because of their lack of devotion to Him they cannot even stand to smell His fragrance. Therefore what is the use of our lives?"
TEXT 12
k{(SNAM inar"Iºya vainataAets$avaṝ&pazAIlaM
™autvaA ca tat¸(iNAtavaeNAuivaiva·(gAItama,
de"vyaAe ivamaAnagAtaya: smar"nauªas$aAr"A
”azyat‘as$aUnak(bar"A maumauḍ"ivaRnaIvya:
kṛṣṇaṁ nirīkṣya vanitotsava-rūpa-śīlaṁ
śrutvā ca tat-kvaṇita-veṇu-vivikta-gītam
devyo vimāna-gatayaḥ smara-nunna-sārā
bhraśyat-prasūna-kabarā mumuhur vinīvyaḥ
kṛṣṇam—Lord Kṛṣṇa; nirīkṣya—observing; vanitā—for all women; utsava—a festival; rūpa—whose beauty; śīlam—and character; śrutvā—hearing; ca—and; tat—by Him; kvaṇita—vibrated; veṇu—of the flute; vivikta—clear; gītam—song; devyaḥ—the wives of the demigods; vimāna-gatayaḥ—traveling in their airplanes; smara—by Cupid; nunna—agitated; sārāḥ—their hearts; bhraśyat—slipping; prasūna-kabarāḥ—the flowers tied in their hair; mumuhuḥ—they became bewildered; vinīvyaḥ—their belts loosening.
Kṛṣṇa's beauty and character create a festival for all women. Indeed, when the demigods' wives flying in airplanes with their husbands catch sight of Him and hear His resonant flute-song, their hearts are shaken by Cupid, and they become so bewildered that the flowers fall out of their hair and their belts loosen.
In Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrīla Prabhupāda comments: "[This verse indicates] that the transcendental sound of the flute of Kṛṣṇa extended to all corners of the universe. Also, it is significant that the gopīs knew about the different kinds of airplanes flying in the sky."
In fact, even while sitting on the laps of their demigod husbands, the demigoddesses became agitated by hearing the sounds of Kṛṣṇa's flute. Thus the gopīs thought that they themselves should not be blamed for their ecstatic conjugal attraction for Kṛṣṇa, who after all was a cowherd boy from their own village and thus a natural object of their love. If even demigoddesses became mad after Kṛṣṇa, how could poor, earthly cowherd girls from Kṛṣṇa's own village avoid having their hearts completely conquered by His loving glances and the sounds of His flute?
The gopīs also considered that the demigods, although noting their wives' attraction to Kṛṣṇa, did not become envious. The demigods are actually very refined in culture and intelligence, and therefore when flying in their airplanes they regularly take their wives along to see Kṛṣṇa. The gopīs thought, "Our husbands, on the other hand, are envious. Therefore even the inferior deer are better off than we, and the demigoddesses are also very fortunate, whereas we poor human beings in an intermediate position are most unfortunate."
TEXT 13
gAAvaê k{(SNAmauKainagARtavaeNAugAIta
paIyaUSamauÔaiBatak(NARpauqE%: ipabantya:
zAAvaA: µautastanapaya:k(valaA: sma tasTaur,"
gAAeivand"maAtmaina ā{"zAA™auk(laA: s$pa{zAntya:
gāvaś ca kṛṣṇa-mukha-nirgata-veṇu-gīta-
pīyūṣam uttabhita-karṇa-puṭaiḥ pibantyaḥ
śāvāḥ snuta-stana-payaḥ-kavalāḥ sma tasthur
govindam ātmani dṛśāśru-kalāḥ spṛśantyaḥ
gāvaḥ—the cows; ca—and; kṛṣṇa-mukha—from the mouth of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nirgata—emitted; veṇu—of the flute; gīta—of the song; pīyūṣam—the nectar; uttabhita—raised high; karṇa—with their ears; puṭaiḥ—which were acting as vessels; pibantyaḥ—drinking; śāvāḥ—the calves; snuta—exuding; stana—from their udders; payaḥ—the milk; kavalāḥ—whose mouthfuls; sma—indeed; tasthuḥ—stood still; govindam—Lord Kṛṣṇa; ātmani—within their minds; dṛśā—with their vision; aśru-kalāḥ—their eyes full of tears; spṛśantyaḥ—touching.
Using their upraised ears as vessels, the cows are drinking the nectar of the flute-song flowing out of Kṛṣṇa's mouth. The calves, their mouths full of milk from their mothers' moist nipples, stand still as they take Govinda within themselves through their tear-filled eyes and embrace Him within their hearts.
TEXT 14
‘aAyaAe bataAmba ivah"gAA maunayaAe vanae'ismana,
k{(SNAeiºataM taāu"id"taM k(lavaeNAugAItama,
@Aś&÷ yae ṛu"maBaujaAna, ś&icar"‘avaAlaAna,
Za{Nvainta maIilataā{"zAAe ivagAtaAnyavaAca:
prāyo batāmba vihagā munayo vane 'smin
kṛṣṇekṣitaṁ tad-uditaṁ kala-veṇu-gītam
āruhya ye druma-bhujān rucira-pravālān
śṛṇvanti mīlita-dṛśo vigatānya-vācaḥ
prāyaḥ—almost; bata—certainly; amba—O mother; vihagāḥ—the birds; munayaḥ—great sages; vane—in the forest; asmin—this; kṛṣṇa-īkṣitam—in order to see Kṛṣṇa; tat-uditam—created by Him; kala-veṇu-gītam—sweet vibrations made by playing the flute; āruhya—rising; ye—who; druma-bhujān—to the branches of the trees; rucira-pravālān—having beautiful creepers and twigs; śṛṇvanti—they hear; mīlita-dṛśaḥ—closing their eyes; vigata-anya-vācaḥ—stopping all other sounds.
O mother, in this forest all the birds have risen onto the beautiful branches of the trees to see Kṛṣṇa. With closed eyes they are simply listening in silence to the sweet vibrations of His flute, and they are not attracted by any other sound. Surely these birds are on the same level as great sages.
The birds resemble sages because they live in the forest, keep their eyes closed, observe silence and remain motionless. Significantly, it is stated here that even great sages become maddened by the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute, which is a completely spiritual vibration.
The word rucira-pravālān indicates that even the branches of the trees are transformed in ecstasy when struck by the vibration of Kṛṣṇa's flute-song. Indra, Brahmā, Śiva and Viṣṇu, being primordial gods, travel throughout the universe and have extensive knowledge of the science of music, and yet even these great personalities have never heard or composed music like that which emanates from Kṛṣṇa's flute. Indeed, the birds are so moved by the blissful sound that in their ecstasy they close their eyes and cling to the branches to avoid falling off the trees.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that the gopīs would sometimes address each other as amba, "mother."
TEXT 15
naâstad"A taāu"paDaAyaR mauku(nd"gAItama,
@AvataRlaiºatamanaAeBavaBa¢avaegAA:
@AilaṆḷnasTaigAtamaUimaRBaujaEmauRr"Are"r,"
gA{õ"inta paAd"yaugAlaM k(malaAepah"Ar"A:
nadyas tadā tad upadhārya mukunda-gītam
āvarta-lakṣita-manobhava-bhagna-vegāḥ
āliṅgana-sthagitam ūrmi-bhujair murārer
gṛhṇanti pāda-yugalaṁ kamalopahārāḥ
nadyaḥ—the rivers; tadā—then; tat—that; upadhārya—perceiving; mukunda—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; gītam—the song of His flute; āvarta—by their whirlpools; lakṣita—manifest; manaḥ-bhava—by their conjugal desire; bhagna—broken; vegāḥ—their currents; āliṅgana—by their embrace; sthagitam—held stationary; ūrmi-bhujaiḥ—by the arms of their waves; murāreḥ—of Lord Murāri; gṛhṇanti—they seize; pāda-yugalam—the two lotus feet; kamala-upahārāḥ—carrying offerings of lotus flowers.
When the rivers hear the flute-song of Kṛṣṇa, their minds begin to desire Him, and thus the flow of their currents is broken and their waters are agitated, moving around in whirlpools. Then with the arms of their waves the rivers embrace Murāri's lotus feet and, holding on to them, present offerings of lotus flowers.
Even such sacred bodies of water as the Yamunā and the Mānasa-gaṅgā are enchanted by the flute-song, and thus they are disturbed by conjugal attraction for young Kṛṣṇa. The gopīs are implying that since many different types of living beings are overwhelmed by conjugal love for Kṛṣṇa, why should the gopīs be criticized for their intense desire to serve Kṛṣṇa in the conjugal relationship?
TEXT 16
ā{"î"Atapae ˜ajapazAUna, s$ah" r"AmagAAepaE:
s$aÂaAr"yantamanau vaeNAumaud"Ir"yantama,
‘aema‘ava{Ū" oid"ta: ku(s$aumaAvalaIiBa:
s$aKyauvyaRDaAtsvavapauSaAmbaud" @Atapa‡ama,
dṛṣṭvātape vraja-paśūn saha rāma-gopaiḥ
sañcārayantam anu veṇum udīrayantam
prema-pravṛddha uditaḥ kusumāvalībhiḥ
sakhyur vyadhāt sva-vapuṣāmbuda ātapatram
dṛṣṭvā—seeing; ātape—in the full heat of the sun; vraja-paśūn—the domestic animals of Vraja; saha—together with; rāma-gopaiḥ—Lord Balarāma and the cowherd boys; sañcārayantam—herding together; anu—repeatedly; veṇum—His flute; udīrayantam—loudly playing; prema—out of love; pravṛddhaḥ—expanded; uditaḥ—rising high; kusuma-āvalībhiḥ—(with droplets of water vapor, which are like) groups of flowers; sakhyuḥ—for his friend; vyadhāt—he constructed; sva-vapuṣā—out of his own body; ambudaḥ—the cloud; ātapatram—an umbrella.
In the company of Balarāma and the cowherd boys, Lord Kṛṣṇa is continually vibrating His flute as He herds all the animals of Vraja, even under the full heat of the summer sun. Seeing this, the cloud in the sky has expanded himself out of love. He is rising high and constructing out of his own body, with its multitude of flower-like droplets of water, an umbrella for the sake of his friend.
Śrīla Prabhupāda states in his Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead: "The scorching heat of the autumn sunshine was sometimes intolerable, and therefore the clouds in the sky appeared in sympathy above Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and Their boyfriends while They engaged in blowing Their flutes. The clouds served as a soothing umbrella over Their heads just to make friendship with Kṛṣṇa."
TEXT 17
paUNAAR: pauilanâ oś&gAAyapad"Abjar"AgA
™aIku(Śḷmaena d"iyataAstanamaiNx"taena
taÚ"zARnasmar"ś&jasta{NAṝ&iSataena
ilampantya @Ananaku(caeSau jaḍ"stad"AiDama,
pūrṇāḥ pulindya urugāya-padābja-rāga-
śrī-kuṅkumena dayitā-stana-maṇḍitena
tad-darśana-smara-rujas tṛṇa-rūṣitena
limpantya ānana-kuceṣu jahus tad-ādhim
pūrṇāḥ—fully satisfied; pulindyaḥ—the wives of the Śabara tribe; urugāya—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; pada-abja—from the lotus feet; rāga—of reddish color; śrī-kuṅkumena—by the transcendental kuṅkuma powder; dayitā—of His girlfriends; stana—the breasts; maṇḍitena—which had decorated; tat—of that; darśana—by the sight; smara—of Cupid; rujaḥ—feeling the torment; tṛṇa—upon the blades of grass; rūṣitena—attached; limpantyaḥ—smearing; ānana—upon their faces; kuceṣu—and breasts; jahuḥ—they gave up; tat—that; ādhim—mental pain.
The aborigine women of the Vṛndāvana area become disturbed by lust when they see the grass marked with reddish kuṅkuma powder. Endowed with the color of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, this powder originally decorated the breasts of His beloveds, and when the aborigine women smear it on their faces and breasts, they feel fully satisfied and give up all their anxiety.
Śrīla Prabhupāda explains this verse as follows: "The aborigine girls became fully satisfied when they smeared their faces and breasts with the dust of Vṛndāvana, which was reddish from the touch of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. The aborigine girls had very full breasts, and they were also very lusty, but when their lovers touched their breasts, the girls were not very much satisfied. When they came out into the midst of the forest, they saw that while Kṛṣṇa was walking some of the leaves and creepers of Vṛndāvana had turned reddish from the kuṅkuma powder which fell from His lotus feet. His lotus feet are held by the gopīs on their breasts, which are smeared with kuṅkuma powder, but when Kṛṣṇa travels in the Vṛndāvana forest with Balarāma and His boyfriends, the reddish powder falls on the ground. So the lusty aborigine girls, while looking toward Kṛṣṇa playing His flute, saw the reddish kuṅkuma on the ground and immediately took it and smeared it over their faces and breasts. In this way they became fully satisfied, although they were not satisfied when their lovers touched their breasts. All material lusty desires can be immediately satisfied if one comes in contact with Kṛṣṇa consciousness."
TEXT 18
h"ntaAyamai‰"r"balaA h"ir"d"As$avayaAeR
ya‰"Amak{(SNAcar"NAs$par"zA‘amaAed":
maAnaM tanaAeita s$ah"gAAegANAyaAestayaAeyaRta,
paAnaIyas$aUyavas$ak(nd"r"k(nd"maUlaE:
hantāyam adrir abalā hari-dāsa-varyo
yad rāma-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa-sparaśa-pramodaḥ
mānaṁ tanoti saha-go-gaṇayos tayor yat
pānīya-sūyavasa-kandara-kandamūlaiḥ
hanta—oh; ayam—this; adriḥ—hill; abalāḥ—O friends; hari-dāsa-varyaḥ—the best among the servants of the Lord; yat—because; rāma-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa—of the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; sparaśa—by the touch; pramodaḥ—jubilant; mānam—respect; tanoti—offers; saha—with; go-gaṇayoḥ—the cows, calves and cowherd boys; tayoḥ—to Them (Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma); yat—because; pānīya—with drinking water; sūyavasa—very soft grass; kandara—caves; kanda-mūlaiḥ—and edible roots.
Of all the devotees, this Govardhana Hill is the best! O my friends, this hill supplies Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, along with Their calves, cows and cowherd friends, with all kinds of necessities—water for drinking, very soft grass, caves, fruits, flowers and vegetables. In this way the hill offers respects to the Lord. Being touched by the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, Govardhana Hill appears very jubilant.
This translation is quoted from Śrīla Prabhupāda's Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 18.34).
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains the opulence of Govardhana Hill as follows: Pānīya refers to the fragrant, cool water from the Govardhana waterfalls, which Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma drink and use to wash Their feet and mouths. Govardhana also offers other beverages, such as honey, mango juice and pīlu juice. Sūyavasa indicates dūrvā grass, used to make the religious offering of arghya. Govardhana also has grass that is fragrant, soft and conducive to the strong growth of cows and increased production of milk. Thus this grass is used for feeding the transcendental herds. Kandara refers to the caves where Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma and Their friends play, sit and lie down. These caves give pleasure when the weather is too hot or too cold, or when it is raining. Govardhana also features soft roots for eating, jewels for ornamenting the body, flat places for sitting, and lamps and mirrors in the form of smooth stones, glistening water and other natural substances.
TEXT 19
gAA gAAepakE(r"nauvanaM nayataAeś&d"Ar"
vaeNAusvanaE: k(lapadE"stanauBa{ts$au s$aKya:
@s$pand"naM gAitamataAM paulak(staś&NAAM
inayaAeRgApaAzAk{(talaºaNAyaAeivaRica‡ama,
gā gopakair anu-vanaṁ nayator udāra-
veṇu-svanaiḥ kala-padais tanu-bhṛtsu sakhyaḥ
aspandanaṁ gati-matāṁ pulakas taruṇāṁ
niryoga-pāśa-kṛta-lakṣaṇayor vicitram
gāḥ—the cows; gopakaiḥ—with the cowherd boys; anu-vanam—to each forest; nayatoḥ—leading; udāra—very liberal; veṇu-svanaiḥ—by the vibrations of the Lord's flute; kala-padaiḥ—having sweet tones; tanu-bhṛtsu—among the living entities; sakhyaḥ—O friends; aspandanam—the lack of movement; gati-matām—of those living entities that can move; pulakaḥ—the ecstatic jubilation; taruṇam—of the otherwise nonmoving trees; niryoga-pāśa—the ropes for binding the rear legs of the cows; kṛta-lakṣaṇayoḥ—of those two (Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma), who are characterized by; vicitram—wonderful.
My dear friends, as Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma pass through the forest with Their cowherd friends, leading Their cows, They carry ropes to bind the cows' rear legs at the time of milking. When Lord Kṛṣṇa plays on His flute, the sweet music causes the moving living entities to become stunned and the nonmoving trees to tremble with ecstasy. These things are certainly very wonderful.
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would sometimes wear Their cowherding ropes on Their heads and sometimes carry them on Their shoulders, and thus They were beautifully decorated with all the equipment of cowherd boys.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that the ropes of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma are made of yellow cloth and have clusters of pearls at both ends. Sometimes They wear these ropes around Their turbans, and the ropes thus become wonderful decorations.

Song Prayers of Wives of Brahmanas to Krsna 
TEXT 29
™aIpatnya Ocau:
maEvaM ivaBaAe'hR"ita BavaAna, gAid"tauM ŒzAMs$aM
s$atyaM ku(ś&Sva inagAmaM tava pad"maUlama,
‘aAæaA vayaM taulais$ad"Ama pad"Avas$a{íM"
ke(zAEinaRvaAeX#]maitalaÎḷYa s$amastabanDaUna,
śrī-patnya ūcuḥ
maivaṁ vibho 'rhati bhavān gadituṁ nṛ-śaṁsam
satyaṁ kuruṣva nigamaṁ tava pāda-mūlam
prāptā vayaṁ tulasi-dāma padāvasṛṣṭaṁ
keśair nivoḍhum atilaṅghya samasta-bandhūn
śrī-patnyaḥ ūcuḥ—the wives of the brāhmaṇas said; mā—not; evam—like this; vibho—O almighty Lord; arhati—ought; bhavān—You; gaditum—to speak; nṛ-śaṁsam—harshly; satyam—true; kuruṣva—please make; nigamam—the promise given in the revealed scripture; tava—Your; pāda-mūlam—the base of the lotus feet; prāptāḥ—having obtained; vayam—we; tulasi-dāma—the garland of tulasī leaves; padā—from Your foot; avasṛṣṭam—fallen; keśaiḥ—upon our hair; nivoḍhum—in order to carry; atilaṅghya—rejecting; samasta—all; bandhūn—relations.
The wives of the brāhmaṇas replied: O almighty one, please do not speak such cruel words. Rather, You should fulfill Your promise that You always reciprocate with Your devotees in kind. Now that we have attained Your lotus feet, we simply wish to remain here in the forest so we may carry upon our heads the garlands of tulasī leaves that fall from Your lotus feet. We are ready to give up all material relationships.
Here the brāhmaṇas' wives are saying something similar to what the gopīs say at the beginning of the rāsa dance (SB 10.29.31), when Lord Kṛṣṇa tells them to go home as well. Like this verse, the gopīs' statement begins with the words maivaṁ vibho 'rhati bhavān gadituṁ nṛ-śaṁsam.
Nigama refers to the Vedic literature, which states that one who surrenders at the lotus feet of the Lord does not return to this material world. Thus the brāhmaṇas' wives appealed to the Lord that since they had surrendered to Him, it was unfair for Him to order them to return to their materialistic husbands.
According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Lord Kṛṣṇa might have pointed out to the brāhmaṇas' wives, "You young ladies are members of the aristocratic brāhmaṇa community, so how can you surrender at the feet of a mere cowherd boy?"
To this the ladies might have replied, "Since we have already surrendered at Your lotus feet, and since we desire to become Your servants, we are obviously not maintaining a false identification as members of the so-called brāhmaṇa community. You can easily ascertain this from our words."
Lord Kṛṣṇa might have replied, "I am a cowherd boy, and My proper maidservants and girlfriends are the cowherd girls, the gopīs."
The wives might have answered, "True, let them be so. Let them shine forth if You are embarrassed in front of Your relatives to make brāhmaṇa ladies Your maidservants. We certainly don't want to embarrass You. We will not go to Your village but will rather remain in Vṛndāvana, like presiding deities of the forest. We simply desire to perfect our lives by even a slight trace of connection with You."
Thus by the spiritual insight of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, we learn that the brāhmaṇas' wives offered to remain at a distance and simply take the tulasī leaves that would fall from the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa or be crushed by the feet of His girlfriends when He would embrace them. The ladies offered to carry these tulasī leaves upon their heads. Thus renouncing the desire to become Kṛṣṇa's intimate girlfriends or maidservants (a position they knew was difficult to achieve), the young brāhmaṇa ladies begged to remain in Vṛndāvana forest. If the Lord had then asked, "Then what will your family members say?" they would have replied, "We have already transcended our so-called relatives because we are seeing You, the Supreme Lord, face to face."
TEXT 30
gA{õ"inta naAe na pataya: ipatar"AE s$autaA vaA
na ”aAta{banDaus$auô$d": ku(ta Wva caAnyae
tasmaAṁ"vat‘apad"yaAe: paitataAtmanaAM naAe
naAnyaA BavaeÕ"itar"ir"nd"ma taiã"Daeih"
gṛhṇanti no na patayaḥ pitarau sutā vā
na bhrātṛ-bandhu-suhṛdaḥ kuta eva cānye
tasmād bhavat-prapadayoḥ patitātmanāṁ no
nānyā bhaved gatir arindama tad vidhehi
gṛhṇanti—they will accept; naḥ—us; na—not; patayaḥ—our husbands; pitarau—fathers; sutāḥ—sons; vā—or; na—not; bhrātṛ—brothers; bandhu—other relatives; suhṛdaḥ—and friends; kutaḥ—how then; eva—indeed; ca—and; anye—other people; tasmāt—therefore; bhavat—Your; prapadayoḥ—at the tips of the lotus feet; patita—fallen; ātmanām—whose bodies; naḥ—for us; na—not; anyā—any other; bhavet—there can be; gatiḥ—destination; arim-dama—O chastiser of enemies; tat—that; vidhehi—kindly bestow upon us.
Our husbands, fathers, sons, brothers, other relatives and friends will no longer take us back, and how could anyone else be willing to give us shelter? Therefore, since we have thrown ourselves at Your lotus feet and have no other destination, please, O chastiser of enemies, grant our desire.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments as follows: "From their very youth the brāhmaṇas' wives had heard about Lord Kṛṣṇa's beauty, qualities and sweetness from the womenfolk of Vṛndāvana village, and also from the flower ladies, the betel-nut sellers and others. Consequently they always felt ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa and were indifferent to their household duties. Their husbands, seeing them as deviant, doubted them and avoided dealing with them as far as possible. Now the wives of the brāhmaṇas were ready to formally reject their so-called families and neighbors, and out of great agitation they were crying and placing their heads upon Lord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, offering obeisances. In this way, with choking voices, they spoke the above verse. They begged that Lord Kṛṣṇa bestow upon them the benediction that He be their only destination, that He, the chastiser of enemies, subdue all their enemies—those difficulties obstructing them from attaining the Lord."
The wives of the brāhmaṇas simply wanted to serve Lord Kṛṣṇa, and this is pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness in ecstatic love of Godhead.


Song Prayers by Bramhanas to Krsna
TEXT 50
tasmaE namaAe BagAvatae
k{(SNAAyaAku(NQ&maeDas$ae
yanmaAyaAmaAeih"taiDayaAe
”amaAma: k(maRvatmaRs$au
tasmai namo bhagavate
kṛṣṇāyākuṇṭha-medhase
yan-māyā-mohita-dhiyo
bhramāmaḥ karma-vartmasu
tasmai—unto Him; namaḥ—obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛṣṇāya—Lord Kṛṣṇa; akuṇṭha-medhase—whose intelligence is never restricted; yat-māyā—by whose illusory potency; mohita—bewildered; dhiyaḥ—whose minds; bhramāmaḥ—we are wandering; karma-vartmasu—upon the paths of fruitive activity.
Let us offer our obeisances unto Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His intelligence is never bewildered, whereas we, confused by His power of illusion, are simply wandering about on the paths of fruitive work.

Song Prayers by King Indra to Krsna
TEXT 4
wn‰" ovaAca
ivazAuŪ"s$aÔvaM tava DaAma zAAntaM
tapaAemayaM Dvastar"jastamas$k(ma,
maAyaAmayaAe'yaM gAuNAs$am‘avaAh"Ae
na ivaâtae tae ƒah"NAAnaubanDa:
indra uvāca
viśuddha-sattvaṁ tava dhāma śāntaṁ
tapo-mayaṁ dhvasta-rajas-tamaskam
māyā-mayo 'yaṁ guṇa-sampravāho
na vidyate te 'grahaṇānubandhaḥ
indraḥ uvāca—Indra said; viśuddha-sattvam—manifesting transcendental goodness; tava—Your; dhāma—form; śāntam—changeless; tapaḥ-mayam—full of knowledge; dhvasta—destroyed; rajaḥ—the mode of passion; tamaskam—and the mode of ignorance; māyā-mayaḥ—based on illusion; ayam—this; guṇa—of the modes of material nature; sampravāhaḥ—the great flux; na vidyate—is not present; te—within You; agrahaṇa—ignorance; anubandhaḥ—which is due to.
King Indra said: Your transcendental form, a manifestation of pure goodness, is undisturbed by change, shining with knowledge and devoid of passion and ignorance. In You does not exist the mighty flow of the modes of material nature, which is based on illusion and ignorance.
The great Bhāgavatam commentator Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has masterfully explained the Sanskrit elements of this profound verse.
The Sanskrit word dhāma has several meanings: a) a dwelling place, house, abode and so on, b) a favorite thing or person; delight; or pleasure, c) form or appearance, or d) power, strength, majesty, glory, splendor or light.
Concerning the first set of meanings, the Vedānta-sūtra states that the Absolute Truth is the source and resting place of all existence, and in the first verse of the Bhāgavatam that Absolute Truth is said to be Kṛṣṇa. Although Lord Kṛṣṇa exists in His own dhāma, or abode, called Kṛṣṇaloka, He Himself is the abode of all existence, as Arjuna confirms in the Bhagavad-gītā, where he addresses Kṛṣṇa as paraṁ dhāma, "the supreme abode."
The very name Kṛṣṇa indicates the all-attractive person, and thus Lord Kṛṣṇa, the source of all beauty and pleasure, is certainly "the favorite thing or person; delight; and pleasure." Ultimately these terms can refer only to Kṛṣṇa.
Dhāma also refers to form or appearance, and as Indra offered these prayers he was in fact directly seeing the form of Kṛṣṇa before him.
As clearly explained in the Vedic literature, Lord Kṛṣṇa's power, strength, majesty, splendor and effulgence are all contained within His transcendental body and thus attest to the infinite glories of the Lord.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has brilliantly summarized all these meanings of the word dhāma by giving the Sanskrit term svarūpa as a synonym. The word svarūpa means "one's own form or shape" and also "one's own condition, character or nature." Since Lord Kṛṣṇa, being pure spirit, is nondifferent from His body, there is absolutely no difference between the Lord and His visible form. By contrast, in this material world we conditioned souls are all distinctly different from our bodies, whether those bodies be male, female, black, white or whatever. All of us are eternal souls, different from our temporary, flimsy bodies.
When the word svarūpa is applied to us, it especially indicates our spiritual form, because our "own form" is in fact our "own condition, character or nature" eternally. Thus the liberated condition in which one's outward form is one's deepest spiritual nature is called svarūpa. Primarily, however, this term refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is all indicated in this verse by the words tava dhāma, as explained by Śrīdhara Svāmī.
 Śrīdhara Svāmī has explained that here the word śāntam means "always in the same form." Śāntam can also mean "undisturbed, free from passion, or purified." According to Vedic philosophy, all change in this world is caused by the influence of passion and ignorance. The passionate mode is creative, and the ignorant mode is destructive, whereas the mode of goodness, sattva, is serene and sustaining. In many ways this verse emphasizes that Lord Kṛṣṇa is free from the modes of nature. The words viśuddha-sattvam, śāntam, dhvasta-rajas-tamaskam and guṇa-sampravāho na vidyate te all indicate this. Unlike Kṛṣṇa, we change from one body to another because of our involvement with the modes of nature; the various transformations of material forms are impelled by the modes of nature, which are themselves set in motion by the influence of time. Therefore one who is free from the material modes of nature is changeless and eternally satisfied in blissful spiritual existence. Thus the word śāntam indicates that the Lord is undisturbed by change, since He is free from the material modes of nature.
According to this verse, the powerful flow of the material modes of nature—namely passion, stupidity and mundane piety—are based on agrahaṇa, which Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has translated as "ignorance." Since the Sanskrit root graḥ means "to take, accept, grasp or comprehend," grahaṇa means "grasp" exactly in the sense of "to grasp an idea or fact." Therefore agrahaṇa here means one's failure to understand one's spiritual position, and this failure causes one to fall into the violent currents of material existence.
An additional meaning of the word agrahaṇa is derived when it is divided into the compound agra-haṇa. Agra means "the first, top or best," and hana means "killing." The best part of our existence is the pure soul, which is eternal, in contradistinction to the temporary, material body and mind. Thus one who chooses material existence over Kṛṣṇa consciousness is in fact killing the best part of himself, the soul, which in its pure state can enjoy Kṛṣṇa consciousness unlimitedly.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has translated tapo-mayam as "full of knowledge." The word tapas, generally indicating "austerity," is derived from the Sanskrit verb tap, whose meaning can be summarized as indicating the various functions of the sun. Tap means "to burn, to shine, to heat and so on." The Supreme Lord is eternally perfect, and therefore here tapo-mayam does not indicate that His transcendental body is meant for austerities, since austerities are performed by conditioned souls to purify themselves or to acquire a particular power. An omnipotent, perfect being neither purifies Himself nor acquires power: He is eternally pure and all-powerful. Therefore Śrīdhara Svāmī has intelligently understood that in this case the word tapas refers to the illuminating function of the sun and thus indicates that the Lord's self-effulgent body is omniscient. Light is a common symbol of knowledge. The Lord's spiritual effulgence does not merely illuminate physically, as in the case of a candle or light bulb; more importantly, the Lord's body illuminates our consciousness with perfect knowledge because the Lord's effulgence is itself perfect knowledge.
We offer our respectful obeisances at the lotus feet of Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī and thank him for his enlightening comments on this verse.
TEXT 5
ku(taAe nau taŪe"tava wRzA tatk{(taA
laAeBaAd"yaAe yae'bauDailangABaAvaA:
taTaAipa d"NxM" BagAvaAna, ibaBaitaR
DamaRsya gAuptyaE Kalainaƒah"Aya
kuto nu tad-dhetava īśa tat-kṛtā
lobhādayo ye 'budha-linga-bhāvāḥ
tathāpi daṇḍaṁ bhagavān bibharti
dharmasya guptyai khala-nigrahāya
kutaḥ—how; nu—certainly; tat—of that (existence of the material body); hetavaḥ—the causes; īśa—O Lord; tat-kṛtāḥ—produced by one's connection with the material body; lobha-ādayaḥ—greed and so forth; ye—which; abudha—of an ignorant person; linga-bhāvāḥ—symptoms; tathā api—nevertheless; daṇḍam—punishment; bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bibharti—wields; dharmasya—of the principles of religion; guptyai—for the protection; khala—of wicked persons; nigrahāya—for the chastisement.
How, then, could there exist in You the symptoms of an ignorant person—such as greed, lust, anger and envy—which are produced by one's previous involvement in material existence and which cause one to become further entangled in material existence? And yet as the Supreme Lord You impose punishment to protect religious principles and curb down the wicked.
This complex philosophical statement by Indra may be analyzed as follows: In the first line of this verse, Indra refers to the main idea expressed at the end of the previous verse—namely, that the great currents of material existence, which are based on ignorance, cannot possibly exist within the Supreme Lord. The words tad-dhetavaḥ and tat-kṛtāḥ indicate that something causes the modes of nature to manifest, and that they in turn become the cause of that which caused them. In the second line of this verse, we find that it is material feelings such as greed, lust, envy and anger that cause the modes of nature to manifest and that are themselves caused by the modes of nature.
The explanation of this seeming paradox is as follows: When the conditioned soul decides to associate with the material qualities, he becomes contaminated by those qualities. As stated in the Gītā (13.22), kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu. For example, in the presence of a seductive woman, a man may give in to his lower instincts and try to enjoy sex with her. By his deciding to associate with the lower qualities of nature, those qualities manifest in him very powerfully. He is overwhelmed with lust and driven to try again and again to satisfy his burning desire. Because his mind has been infected by lust, all that he does, thinks and speaks will be influenced by his strong attachment to sex. In other words, by choosing to associate with the lusty qualities of nature, he has caused them to powerfully manifest within himself, and eventually those lusty qualities themselves will cause him to accept another material body suitable for affairs governed by those qualities.
The lower qualities, such as lust, greed, anger and envy, are abudha-liṅga-bhāvāḥ, symptoms of ignorance. Indeed, as indicated by Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī in his commentary, the manifestation of the modes of nature is synonymous with the manifestation of a particular material body. It is clearly explained throughout the Vedic literature that the conditioned soul receives a particular body, gives it up and then accepts another simply because of his involvement with the modes of nature (kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya [Bg. 13.22]). Thus to say that one is participating in the modes of nature is to say that one is accepting particular types of bodies suitable for the particular material qualities one is involved with.
An ignorant bystander might have simplistically interpreted Kṛṣṇa's pastime of lifting Govardhana Hill as follows: The residents of Vṛndāvana were obliged by Vedic principles to make certain offerings to the god of heaven, Indra. Child Kṛṣṇa, ignoring the position of Indra, usurped these offerings and took them for His own pleasure. When Indra tried to punish Kṛṣṇa and His associates, the Lord frustrated Indra's attempt, humiliated him, and exhausted his pride and resources.
But this superficial interpretation is refuted in this verse. Here Lord Indra addresses Śrī Kṛṣṇa as bhagavān, indicating that He is not an ordinary child but in fact God. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's punishing Indra was part of His mission of protecting religious principles and curbing down the envious; it was not a display of material anger or of greed for the offerings meant for Indra. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is pure spiritual existence, and His simple, sublime desire is to engage all living beings in the perfect, blissful life of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa's desire to make us Kṛṣṇa conscious is not egotistical, since ultimately Kṛṣṇa is everything and Kṛṣṇa consciousness is objectively the best consciousness. Lord Indra is really the humble servant of Kṛṣṇa, a fact he is now beginning to remember.
TEXT 6
ipataA gAuś&stvaM jagAtaAmaDaIzAAe
āu"r"tyaya: k(Ala opaAÔad"Nx":
ih"taAya caecC$AtanauiBa: s$amaIh"s$ae
maAnaM ivaDaunvana, jagAd"IzAmaAinanaAma,
pitā gurus tvaṁ jagatām adhīśo
duratyayaḥ kāla upātta-daṇḍaḥ
hitāya cecchā-tanubhiḥ samīhase
mānaṁ vidhunvan jagad-īśa-māninām
pitā—the father; guruḥ—the spiritual master; tvam—You; jagatām—of the entire universe; adhīśaḥ—the supreme controller; duratyayaḥ—insurmountable; kālaḥ—time; upātta—wielding; daṇḍaḥ—punishment; hitāya—for the benefit; ca—and; icchā—assumed by Your own free will; tanubhiḥ—by Your transcendental forms; samīhase—You endeavor; mānam—the false pride; vidhunvan—eradicating; jagat-īśa—lords of the universe; māninām—of those who presume themselves to be.
You are the father and spiritual master of this entire universe, and also its supreme controller. You are insurmountable time, imposing punishment upon the sinful for their own benefit. Indeed, in Your various incarnations, selected by Your own free will, You act decisively to remove the false pride of those who presume themselves masters of this world.
The word hitāya is significant here. Lord Kṛṣṇa protects religion and chastises the wicked for the benefit of the entire universe. Foolish and faithless pseudopriests criticize God for punishing the living entities through the actions of nature. But whether Lord Kṛṣṇa punishes them indirectly through nature or directly in His incarnations, as mentioned here, He has a perfect right to do so because He is the father, spiritual master and supreme ruler of the entire universe. Another way He curbs down the false attempts of the conditioned souls to establish the kingdom of God without God is through His feature as insurmountable time. It is said, "Spare the rod and spoil the child." That is a fact, and it is actually the Lord's mercy that He takes the trouble to rectify our misbehavior, although faithless persons criticize the Lord's fatherly vigilance.
TEXT 7
yae maiã"DaAÁaA jagAd"IzAmaAinanas$a,
tvaAM vaIºya k(Alae'BayamaAzAu tanmad"ma,
ih"tvaAyaRmaAgA< ‘aBajantyapasmayaA
wRh"A KalaAnaAmaipa tae'nauzAAs$anama,
ye mad-vidhājñā jagad-īśa-māninas
tvāṁ vīkṣya kāle 'bhayam āśu tan-madam
hitvārya-mārgaṁ prabhajanty apasmayā
īhā khalānām api te 'nuśāsanam
ye—those who; mat-vidha—like me; ajñāḥ—foolish persons; jagat-īśa—as lords of the universe; māninaḥ—falsely identifying themselves; tvām—You; vīkṣya—seeing; kāle—at time (of fear); abhayam—fearless; āśu—quickly; tat—their; madam—false pride; hitvā—abandoning; ārya—of devotees progressing in spiritual life; mārgam—the path; prabhajanti—they take to fully; apa-smayāḥ—free of pride; īhā—the activity; khalānām—of the wicked; api—indeed; te—by You; anuśāsanam—the instruction.
Even fools like me, who proudly think themselves universal lords, quickly give up their conceit and directly take to the path of the spiritually progressive when they see You are fearless even in the face of time. Thus You punish the mischievous only to instruct them.
History is filled with examples of the supreme authority breaking the conceit of foolish men. Modern world leaders proudly fight one another, placing the common people in unprecedented jeopardy. Similarly Indra, proud of his apparently illustrious position, dared to threaten the lives of the innocent residents of Vṛndāvana with terrible weapons, until his arrogance was curbed by the dynamic response of the Supreme Lord.
Nowadays, governments in the Western countries tend to be elected democratically, and thus the mass of people become identified with the destiny of their leaders. When the proud leaders engage in violence, the people who elected them bear the brunt of such belligerent decisions. Thus the people in the democratic nations of the world should elect Kṛṣṇa conscious leaders, who will establish an administration consonant with the laws of God. If they fail to do so, their materialistic leaders, oblivious of the will of the Supreme Lord, will undoubtedly be chastised by cataclysmic events, and the people who elected such leaders, being responsible for their leaders' acts, will share in the suffering.
It is ironic that in modern democracies not only do the leaders consider themselves universal controllers, but the mass of people, considering the leaders merely their representatives rather than the representatives of God, also consider themselves, as a people, to be the controllers of their nation. Thus the chastisement mentioned in this verse has become unprecedentedly applicable to people in general in the modern world.
Modern man should not simply make himself a lesson of nature by falling down from his proud position; rather he should submissively execute the will of the all-attractive Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and usher in a new era of sanity, tranquillity and widespread enlightenment.
TEXT 8
s$a tvaM mamaEṅyaRmad"plautasya
k{(taAgAs$astae'ivaāu"Sa: ‘aBaAvama,
ºantauM ‘aBaAe'TaAhR"is$a maUX#caetas$aAe
maEvaM paunaBaURnmaitar"IzA mae's$ataI
sa tvaṁ mamaiśvarya-mada-plutasya
kṛtāgasas te 'viduṣaḥ prabhāvam
kṣantuṁ prabho 'thārhasi mūḍha-cetaso
maivaṁ punar bhūn matir īśa me 'satī
saḥ—He; tvam—Yourself; mama—of me; aiśvarya—of rulership; mada—in the intoxication; plutasya—who is submerged; kṛta—having committed; āgasaḥ—sinful offense; te—Your; aviduṣaḥ—not knowing; prabhāvam—the transcendental influence; kṣantum—to forgive; prabho—O master; atha—therefore; arhasi—You should; mūḍha—foolish; cetasaḥ—whose intelligence; mā—never; evam—thus; punaḥ—again; bhūt—may it be; matiḥ—consciousness; īśa—O Lord; me—my; asatī—impure.
Engrossed in pride over my ruling power, ignorant of Your majesty, I offended You. O Lord, may You forgive me. My intelligence was bewildered, but let my consciousness never again be so impure.
Although Lord Kṛṣṇa protected the residents of Vraja by lifting Govardhana Hill, He had not yet punished Indra himself, and Indra feared that at any moment Śrī Kṛṣṇa might call the son of Vivasvān, Yamarāja, who punishes impudent persons who defy the laws of God.
Indra was quite fearful and thus begged the Lord's forgiveness on the plea that he could be purified only by Kṛṣṇa's mercy—that he was too stubborn to learn a good lesson through mere punishment.
In fact, despite Indra's humility in this case, his heart was not completely purified. Later on in this canto we find that when Lord Kṛṣṇa once took a pārijāta flower from Indra's kingdom, poor Indra again reacted violently against the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus, we should aspire to go back to our eternal home in the kingdom of Kṛṣṇa, and should not become entangled in the imperfect life of the material gods.
TEXT 9
tavaAvataAr"Ae'yamaDaAeºajaeh"
BauvaAe Bar"ANAAmauś&BaAr"janmanaAma,
camaUpataInaAmaBavaAya de"va
BavaAya yauSma»ar"NAAnauvaitaRnaAma,
tavāvatāro 'yam adhokṣajeha
bhuvo bharāṇām uru-bhāra-janmanām
camū-patīnām abhavāya deva
bhavāya yuṣmac-caraṇānuvartinām
tava—Your; avatāraḥ—descent; ayam—this; adhokṣaja—O transcendental Lord; iha—into this world; bhuvaḥ—of the earth; bharāṇām—who constitute a great burden; uru-bhāra—to many disturbances; janmanām—who have given rise; camū-patīnām—of military leaders; abhavāya—for the destruction; deva—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhavāya—for the auspicious benefit; yuṣmat—Your; caraṇa—lotus feet; anuvartinām—of those who serve.
You descend into this world, O transcendent Lord, to destroy the warlords who burden the earth and create many terrible disturbances. O Lord, you simultaneously act for the welfare of those who faithfully serve Your lotus feet.
This verse utilizes an attractive poetic device. Lord Kṛṣṇa's descent into the world is said to be for the abhava, literally "nonexistence" or "destruction," of the demoniac warlords, and simultaneously for the bhava, or "existence, prosperity," of those who faithfully serve the Lord's lotus feet.
True existence, indicated here by the word bhava, is sac-cid-ānanda, eternal and full of bliss and knowledge. To an uninformed observer, it may appear that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is simply rewarding His followers and punishing His enemies the way any ordinary person might do. This specific doubt about the Lord is raised extensively in the Sixth Canto in connection with Kṛṣṇa's taking the side of the faithful demigods against the faithless demons in a particular cosmic war. In that canto the Vaiṣṇava authorities clearly explain that in fact Lord Kṛṣṇa is the father and Lord of all living beings and that all His activities are therefore meant for the benefit of all existence. Lord Kṛṣṇa does not really cause the nonexistence of anyone; rather He curbs the foolish, destructive, material ways of those who defy the laws of God. These laws are created to ensure the prosperity, harmony and happiness of the entire creation, and their violation is an unjustifiable disturbance.
Certainly Indra hoped that Lord Kṛṣṇa would count him among the devotees and not the demons, although considering Indra's actions one might doubt where his loyalties actually lay. Indra was aware of this possible doubt and thus, as we find in the next verse, he tried his best to surrender to the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 10
namastauByaM BagAvatae
pauś&SaAya mah"Atmanae
vaAs$aude"vaAya k{(SNAAya
s$aAtvataAM patayae nama:
namas tubhyaṁ bhagavate
puruṣāya mahātmane
vāsudevāya kṛṣṇāya
sātvatāṁ pataye namaḥ
namaḥ—obeisances; tubhyam—unto You; bhagavate—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruṣāya—the Lord dwelling within the hearts of all; mahā-ātmane—the great Soul; vāsudevāya—to Him who dwells everywhere; kṛṣṇāya—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sātvatām—of the Yadu dynasty; pataye—to the master; namaḥ—obeisances.
Obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the great Soul, who are all-pervading and who reside in the hearts of all. My obeisances unto You, Kṛṣṇa, the chief of the Yadu dynasty.
TEXT 11
svacC$nd"AepaAÔade"h"Aya
ivazAuŪ"ÁaAnamaUtaRyae
s$avaRsmaE s$avaRbaIjaAya
s$avaRBaUtaAtmanae nama:
svacchandopātta-dehāya
viśuddha-jñāna-mūrtaye
sarvasmai sarva-bījāya
sarva-bhūtātmane namaḥ
sva—of His own (devotees); chanda—according to the desire; upātta—who assumes; dehāya—His transcendental bodies; viśuddha—perfectly pure; jñāna—knowledge; mūrtaye—whose form; sarvasmai—to Him who is everything; sarva-bījāya—who is the seed of all; sarva-bhūta—of all created beings; ātmane—who is the indwelling Soul; namaḥ—obeisances.
Unto Him who assumes transcendental bodies according to the desires of His devotees, unto Him whose form is itself pure consciousness, unto Him who is everything, who is the seed of everything and who is the Soul of all creatures, I offer my obeisances.
We could hardly construe from the first line of this verse that God is somehow impersonal but assumes a personal material body. It is clearly said here that the Lord assumes different forms according to svacchanda—according to His own desire or according to the desires of His devotees. An impersonal God could hardly reciprocate with the personal desires of Its devotees, nor could an impersonal God Itself have desires, since desire is characteristic of personality. Therefore, the Lord's manifesting different forms in a personal way, responding to personal desires, indicates that He is eternally a person and manifests His different transcendental bodies as an expression of His own eternal nature.
The word viśuddha-jñāna-mūrtaye is most significant. Mūrti means the form of the Deity, and it is specifically stated here that the Lord's form is itself completely pure consciousness. Consciousness is the primary spiritual element, distinct from any of the material elements, and even distinct from the subtle or psychological material elements—mundane mind, intelligence and false ego—which are simply a psychic covering over pure consciousness. Since the Lord's form is made of pure consciousness, it can hardly be understood as a material body like the mortal bags of flesh and bones we carry around in this world.
In the last two lines of this verse, there is poetic emphasis on the word sarva, "everything." The Lord is everything: He is the seed of everything and He is the Soul of every creature. Therefore, let us join with Indra in offering our obeisances to the Lord.
TEXT 12
mayaedM" BagAvana, gAAeñ"-
naAzAAyaAs$aAr"vaAyauiBa:
caeií"taM ivah"tae yaÁae
maAinanaA taI˜amanyaunaA
mayedaṁ bhagavan goṣṭha-
nāśāyāsāra-vāyubhiḥ
ceṣṭitaṁ vihate yajñe
māninā tīvra-manyunā
mayā—by me; idam—this; bhagavan—O Lord; goṣṭha—of Your cowherd community; nāśāya—for the destruction; āsāra—by hard rain; vāyubhiḥ—and wind; ceṣṭitam—enacted; vihate—when it was disrupted; yajñe—my sacrifice; māninā—(by me) who was falsely proud; tīvra—fierce; manyunā—whose anger.
My dear Lord, when my sacrifice was disrupted I became fiercely angry because of false pride. Thus I tried to destroy Your cowherd community with severe rain and wind.
TEXT 13
tvayaezAAnaugA{h"ItaAe'isma
DvastastamBaAe va{TaAeâma:
wRṅrM" gAuś&maAtmaAnaM
tvaAmahM" zAr"NAM gAta:
tvayeśānugṛhīto 'smi
dhvasta-stambho vṛthodyamaḥ
īśvaraṁ gurum ātmānaṁ
tvām ahaṁ śaraṇaṁ gataḥ
tvayā—by You; īśa—O Lord; anugṛhītaḥ—shown mercy; asmi—I am; dhvasta—shattered; stambhaḥ—my false pride; vṛthā—fruitless; udyamaḥ—my attempt; īśvaram—the Supreme Lord; gurum—the spiritual master; ātmānam—the true Self; tvām—to You; aham—I; śaraṇam—for shelter; gataḥ—have come.
O Lord, You have shown mercy to me by shattering my false pride and defeating my attempt [to punish Vṛndāvana]. To You, the Supreme Lord, spiritual master and Supreme Soul, I have now come for shelter.

Song Prayers by Surabhi Cow to Krsna
TEXT 19
s$aur"iBaś&vaAca
k{(SNA k{(SNA mah"AyaAeigAna,
ivaṅAtmana, ivaṅs$amBava
BavataA laAek(naATaena
s$anaATaA vayamacyauta
surabhir uvāca
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa mahā-yogin
viśvātman viśva-sambhava
bhavatā loka-nāthena
sa-nāthā vayam acyuta
surabhiḥ uvāca—Surabhi said; kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa; mahā yogin—O greatest of mystics; viśva-ātman—O Soul of the universe; viśva-sambhava—O origin of the universe; bhavatā—by You; loka nāthena—the master of the world; sa-nāthāḥ—having a master; vayam—we; acyuta—O infallible one.
Mother Surabhi said: O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, greatest of mystics! O Soul and origin of the universe! You are the master of the world, and by Your grace, O infallible Lord, we have You as our master.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura points out here that mother Surabhi is feeling great ecstasy as she repeats the words "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa lifted Govardhana Hill by His mystic power and thus protected the cows of Vṛndāvana, whereas her so-called master, Indra, had tried to kill them. Thus Surabhi now clearly understands that it is not the demigods but rather the Supreme God, Kṛṣṇa Himself, who is her real master forever.
TEXT 20
tvaM na: par"makM( dE"vaM
tvaM na wn‰"Ae jagAtpatae
BavaAya Bava gAAeiva‘a
de"vaAnaAM yae ca s$aADava:
tvaṁ naḥ paramakaṁ daivaṁ
tvaṁ na indro jagat-pate
bhavāya bhava go-vipra
devānāṁ ye ca sādhavaḥ
tvam—You; naḥ—our; paramakam—supreme; daivam—worshipable Deity; tvam—You; naḥ—our; indraḥ—Lord Indra; jagat-pate—O master of the universe; bhavāya—for the welfare; bhava—please be; go—of the cows; vipra—the brāhmaṇas; devānām—and the demigods; ye—who; ca—and; sādhavaḥ—saintly persons.
You are our worshipable Deity. Therefore, O Lord of the universe, for the benefit of the cows, the brāhmaṇas, the demigods and all other saintly persons, please become our Indra.
The Supreme Lord is self-sufficient: He can do everything Himself. The Lord appointed one of His innumerable children to the position of Indra, the lord of the cosmic heaven. But Indra abused his authority, and now Surabhi requests Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Absolute Truth, to directly become her Lord, her Indra. We should carefully perform our duties without false pride; thus we will not become obsolete and embarrassed, as in the present case of King Indra, who actually attacked Lord Kṛṣṇa and His Vṛndāvana devotees.
TEXT 21
wn‰M" nastvaAiBaSaeºyaAmaAe
“aṭNAA caAeid"taA vayama,
@vataINAAeR'is$a ivaṅAtmana,
BaUmaeBaARr"ApanauÔayae
indraṁ nas tvābhiṣekṣyāmo
brahmaṇā coditā vayam
avatīrṇo 'si viśvātman
bhūmer bhārāpanuttaye
indram—as Indra; naḥ—our; tvā—to You; abhiṣekṣyāmaḥ—we shall perform the bathing ceremony of coronation; brahmaṇā—by Lord Brahmā; coditāḥ—ordered; vayam—we; avatīrṇaḥ asi—You have descended; viśva-ātman—O Soul of the universe; bhūmeḥ—of the earth; bhāra—the burden; apanuttaye—in order to alleviate.
As ordered by Lord Brahmā, we shall perform Your bathing ceremony to coronate You as Indra. O Soul of the universe, You descend to this world to relieve the burden of the earth.
Surabhi makes it quite clear in this verse that she has had enough of the leadership of imperfect demigods like Purandara (Indra), and now she is determined to directly serve the Supreme Lord. Since Brahmā has ordered her, her attempt to coronate Lord Kṛṣṇa as her personal Lord is authorized by higher authority. Moreover, Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself comes down to the earth to relieve the burden of self-destructive, mundane administration, and thus it is perfectly consistent with the Lord's own purpose that He become the Lord of Surabhi. Since the Lord rules millions of universes, He can certainly take care of mother Surabhi.
In fact, Surabhi wanted to bathe the Lord for her own purification, and she earnestly makes her proposal to Viśvātmā, the Soul of the universe, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.


Song Prayers by Varuna to Lord Krsna
TEXT 5
™aIvaś&NA ovaAca
@â mae inaBa{taAe de"h"Ae
'âEvaATaAeR'iDagAta: ‘aBaAe
tvatpaAd"BaAjaAe BagAvaªa,
@vaApau: paAr"maDvana:
śrī-varuṇa uvāca
adya me nibhṛto deho
'dyaivārtho 'dhigataḥ prabho
tvat-pāda-bhājo bhagavann
avāpuḥ pāram adhvanaḥ
śrī-varuṇaḥ uvāca—Śrī Varuṇa said; adya—today; me—by me; nibhṛtaḥ—is carried successfully; dehaḥ—my material body; adya—today; eva—indeed; arthaḥ—the goal of life; adhigataḥ—is experienced; prabho—O Lord; tvat—Your; pāda—the lotus feet; bhājaḥ—those who serve; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality; avāpuḥ—have achieved; pāram—the state of transcendence; adhvanaḥ—of the path (of material existence) .
Śrī Varuṇa said: Now my body has fulfilled its function. Indeed, now the goal of my life is achieved, O Lord. Those who accept Your lotus feet, O Personality of Godhead, can transcend the path of material existence.
Varuṇa ecstatically exclaims here that since he has now seen the infinitely gorgeous body of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the trouble of assuming a material body has now been supremely justified. Indeed, the artha, the goal or real value of Varuṇa's life, has now been achieved. Because Lord Kṛṣṇa's form is transcendental, those who accept His lotus feet go beyond the boundary of material existence, and thus only the spiritually unaware would presume that the Lord's lotus feet are material.
TEXT 6
namastauByaM BagAvatae
“aṭNAe par"maAtmanae
na ya‡a ™aUyatae maAyaA
laAek(s$a{ií"ivak(lpanaA
namas tubhyaṁ bhagavate
brahmaṇe paramātmane
na yatra śrūyate māyā
loka-sṛṣṭi-vikalpanā
namaḥ—obeisances; tubhyam—unto You; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; brahmaṇe—the Absolute Truth; parama-ātmane—the Supreme Soul; na—not; yatra—in whom; śrūyate—is heard of; māyā—the illusory, material energy; loka—of this world; sṛṣṭi—the creation; vikalpanā—which arranges.
My obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Soul, within whom there is no trace of the illusory energy, which orchestrates the creation of this world.
The word śrūyate is significant here. Śruti, or Vedic literature, consists of authorized statements made by the Lord Himself or His enlightened representatives. Thus neither the Lord nor recognized spiritual authorities would ever say that within the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, there is the fault of illusion. Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī points out that the word brahmaṇe here indicates the Lord is full in Himself, and that the term paramātmane indicates He is the controller of all living entities.
Thus within the supreme being, complete in Himself and omnipotent, we do not find any jurisdiction of the material, illusory energy.
TEXT 7
@jaAnataA maAmake(na
maUXe#naAk(AyaR"vaeid"naA
@AnaItaAe'yaM tava ipataA
taṁ"vaAna, ºantaumahR"ita
ajānatā māmakena
mūḍhenākārya-vedinā
ānīto 'yaṁ tava pitā
tad bhavān kṣantum arhati
ajānatā—by one who was ignorant; māmakena—by my servant; mūḍhena—foolish; akārya-vedinā—not knowing his proper duty; ānītaḥ—was brought; ayam—this person; tava—Your; pitā—father; tat—that; bhavān—Your good self; kṣantum arhati—should please forgive.
Your father, who is sitting here, was brought to me by a foolish, ignorant servant of mine who did not understand his proper duty. Therefore, please forgive us.
The word ayam, "this one here," clearly indicates that Kṛṣṇa's father, Nanda Mahārāja, was present as Varuṇa was speaking. In fact, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura states that Varuṇa had seated Śrī Nanda on a jeweled throne and had personally worshiped him out of respect.
Technically, Nanda Mahārāja was correct in entering the water just before sunrise. The following explanation is given by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his commentary on the first verse of this chapter: After an especially short Ekādaśī, measuring only eighteen hours, about six hours of the lunar day in which the fast had to be broken, namely the Dvādaśī, had already expired before the dawn. Since at sunrise the proper time for breaking the fast would have passed, Nanda Mahārāja decided to enter the water at an otherwise inauspicious time.
Of course, Varuṇa's servant should have been aware of these technical details, which are meant for strict followers of the Vedic rituals. Above and beyond that, Nanda Mahārāja was acting as the Supreme Lord's father and was therefore a most sacred person, beyond the touch of insignificant cosmic bureaucrats like the foolish servant of Varuṇa.
TEXT 8
mamaApyanauƒahM" k{(SNA
k(tauRmahR"syazAeSaā{"k,(
gAAeivand" naIyataAmaeSa
ipataA tae ipata{vats$ala
mamāpy anugrahaṁ kṛṣṇa
kartum arhasy aśeṣa-dṛk
govinda nīyatām eṣa
pitā te pitṛ-vatsala
mama—to me; api—even; anugraham—mercy; kṛṣṇa—O Lord Kṛṣṇa; kartum arhasi—please do; aśeṣa—of everything; dṛk—O You who see; govinda—O Govinda; nīyatām—may he be taken; eṣaḥ—this; pitā—father; te—Your; pitṛ-vatsala—O You who are most affectionate to Your parents.
O Kṛṣṇa, O seer of everything, please give Your mercy even to me. O Govinda, You are most affectionate to Your father. Please take him home.

Song Gopis Words at Rasa sthali
TEXT 31
™aIgAAepya Ocau:
maEvaM ivaBaAe'hR"ita BavaAna, gAid"tauM na{zAMs$aM
s$antyajya s$avaRivaSayaAMstava paAd"maUlama,
Ba·(A Bajasva āu"r"vaƒah" maA tyajaAsmaAna,
de"vaAe yaTaAid"pauś&SaAe Bajatae maumauºaUna,
śrī-gopya ūcuḥ
maivaṁ vibho 'rhati bhavān gadituṁ nṛ-śaṁsaṁ
santyajya sarva-viṣayāṁs tava pāda-mūlam
bhaktā bhajasva duravagraha mā tyajāsmān
devo yathādi-puruṣo bhajate mumukṣūn
śrī-gopyaḥ ūcuḥ—the beautiful gopīs said; mā—not; evam—in this way; vibho—O all-powerful one; arhati—should; bhavān—Your good self; gaditum—speak; nṛ-śaṁsam—cruelly; santyajya—renouncing completely; sarva—all; viṣayān—varieties of sense gratification; tava—Your; pāda-mūlam—feet; bhaktāḥ—worshiping; bhajasva—please reciprocate with; duravagraha—O stubborn one; mā tyaja—do not reject; asmān—us; devāḥ—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yathā—just as; ādi-puruṣaḥ—the primeval Lord, Nārāyaṇa; bhajate—reciprocates; mumukṣūn—with those who desire liberation.
The beautiful gopīs said: O all-powerful one, You should not speak in this cruel way. Do not reject us, who have renounced all material enjoyment to render devotional service to Your lotus feet. Reciprocate with us, O stubborn one, just as the primeval Lord, Śrī Nārāyaṇa, reciprocates with His devotees in their endeavors for liberation.
TEXT 32
yatpatyapatyas$auô$d"Amanauva{iÔar"Ṇḷ
ṣINAAM svaDamaR wita DamaRivad"A tvayaAe·(ma,
@stvaevamaetaāu"pade"zApade" tvayaIzAe
‘aeñ"Ae BavaAMstanauBa{taAM ik(la banDaur"AtmaA
yat paty-apatya-suhṛdām anuvṛttir aṅga
strīṇāṁ sva-dharma iti dharma-vidā tvayoktam
astv evam etad upadeśa-pade tvayīśe
preṣṭho bhavāṁs tanu-bhṛtāṁ kila bandhur ātmā
yat—which; pati—of husbands; apatya—children; suhṛdām—and well-wishing relatives and friends; anuvṛttiḥ—the following; aṅga—our dear Kṛṣṇa; strīṇām—of women; sva-dharmaḥ—the proper religious duty; iti—thus; dharma-vidā—by the knower of religion; tvayā—You; uktam—spoken; astu—let it be; evam—like that; etat—this; upadeśa—of this instruction; pade—to the real object; tvayi—You; īśe—O Lord; preṣṭhaḥ—the dearmost; bhavān—You; tanu-bhṛtām—for all embodied living beings; kila—certainly; bandhuḥ—the close relative; ātmā—the very Self.
Our dear Kṛṣṇa, as an expert in religion You have advised us that the proper religious duty for women is to faithfully serve their husbands, children and other relatives. We agree that this principle is valid, but actually this service should be rendered to You. After all, O Lord, You are the dearmost friend of all embodied souls. You are their most intimate relative and indeed their very Self.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Soul of all souls, their dearmost friend and well-wisher. As stated in the Eleventh Canto of the Bhāgavatam (11.5.41):
devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ
na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan
sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ
gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam
"O King, one who has given up all material duties and has taken full shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, who offers shelter to all, is not indebted to the demigods, great sages, ordinary living beings, relatives, friends, mankind or even one's forefathers who have passed away. Since all such classes of living entities are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, one who has surrendered to the Lord's service has no need to serve such persons separately." Authority descends from the author of all existence, the Supreme Lord. Natural figures of authority such as husbands, mothers, government leaders and sages gain their power and authority from the Supreme Lord and should thus represent the Absolute Truth to those who follow them. If one wholeheartedly engages in loving service to the original, Supreme Truth, one need not indirectly serve the Absolute Truth through the above-mentioned secondary authorities.
Even a soul surrendered to God, however, continues to serve the spiritual master, who is a direct, not an indirect, representative of the Supreme Lord. A bona fide ācārya, or spiritual master, is the transparent medium leading the disciple to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. All indirect authorities become obsolete when one is directly in touch with the Absolute Truth. The gopīs wanted to explain this basic point to Kṛṣṇa, and some of the bolder young girls among them attempted to defeat Śrī Kṛṣṇa with His own statements, as exemplified in this verse.
TEXT 33
ku(vaRinta ih" tvaiya r"itaM ku(zAlaA: sva @Atmana,
inatyai‘ayae paitas$autaAid"iBar"AitaR&dE": ik(ma,
taªa: ‘as$aId" par"maeṅr" maA sma iC$nâA
@AzAAM Da{taAM tvaiya icar"Ad"r"ivand"nae‡a
kurvanti hi tvayi ratiṁ kuśalāḥ sva ātman
nitya-priye pati-sutādibhir ārti-daiḥ kim
tan naḥ prasīda parameśvara mā sma chindyā
āśāṁ dhṛtāṁ tvayi cirād aravinda-netra
kurvanti—they show; hi—indeed; tvayi—for You; ratim—attraction; kuśalāḥ—expert persons; sve—for their own; ātman—Self; nitya—eternally; priye—who is dear; pati—with our husbands; suta—children; ādibhiḥ—and other relations; ārti-daiḥ—who only give trouble; kim—what; tat—therefore; naḥ—to us; prasīda—be merciful; parama-īśvara—O supreme controller; mā sma chindyāḥ—please do not cut down; āśām—our hopes; dhṛtām—sustained; tvayi—for You; cirāt—for a long time; aravinda-netra—O lotus-eyed one.
Expert transcendentalists always direct their affection toward You because they recognize You as their true Self and eternal beloved. What use do we have for these husbands, children and relatives of ours, who simply give us trouble? Therefore, O supreme controller, grant us Your mercy. O lotus-eyed one, please do not cut down our long-cherished hope to have Your association.
TEXT 34
icaÔaM s$auKaena BavataApaô$taM gA{he"Sau
yaiªaivaRzAtyauta k(r"Avaipa gA{÷k{(tyae
paAd"AE padM" na calatastava paAd"maUlaAā,"
yaAma: k(TaM ˜ajamaTaAe k(r"vaAma ikM( vaA
cittaṁ sukhena bhavatāpahṛtaṁ gṛheṣu
yan nirviśaty uta karāv api gṛhya-kṛtye
pādau padaṁ na calatas tava pāda-mūlād
yāmaḥ kathaṁ vrajam atho karavāma kiṁ vā
cittam—our minds; sukhena—easily; bhavatā—by You; apahṛtam—were stolen; gṛheṣu—in our households; yat—which; nirviśati—were absorbed; uta—moreover; karau—our hands; api—as well; gṛhya-kṛtye—in household work; pādau—our feet; padam—one step; na calataḥ—are not moving; tava—Your; pāda-mūlāt—away from the feet; yāmaḥ—we shall go; katham—how; vrajam—back to Vraja; atha u—and then; karavāma—we shall do; kim—what; vā—furthermore.
Until today our minds were absorbed in household affairs, but You easily stole both our minds and our hands away from our housework. Now our feet won't move one step from Your lotus feet. How can we go back to Vraja? What would we do there?
Śrī Kṛṣṇa had blown into His flute, and the intoxicating music that had come out of its holes had stolen the minds of the young gopī girls. Now they had come to see Kṛṣṇa to demand back their stolen property, but they could regain their minds only if Śrī Kṛṣṇa accepted them and engaged with them in conjugal affairs.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa might have replied, "But My dear gopīs, just go home for now. Let Me consider the situation for a day or two, and then I will give you back your minds." In reply to this possible argument, the gopīs state, "Our feet refuse to move even one step. So please give us back our minds and accept us, and then we will go."
TEXT 35
is$aÂaAṆḷ nastvad"Dar"Ama{tapaUr"ke(NA
h"As$aAvalaAek(k(lagAItajaô$cC$yaAi¢ama,
naAe caeã"yaM ivar"h"jaAgnyaupayau·(de"h"A
DyaAnaena yaAma pad"yaAe: pad"vaI%M s$aKae tae
siñcāṅga nas tvad-adharāmṛta-pūrakeṇa
hāsāvaloka-kala-gīta-ja-hṛc-chayāgnim
no ced vayaṁ virahajāgny-upayukta-dehā
dhyānena yāma padayoḥ padavīṁ sakhe te
siñca—please pour; aṅga—our dear Kṛṣṇa; naḥ—our; tvat—Your; adhara—of the lips; amṛta—of the nectar; pūrakeṇa—with the flood; hāsa—smiling; avaloka—by Your glances; kala—melodious; gīta—and the song (of Your flute); ja—generated; hṛt-śaya—situated within our hearts; agnim—the fire; na u cet—if not; vayam—we; viraha—from separation; ja—born; agni—within the fire; upayukta—placing; dehāḥ—our bodies; dhyānena—by meditation; yāma—we shall go; padayoḥ—of the feet; padavīm—to the place; sakhe—O friend; te—Your.
Dear Kṛṣṇa, please pour the nectar of Your lips upon the fire within our hearts—a fire You ignited with Your smiling glances and the sweet song of Your flute. If You do not, we will consign our bodies to the fire of separation from You, O friend, and thus like yogīs attain to the abode of Your lotus feet by meditation.
TEXT 36
ya÷RmbaujaAºa tava paAd"talaM r"maAyaA
d"ÔaºaNAM ¸(icad"r"Nyajanai‘ayasya
@s$‘aAºma tat‘aBa{ita naAnyas$amaºamaÃa:
sTaAtauMstvayaAiBar"imataA bata paAr"yaAma:
yarhy ambujākṣa tava pāda-talaṁ ramāyā
datta-kṣaṇaṁ kvacid araṇya-jana-priyasya
asprākṣma tat-prabhṛti nānya-samakṣam añjaḥ
sthātuṁs tvayābhiramitā bata pārayāmaḥ
yarhi—when; ambuja—like lotuses; akṣa—O You whose eyes; tava—Your; pāda—of the feet; talam—at the base; ramāyāḥ—for the goddess of fortune, Śrīmatī Lakṣmīdevī; datta—affording; kṣaṇam—a festival; kvacit—sometimes; araṇya—who dwell in the forest; jana—the people; priyasya—who hold dear; asprākṣma—we shall touch; tat-prabhṛti—from that moment forward; na—never; anya—of any other man; samakṣam—in the presence; añjaḥ—directly; sthātum—to stand; tvayā—by You; abhiramitāḥ—filled with joy; bata—certainly; pārayāmaḥ—will we be able.
O lotus-eyed one, the goddess of fortune considers it a festive occasion whenever she touches the soles of Your lotus feet. You are very dear to the residents of the forest, and therefore we will also touch those lotus feet. From that time on we will be unable even to stand in the presence of any other man, for we will have been fully satisfied by You.
TEXT 37
™aIyaRtpad"Ambaujar"jaêk(mae taulasyaA
labDvaAipa vaºais$a padM" ik(la Ba{tyajauí"ma,
yasyaA: svavaIºaNA otaAnyas$aur"‘ayaAs$as$a,
taã"ã"yaM ca tava paAd"r"ja: ‘apaªaA:
śrīr yat padāmbuja-rajaś cakame tulasyā
labdhvāpi vakṣasi padaṁ kila bhṛtya-juṣṭam
yasyāḥ sva-vīkṣaṇa utānya-sura-prayāsas
tadvad vayaṁ ca tava pāda-rajaḥ prapannāḥ
śrīḥ—the goddess of fortune, wife of Lord Nārāyaṇa; yat—as; pada-ambuja—of the lotus feet; rajaḥ—the dust; cakame—desired; tulasyā—together with Tulasī-devī; labdhvā—having obtained; api—even; vakṣasi—upon His chest; padam—her position; kila—indeed; bhṛtya—by servants; juṣṭam—served; yasyāḥ—whose (Lakṣmī's); sva—upon themselves; vīkṣaṇe—for the sake of the glance; uta—on the other hand; anya—of the other; sura—demigods; prayāsaḥ—the endeavor; tadvat—in the same way; vayam—we; ca—also; tava—Your; pāda—of the feet; rajaḥ—the dust; prapannāḥ—have approached for shelter.
Goddess Lakṣmī, whose glance is sought after by the demigods with great endeavor, has achieved the unique position of always remaining on the chest of her Lord, Nārāyaṇa. Still, she desires the dust of His lotus feet, even though she has to share that dust with Tulasī-devī and indeed with the Lord's many other servants. Similarly, we have approached the dust of Your lotus feet for shelter.
The gopīs here point out that the dust of the Lord's feet is so ecstatic and enlivening that the goddess of fortune wants to abandon her unique position on His chest to share with many other devotees a position at His feet. Thus the gopīs urge Lord Kṛṣṇa not to be guilty of a double standard. Since the Lord gave the goddess of fortune a place on His chest and also allowed her to seek the dust of His lotus feet, Kṛṣṇa should certainly give the same opportunity to His most loving devotees, the gopīs. "After all," the gopīs plead, "seeking the dust of Your lotus feet is perfectly justified, and You should encourage us in this endeavor and not try to send us away."
TEXT 38
taªa: ‘as$aId" va{ijanaAdR"na tae'in„amaUlaM
‘aAæaA ivas$a{jya vas$ataIstvaāu"paAs$anaAzAA:
tvats$aund"r"ismatainar"IºaNAtaI˜ak(Ama
taæaAtmanaAM pauś&SaBaUSaNA de"ih" d"Asyama,
tan naḥ prasīda vṛjinārdana te 'nghri-mūlaṁ
prāptā visṛjya vasatīs tvad-upāsanāśāḥ
tvat-sundara-smita-nirīkṣaṇa-tīvra-kāma=
taptātmanāṁ puruṣa-bhūṣaṇa dehi dāsyam
tat—therefore; naḥ—to us; prasīda—please show Your mercy; vṛjina—of all distress; ardana—O vanquisher; te—Your; aṅghri-mūlam—feet; prāptāḥ—we have approached; visṛjya—renouncing; vasatīḥ—our homes; tvat-upāsanā—the worship of You; āśāḥ—hoping for; tvat—Your; sundara—beautiful; smita—smiling; nirīkṣaṇa—because of the glances; tīvra—intense; kāma—by the lust; tapta—burned; ātmanām—whose hearts; puruṣa—of all men; bhūṣaṇa—O ornament; dehi—please grant; dāsyam—servitude.
Therefore, O vanquisher of all distress, please show us mercy. To approach Your lotus feet we abandoned our families and homes, and we have no desire other than to serve You. Our hearts are burning with intense desires generated by Your beautiful smiling glances. O jewel among men, please make us Your maidservants.
When Śrī Kṛṣṇa was born, the sage Garga predicted that He would manifest all the opulences of the Supreme Lord Nārāyaṇa. The gopīs now appeal to the Lord to fulfill this prediction by being merciful and granting them direct service, just as Lord Nārāyaṇa awards direct service to His loving devotees. The gopīs emphasize that they did not give up their families and homes with the hope of securing a higher pleasure from Kṛṣṇa. They are simply begging for service, revealing their pure-hearted devotion. The gopīs think, "If in the course of Your pursuing Your happiness we somehow or other become happy by seeing Your face, what is the harm in that?"
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī comments on the words puruṣa-bhūṣaṇa, "O jewel among men." The Ṭhākura states that the gopīs meant to say, "O jewel of all males, please decorate our golden bodies with the dark blue gems of Your limbs."
TEXT 39
vaIºyaAlak(Ava{tamauKaM tava ku(Nx"la™aI
gANx"sTalaADar"s$auDaM h"is$ataAvalaAek(ma,
d"ÔaABayaM ca Baujad"Nx"yaugAM ivalaAefya
vaºa: i™ayaEk(r"maNAM ca BavaAma d"Asya:
vīkṣyālakāvṛta-mukhaṁ tava kuṇḍala-śrī-
gaṇḍa-sthalādhara-sudhaṁ hasitāvalokam
dattābhayaṁ ca bhuja-daṇḍa-yugaṁ vilokya
vakṣaḥ śriyaika-ramaṇaṁ ca bhavāma dāsyaḥ
vīkṣya—seeing; alaka—by Your hair; āvṛta—covered; mukham—face: tava—Your; kuṇḍala—of Your earrings; śrī—with the beauty; gaṇḍa-sthala—having the cheeks; adhara—of Your lips; sudham—and the nectar; hasita—smiling; avalokam—with glances; datta—bestowing; abhayam—fearlessness; ca—and; bhuja-daṇḍa—of Your mighty arms; yugam—the pair; vilokya—glancing upon; vakṣaḥ—Your chest; śrī—of the goddess of fortune; eka—the only; ramaṇam—source of pleasure; ca—and; bhavāma—we must become; dāsyaḥ—Your maidservants.
Seeing Your face encircled by curling locks of hair, Your cheeks beautified by earrings, Your lips full of nectar, and Your smiling glance, and also seeing Your two imposing arms, which take away our fear, and Your chest, which is the only source of pleasure for the goddess of fortune, we must become Your maidservants.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura envisions the gopīs' dealings with Kṛṣṇa as follows:
"Kṛṣṇa says, 'You want to become My servants; so do I have to buy you with some payment, or are you giving yourselves freely?'
"The gopīs reply, 'Since the beginning of our youthful womanhood You have been purchasing us with a payment millions and millions of times more than enough. That payment is Your gemlike smiling glance, which constitutes a great treasure we have never heard about or seen anywhere else.'
" 'When You put Your golden turban on Your head, Your maidservant will act as Your valet, pulling up the turban bit by bit until it is in just the right position. And even while You shake a chastising finger at her, trying hard to prohibit her, she will put her hand beneath Your turban and take the opportunity to glance at Your face. Thus we, Your maidservants, will relish with our eyes Your abundant sweetness.'
"Kṛṣṇa says, 'Your husbands will not tolerate this behavior of ours. They will complain bitterly to King Kaṁsa, thus producing a fearful situation for Me and for you as well.'
"The gopīs say, 'But Kṛṣṇa, Your two mighty arms make us fearless, just as they did when You held up Govardhana Hill to protect us from the pride of Mahendra. Those arms will certainly kill that beast Kaṁsa.'
" 'But being a religious person, I cannot make others' wives My maidservants. '
" 'O dear crest jewel of religious personalities, You may say that You refuse to make the cowherds' wives Your maidservants, but by force You have already taken Lakṣmī, the wife of Nārāyaṇa, from Vaikuṇṭha and are carrying her around on Your chest. Out of shame she has assumed the form of a golden line on Your chest, and she takes her only pleasure there.
" 'Besides, within all the fourteen worlds and even above these worlds—in Vaikuṇṭhaloka, beyond this universe—You never reject any beautiful woman, no matter who she is or whom she belongs to. We know this quite well.' "
TEXT 40
k(A s$‡yaṆḷ tae k(lapad"AyatavaeNAugAIta-
s$ammaAeih"taAyaRcair"taAªa calaeit‡alaAefyaAma,
‡aElaAefyas$aAEBagAimadM" ca inar"Iºya ṝ&paM
yaÕ"Aeiã"jaṛu"mama{gAA: paulak(Anyaiba”ana,
kā stry aṅga te kala-padāyata-veṇu-gīta-
sammohitārya-caritān na calet tri-lokyām
trailokya-saubhagam idaṁ ca nirīkṣya rūpaṁ
yad go-dvija-druma-mṛgāḥ pulakāny abibhran
kā—which; strī—woman; aṅga—dear Kṛṣṇa; te—Your; kala—sweet-sounding; pada—having stanzas; āyata—drawn-out; veṇu—of Your flute; gīta—by the song; sammohitā—completely bewildered; ārya—of civilized people; caritāt—from the proper behavior; na calet—does not deviate; tri-lokyām—within the three worlds; trai-lokya—of all the three worlds; saubhagam—the cause of auspiciousness; idam—this; ca—and; nirīkṣya—seeing; rūpam—the personal beauty; yat—because of which; go—the cows; dvija—birds; druma—trees; mṛgāḥ—and deer; pulakāni—bodily hair standing on end; abibhran—they bore.
Dear Kṛṣṇa, what woman in all the three worlds wouldn't deviate from religious behavior when bewildered by the sweet, drawn-out melody of Your flute? Your beauty makes all three worlds auspicious. Indeed, even the cows, birds, trees and deer manifest the ecstatic symptom of bodily hair standing on end when they see Your beautiful form.
TEXT 41
vya·M( BavaAna, ˜ajaBayaAitaRh"r"Ae'iBajaAtaAe
de"vaAe yaTaAid"pauś&Sa: s$aur"laAek(gAAeæaA
taªaAe inaDaeih" k(r"paÆḷjamaAtaRbanDaAe
taæastanaeSau ca izAr":s$au ca ik(Æḷr"INAAma,
vyaktaṁ bhavān vraja-bhayārti-haro 'bhijāto
devo yathādi-puruṣaḥ sura-loka-goptā
tan no nidhehi kara-paṅkajam ārta-bandho
tapta-staneṣu ca śiraḥsu ca kiṅkarīṇām
vyaktam—obviously; bhavān—You; vraja—of the people of Vraja; bhaya—of the fear; ārti—and distress; haraḥ—as the remover; abhijātaḥ—have taken birth; devaḥ—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yathā—just as; ādi-puruṣaḥ—the primeval Lord; sura-loka—of the planets of the demigods; goptā—the protector; tat—therefore; naḥ—of us; nidhehi—kindly place; kara—Your hand; paṅkajam—lotuslike; ārta—of the distressed; bandho—O friend; tapta—burning; staneṣu—on the breasts; ca—and; śiraḥsu—on the heads; ca—also; kiṅkarīṇām—of Your maidservants.
Clearly You have taken birth in this world to relieve the fear and distress of the people of Vraja, just as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the primeval Lord, protects the domain of the demigods. Therefore, O friend of the distressed, kindly place Your lotus hand on Your maidservants' heads and burning breasts.


Song Gopi gita
TEXT 1
gAAepya Ocau:
jayaita tae'iDakM( janmanaA ˜aja:
™ayata wind"r"A zAṅd"‡a ih"
d"iyata ā{"zyataAM id"ºau taAvak(As$a,
tvaiya Da{taAs$avastvaAM ivaicanvatae
gopya ūcuḥ
jayati te 'dhikaṁ janmanā vrajaḥ
śrayata indirā śaśvad atra hi
dayita dṛśyatāṁ dikṣu tāvakās
tvayi dhṛtāsavas tvāṁ vicinvate
gopyaḥ ūcuḥ—the gopīs said; jayati—is glorious; te—Your; adhikam—exceedingly; janmanā—by the birth; vrajaḥ—the land of Vraja; śrayate—is residing; indirā—Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune; śaśvat—perpetually; atra—here; hi—indeed; dayita—O beloved; dṛśyatām—may (You) be seen; dikṣu—in all directions; tāvakāḥ—Your (devotees); tvayi—for Your sake; dhṛta—sustained; asavaḥ—their life airs; tvām—for You; vicinvate—they are searching.
The gopīs said: O beloved, Your birth in the land of Vraja has made it exceedingly glorious, and thus Indirā, the goddess of fortune, always resides here. It is only for Your sake that we, Your devoted servants, maintain our lives. We have been searching everywhere for You, so please show Yourself to us.
Those who are familiar with the art of chanting Sanskrit verses will be able to appreciate the especially exquisite Sanskrit poetry of this chapter. Specifically, the poetic meter of the verses is extraordinarily beautiful, and also, for the most part, in each line the first and seventh syllables begin with the same consonant, as do the second syllables of all four lines.
TEXT 2
zAr"āu"d"AzAyae s$aADaujaAtas$ata,-
s$ar"is$ajaAed"r"™aImauSaA ā{"zAA
s$aur"tanaATa tae'zAulk(d"Ais$ak(A
var"d" ina£ataAe naeh" ikM( vaDa:
śarad-udāśaye sādhu-jāta-sat-
sarasijodara-śrī-muṣā dṛśā
surata-nātha te 'śulka-dāsikā
vara-da nighnato neha kiṁ vadhaḥ
śarat—of the autumn season; uda-āśaye—in the reservoir of water; sādhu—excellently; jāta—grown; sat—fine; sarasi-ja—of the lotus flowers; udara—in the middle; śrī—the beauty; muṣā—which excels; dṛśā—with Your glance; surata-nātha—O Lord of love; te—Your; aśulka—acquired without payment; dāsikāḥ—maidservants; vara-da—O giver of benedictions; nighnataḥ—for You who are killing; na—not; iha—in this world; kim—why; vadhaḥ—murder.
O Lord of love, in beauty Your glance excels the whorl of the finest, most perfectly formed lotus within the autumn pond. O bestower of benedictions, You are killing the maidservants who have given themselves to You freely, without any price. Isn't this murder?
In the autumn season, the whorl of the lotus has a special beauty, but that unique loveliness is surpassed by the beauty of Kṛṣṇa's glance.
TEXT 3
ivaSajalaApyayaAã"YaAlar"Aºas$aAā,"
vaSaRmaAś&taAãE"âutaAnalaAta,
va{SamayaAtmajaAiã"ṅtaAe BayaAā,"
[%SaBa tae vayaM r"iºataA mauḍ":
viṣa-jalāpyayād vyāla-rākṣasād
varṣa-mārutād vaidyutānalāt
vṛṣa-mayātmajād viśvato bhayād
ṛṣabha te vayaṁ rakṣitā muhuḥ
viṣa—poisonous; jala—by the water (of the Yamunā, contaminated by Kāliya); apyayāt—from destruction; vyāla—fearsome; rākṣasāt—from the demon (Agha); varṣa—from rain (sent by Indra); mārutāt—and the wind-storm (created by Tṛṇāvarta); vaidyuta-analāt—from the thunderbolt (of Indra); vṛṣa—from the bull, Ariṣṭāsura; maya-ātmajāt—from the son of Maya (Vyomāsura); viśvataḥ—from all; bhayāt—fear; ṛṣabha—O greatest of personalities; te—by You; vayam—we; rakṣitāḥ—have been protected; muhuḥ—repeatedly.
O greatest of personalities, You have repeatedly saved us from all kinds of danger—from poisoned water, from the terrible man-eater Agha, from the great rains, from the wind demon, from the fiery thunderbolt of Indra, from the bull demon and from the son of Maya Dānava.
Here the gopīs imply, "O Kṛṣṇa, You saved us from so many terrible dangers, so now that we are dying of separation from You, won't You save us again?" Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that the gopīs mention Ariṣṭa and Vyoma because, although Kṛṣṇa had not yet killed these demons, the fact that He would kill them in the future was well known, having been predicted by the sages Garga and Bhāguri at the time of the Lord's birth.
TEXT 4
na Kalau gAAepaIk(Anand"naAe BavaAna,
@iKalade"ih"naAmantar"Atmaā{"k,(
ivaKanas$aAiTaRtaAe ivaṅgAuæayae
s$aKa ode"iyavaAna, s$aAtvataAM ku(lae
na khalu gopīkā-nandano bhavān
akhila-dehinām antarātma-dṛk
vikhanasārthito viśva-guptaye
sakha udeyivān sātvatāṁ kule
na—not; khalu—indeed; gopikā—of the gopī, Yaśodā; nandanaḥ—the son; bhavān—Your good self; akhila—of all; dehinām—embodied living entities; antaḥ-ātma—of the inner consciousness; dṛk—the seer; vikhanasā—by Lord Brahmā; arthitaḥ—prayed for; viśva—of the universe; guptaye—for the protection; sakhe—O friend; udeyivān—You arose; sātvatām—of the Sātvatas; kule—in the dynasty.
You are not actually the son of the gopī Yaśodā, O friend, but rather the indwelling witness in the hearts of all embodied souls. Because Lord Brahmā prayed for You to come and protect the universe, You have now appeared in the Sātvata dynasty.
The gopīs here imply, "Since You have descended to protect the entire universe, how can You neglect Your own devotees?"
TEXT 5
ivar"icataABayaM va{iSNADaUyaR tae
car"NAmaIyauSaAM s$aMs$a{taeBaRyaAta,
k(r"s$ar"Aeś&hM" k(Anta k(AmadM"
izAr"is$a Daeih" na: ™aIk(r"ƒah"ma,
viracitābhayaṁ vṛṣṇi-dhūrya te
caraṇam īyuṣāṁ saṁsṛter bhayāt
kara-saroruhaṁ kānta kāma-daṁ
śirasi dhehi naḥ śrī-kara-graham
viracita—created; abhayam—fearlessness; vṛṣṇi—of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty; dhūrya—O best; te—Your; caraṇam—feet; īyuṣām—of those who approach; saṁsṛteḥ—of material existence; bhayāt—out of fear; kara—Your hand; saraḥ-ruham—like a lotus flower; kānta—O lover; kāma—desires; dam—fulfilling; śirasi—on the heads; dhehi—please place; naḥ—of us; śrī—of the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmīdevī; kara—the hand; graham—taking.
O best of the Vṛṣṇis, Your lotuslike hand, which holds the hand of the goddess of fortune, grants fearlessness to those who approach Your feet out of fear of material existence. O lover, please place that wish-fulfilling lotus hand on our heads.
TEXT 6
˜ajajanaAitaRh"na, vaIr" yaAeiSataAM
inajajanasmayaDvaMs$anaismata
Baja s$aKae Bavaitk(Æḷr"I: sma naAe
jalaś&h"AnanaM caAś& d"zARya
vraja-janārti-han vīra yoṣitāṁ
nija-jana-smaya-dhvaṁsana-smita
bhaja sakhe bhavat-kiṅkarīḥ sma no
jalaruhānanaṁ cāru darśaya
vraja-jana—of the people of Vraja; ārti—of the suffering; han—O destroyer; vīra—O hero; yoṣitām—of women; nija—Your own; jana—of the people; smaya—the pride; dhvaṁsana—destroying; smita—whose smile; bhaja—please accept; sakhe—O friend; bhavat—Your; kiṅkarīḥ—maidservants; sma—indeed; naḥ—us; jala-ruha—lotus; ānanam—Your face; cāru—beautiful; darśaya—please show.
O You who destroy the suffering of Vraja's people, O hero of all women, Your smile shatters the false pride of Your devotees. Please, dear friend, accept us as Your maidservants and show us Your beautiful lotus face.
TEXT 7
‘aNAtade"ih"naAM paApak(SaRNAM
ta{NAcar"AnaugAM ™aIinake(tanama,
P(iNAP(NAAipaRtaM tae pad"AmbaujaM
k{(NAu ku(caeSau na: k{(inDa ô$cC$yama,
praṇata-dehināṁ pāpa-karṣaṇaṁ
tṛṇa-carānugaṁ śrī-niketanam
phaṇi-phaṇārpitaṁ te padāmbujaṁ
kṛṇu kuceṣu naḥ kṛndhi hṛc-chayam
praṇata—who are surrendered to You; dehinām—of the embodied living beings; pāpa—the sins; karṣaṇam—which remove; tṛṇa—grass; cara—who graze (the cows); anugam—following; śrī—of the goddess of fortune; niketanam—the abode; phaṇi—of the serpent (Kāliya); phaṇā—on the hoods; arpitam—placed; te—Your; pada-ambujam—lotus feet; kṛṇu—please put; kuceṣu—on the breasts; naḥ—our; kṛndhi—cut away; hṛt-śayam—the lust in our hearts.
Your lotus feet destroy the past sins of all embodied souls who surrender to them. Those feet follow after the cows in the pastures and are the eternal abode of the goddess of fortune. Since You once put those feet on the hoods of the great serpent Kāliya, please place them upon our breasts and tear away the lust in our hearts.
In their appeal, the gopīs point out that Lord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet destroy the sins of all surrendered conditioned souls. The Lord is so merciful that He even goes out to herd the cows in the pasturing ground, and thus His lotus feet follow them about in the grass. He has offered His lotus feet to the goddess of fortune and has placed them upon the hoods of the serpent Kāliya. Therefore, considering all this, the Lord should place His lotus feet on the gopīs' breasts and satisfy their desire. That is the logic the gopīs employ here.
TEXT 8
maDaur"yaA igAr"A valgAuvaAfyayaA
bauDamanaAeÁayaA pauSk(re"ºaNA
ivaiDak(r"Iir"maA vaIr" mau÷taIr,"
@Dar"s$aIDaunaApyaAyayasva na:
madhurayā girā valgu-vākyayā
budha-manojñayā puṣkarekṣaṇa
vidhi-karīr imā vīra muhyatīr
adhara-sīdhunāpyāyayasva naḥ
madhurayā—sweet; girā—by Your voice; valgu—charming; vākyayā—by Your words; budha—to the intelligent; mano-jñayā—attractive; puṣkara—lotus; īkṣaṇa—You whose eyes; vidhi-karīḥ—maidservants; imāḥ—these; vīra—O hero; muhyatīḥ—becoming bewildered; adhara—of Your lips; sīdhunā—with the nectar; āpyāyayasva—please restore to life; naḥ—us.
O lotus-eyed one, Your sweet voice and charming words, which attract the minds of the intelligent, are bewildering us more and more. Our dear hero, please revive Your maidservants with the nectar of Your lips.
TEXT 9
tava k(TaAma{taM taæajaIvanaM
k(ivaiBar"Iix"taM k(lmaSaApah"ma,
™avaNAmaṆḷlaM ™aImad"AtataM
Bauiva gA{NAinta yae BaUir"d"A janaA:
tava kathāmṛtaṁ tapta-jīvanaṁ
kavibhir īḍitaṁ kalmaṣāpaham
śravaṇa-maṅgalaṁ śrīmad ātataṁ
bhuvi gṛṇanti ye bhūri-dā janāḥ
tava—Your; kathā-amṛtam—the nectar of words; tapta-jīvanam—life for those aggrieved in the material world; kavibhiḥ—by great thinkers; īḍitam—described; kalmaṣa-apaham—that which drives away sinful reactions; śravaṇa-maṅgalam—giving spiritual benefit when heard; śṛīmat—filled with spiritual power; ātatam—broadcast all over the world; bhuvi—in the material world; gṛṇanti—chant and spread; ye—those who; bhūri-dāḥ—most beneficent; janāḥ—persons.
The nectar of Your words and the descriptions of Your activities are the life and soul of those suffering in this material world. These narrations, transmitted by learned sages, eradicate one's sinful reactions and bestow good fortune upon whoever hears them. These narrations are broadcast all over the world and are filled with spiritual power. Certainly those who spread the message of Godhead are most munificent.
King Pratāparudra recited this verse to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu during Lord Jagannātha's Ratha-yātrā festival. While the Lord was resting in a garden, King Pratāparudra humbly entered and began massaging His legs and lotus feet. Then the king recited the Thirty-first Chapter of the Tenth Canto of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the songs of the gopīs. The Caitanya-caritāmṛta relates that when Lord Caitanya heard this verse, beginning tava kathāmṛtam, He immediately arose in ecstatic love and embraced King Pratāparudra. The incident is described in detail in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 14.4-18), and in his edition Śrīla Prabhupāda has given extensive commentary on it.
TEXT 10
‘ah"is$ataM i‘aya‘aemavaIºaNAM
ivah"r"NAM ca tae DyaAnamaṆḷlama,
r"h"is$a s$aMivad"Ae yaA ô$id" s$pa{zA:
ku(h"k( naAe mana: ºaAeBayainta ih"
prahasitaṁ priya-prema-vīkṣaṇaṁ
viharaṇaṁ ca te dhyāna-maṅgalam
rahasi saṁvido yā hṛdi spṛśaḥ
kuhaka no manaḥ kṣobhayanti hi
prahasitam—the smiling; priya—affectionate; prema—with love; vīkṣaṇam—glances; viharaṇam—intimate pastimes; ca—and; te—Your; dhyāna—by meditation; maṅgalam—auspicious; rahasi—in solitary places; saṁvidaḥ—conversations; yāḥ—which; hṛdi—the heart; spṛśaḥ—touching; kuhaka—O cheater; naḥ—our; manaḥ—minds; kṣobhayanti—agitate; hi—indeed.
Your smiles, Your sweet, loving glances, the intimate pastimes and confidential talks we enjoyed with You—all these are auspicious to meditate upon, and they touch our hearts. But at the same time, O deceiver, they very much agitate our minds.
TEXT 11
calais$a yaā," ˜ajaA»aAr"yana, pazAUna,
nailanas$aund"rM" naATa tae pad"ma,
izAlata{NAAŚḷrE": s$aId"taIita na:
k(ilalataAM mana: k(Anta gAcC$ita
calasi yad vrajāc cārayan paśūn
nalina-sundaraṁ nātha te padam
śila-tṛṇāṅkuraiḥ sīdatīti naḥ
kalilatāṁ manaḥ kānta gacchati
calasi—You go; yat—when; vrajāt—from the cowherd village; cārayan—herding; paśūn—the animals; nalina—than a lotus flower; sundaram—more beautiful; nātha—O master; te—Your; padam—feet; śila—by sharp edges of grain; tṛṇa—grass; aṅkuraiḥ—and sprouting plants; sīdati—are experiencing pain; iti—thus thinking; naḥ—us; kalilatām—discomfort; manaḥ—our minds; kānta—O lover; gacchati—feel.
Dear master, dear lover, when You leave the cowherd village to herd the cows, our minds are disturbed with the thought that Your feet, more beautiful than a lotus, will be pricked by the spiked husks of grain and the rough grass and plants.
TEXT 12
id"napair"ºayae naIlaku(ntalaEr,"
vanaś&h"AnanaM iba”ad"Ava{tama,
Ganar"jasvalaM d"zARyanmauḍ"r,"
manais$a na: smarM" vaIr" yacC$is$a
dina-parikṣaye nīla-kuntalair
vanaruhānanaṁ bibhrad āvṛtam
ghana-rajasvalaṁ darśayan muhur
manasi naḥ smaraṁ vīra yacchasi
dina—of the day; parikṣaye—at the finish; nīla—dark blue; kuntalaiḥ—with locks of hair; vana-ruha—lotus; ānanam—face; bibhrat—exhibiting; āvṛtam—covered; ghana—thick; rajaḥ-valam—smeared with dust; darśayan—showing; muhuḥ—repeatedly; manasi—in the minds; naḥ—our; smaram—Cupid; vīra—O hero; yacchasi—You are placing.
At the end of the day You repeatedly show us Your lotus face, covered with dark blue locks of hair and thickly powdered with dust. Thus, O hero, You arouse lusty desires in our minds.
TEXT 13
‘aNAtak(AmadM" paájaAicaRtaM
Dar"iNAmaNx"naM DyaeyamaApaid"
car"NApaÆḷjaM zAntamaM ca tae
r"maNA na: stanaeSvapaRyaAiDah"na,
praṇata-kāma-daṁ padmajārcitaṁ
dharaṇi-maṇḍanaṁ dhyeyam āpadi
caraṇa-paṅkajaṁ śantamaṁ ca te
ramaṇa naḥ staneṣv arpayādhi-han
praṇata—of those who bow down; kāma—the desires; dam—fulfilling; padma-ja—by Lord Brahmā; arcitam—worshiped; dharaṇi—of the earth; maṇḍanam—the ornament; dhyeyam—the proper object of meditation; āpadi—in time of distress; caraṇa-paṅkajam—the lotus feet; śam-tamam-giving the highest satisfaction; ca—and; te—Your; ramaṇa—O lover; naḥ—our; staneṣu—on the breasts; arpaya—please place; adhi-han—O destroyer of mental distress.
Your lotus feet, which are worshiped by Lord Brahmā, fulfill the desires of all who bow down to them. They are the ornament of the earth, they give the highest satisfaction, and in times of danger they are the appropriate object of meditation. O lover, O destroyer of anxiety, please place those lotus feet upon our breasts.
TEXT 14
s$aur"tavaDaRnaM zAAek(naAzAnaM
svair"tavaeNAunaA s$auñ]" cauimbatama,
wtar"r"AgAivasmaAr"NAM na{NAAM
ivatar" vaIr" nastae'Dar"Ama{tama,
surata-vardhanaṁ śoka-nāśanaṁ
svarita-veṇunā suṣṭhu cumbitam
itara-rāga-vismāraṇaṁ nṛṇāṁ
vitara vīra nas te 'dharāmṛtam
surata—conjugal happiness; vardhanam—which increases; śoka—grief; nāśanam—which destroys; svarita—vibrated; veṇunā—by Your flute; suṣṭhu—abundantly; cumbitam—kissed; itara—other; rāga—attachments; vismāraṇam—causing to forget; nṛṇām—men; vitara—please spread; vīra—O hero; naḥ—upon us; te—Your; adhara—of the lips; amṛtam—the nectar.
O hero, kindly distribute to us the nectar of Your lips, which enhances conjugal pleasure and vanquishes grief. That nectar is thoroughly relished by Your vibrating flute and makes people forget any other attachment.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī' s charming commentary on this verse is in the form of a dialogue between the gopīs and Kṛṣṇa:
"The gopīs say, 'O Kṛṣṇa, You exactly resemble Dhanvantari, the best of physicians. So please give us some medicine, for we are suffering from the disease of romantic desire for You. Don't hesitate to give us the medicinal nectar of Your lips freely, without our paying a substantial price. Since You are a great hero in giving charity, You should give it without any payment, even to the most wretched persons. Consider that we are losing our life and that now You can restore us to life by giving us that nectar. After all, You have already given it to Your flute, which is simply a hollow bamboo stick.'
"Kṛṣṇa says, 'But the diet of people in this world is the bad one of attachment to wealth, followers, family and so forth. The particular medicine you've requested should not be given to those who have such a bad diet.'
" 'But this medicine makes one forget all other attachments. So wonderful is this herbal drug that it counteracts bad dietary habits. Please give that nectar to us, O hero, since You are most charitable.' "
TEXT 15
@q%ita yaṁ"vaAnai¶" k(AnanaM
‡auiq% yaugAAyatae tvaAmapazyataAma,
ku(iq%laku(ntalaM ™aImauKaM ca tae
jax" od"IºataAM paºmak{(ā," ā{"zAAma,
aṭati yad bhavān ahni kānanaṁ
truṭi yugāyate tvām apaśyatām
kuṭila-kuntalaṁ śrī-mukhaṁ ca te
jaḍa udīkṣatāṁ pakṣma-kṛd dṛśām
aṭati—travel; yat—when; bhavān—You; ahni—during the daytime; kānanam—to the forest; truṭi—about 1/1700 of a second; yugāyate—becomes like an entire millennium; tvām—You; apaśyatām—for those who do not see; kuṭila—curling; kuntalam—with locks of hair; śrī—beautiful; mukham—face; ca—and; te—Your; jaḍaḥ—foolish; udīkṣatām—for those who are eagerly looking; pakṣma—of lids; kṛt—the creator; dṛśām—of the eyes.
When You go off to the forest during the day, a tiny fraction of a second becomes like a millennium for us because we cannot see You. And even when we can eagerly look upon Your beautiful face, so lovely with its adornment of curly locks, our pleasure is hindered by our eyelids, which were fashioned by the foolish creator.
TEXT 16
paitas$autaAnvaya”aAta{baAnDavaAna,
@itaivalaÎḷYa tae'ntyacyautaAgAtaA:
gAitaivad"stavaAeÕ"ItamaAeih"taA:
ik(tava yaAeiSata: k(styajaeiªaizA
pati-sutānvaya-bhrātṛ-bāndhavān
ativilaṅghya te 'nty acyutāgatāḥ
gati-vidas tavodgīta-mohitāḥ
kitava yoṣitaḥ kas tyajen niśi
pati—husbands; suta—children; anvaya—ancestors; bhrātṛ—brothers; bāndhavān—and other relatives; ativilaṅghya—completely neglecting; te—Your; anti—into the presence; acyuta—O infallible one; āgatāḥ—having come; gati—of our movements; vidaḥ—who understand the purpose; tava—Your; udgīta—by the loud song (of the flute); mohitāḥ—bewildered; kitava—O cheater; yoṣitaḥ—women; kaḥ—who; tyajet—would abandon; niśi—in the night.
Dear Acyuta, You know very well why we have come here. Who but a cheater like You would abandon young women who come to see Him in the middle of the night, enchanted by the loud song of His flute? Just to see You, we have completely rejected our husbands, children, ancestors, brothers and other relatives.
TEXT 17
r"h"is$a s$aMivadM" ô$cC$yaAed"yaM
‘ah"is$ataAnanaM ‘aemavaIºaNAma,
ba{h"āu"r": i™ayaAe vaIºya DaAma tae
mauḍ"r"itas$pa{h"A mau÷tae mana:
rahasi saṁvidaṁ hṛc-chayodayaṁ
prahasitānanaṁ prema-vīkṣaṇam
bṛhad-uraḥ śriyo vīkṣya dhāma te
muhur ati-spṛhā muhyate manaḥ
rahasi—in private; saṁvidam—confidential discussions; hṛt-śaya—of lust in the heart; udayam—the rise; prahasita—smiling; ānanam—face; prema—loving; vīkṣaṇam—glances; bṛhat—broad; uraḥ—chest; śriyaḥ—of the goddess of fortune; vīkṣya—seeing; dhāma—the abode; te—Your; muhuḥ—repeatedly; ati—excessive; spṛhā—hankering; muhyate—bewilders; manaḥ—the mind.
Our minds are repeatedly bewildered as we think of the intimate conversations we had with You in secret, feel the rise of lust in our hearts and remember Your smiling face, Your loving glances and Your broad chest, the resting place of the goddess of fortune. Thus we experience the most severe hankering for You.
TEXT 18
˜ajavanaAEk(s$aAM vyai·(r"Ṇḷ tae
va{ijanah"n‡yalaM ivaṅmaṆḷlama,
tyaja manaAfca nastvats$pa{h"AtmanaAM
svajanaô$ṛu"jaAM yaiªaSaUd"nama,
vraja-vanaukasāṁ vyaktir aṅga te
vṛjina-hantry alaṁ viśva-maṅgalam
tyaja manāk ca nas tvat-spṛhātmanāṁ
sva-jana-hṛd-rujāṁ yan niṣūdanam
vraja-vana—in the forests of Vraja; okasām—for those who dwell; vyaktiḥ—the appearance; aṅga—dear one; te—Your; vṛjina—of distress; hantrī—the agent of destruction; alam—extremely so; viśva-maṅgalam—all-auspicious; tyaja—please release; manāk—a little; ca—and; naḥ—to us; tvat—for You; spṛhā—with hankering; ātmanām—whose minds are filled; sva—Your own; jana—devotees; hṛt—in the hearts; rujām—of the disease; yat—which is; niṣūdanam—that which counteracts.
O beloved, Your all-auspicious appearance vanquishes the distress of those living in Vraja's forests. Our minds long for Your association. Please give to us just a bit of that medicine, which counteracts the disease in Your devotees' hearts.
According to the ācāryas, the gopīs repeatedly entreat Lord Kṛṣṇa to place His lotus feet on their breasts. The gopīs are not victims of material lust, but rather they are absorbed in pure love of Godhead and thus want to serve Lord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet by offering their beautiful breasts to Him. Materialistic persons, who are victims of mundane sex desire, will not be able to understand how these conjugal dealings take place on a pure, spiritual platform, and that is the materialists' great misfortune.
TEXT 19
yaÔae s$aujaAtacar"NAAmbauś&hM" stanaeSau
BaItaA: zAnaE: i‘aya d"DaImaih" k(kR(zAeSau
taenaAq%vaImaq%is$a taã"YaTatae na ikM( isvata,
kU(paARid"iBa”aRmaita DaIBaRvad"AyauSaAM na:
yat te sujāta-caraṇāmburuhaṁ staneṣu
bhītāḥ śanaiḥ priya dadhīmahi karkaśeṣu
tenāṭavīm aṭasi tad vyathate na kiṁ svit
kūrpādibhir bhramati dhīr bhavad-āyuṣāṁ naḥ
yat—which; te—Your; su-jāta—very fine; caraṇa-ambu-ruham—lotus feet; staneṣu—on the breasts; bhītāḥ—being afraid; śanaiḥ—gently; priya—O dear one; dadhīmahi—we place; karkaśeṣu—rough; tena—with them; aṭavīm—the forest; aṭasi—You roam; tat—they; vyathate—are distressed; na—not; kim svit—we wonder; kūrpa-ādibhiḥ—by small stones and so on; bhramati—flutters; dhīḥ—the mind; bhavat-āyuṣām—of those of whom Your Lordship is the very life; naḥ—of us.
O dearly beloved! Your lotus feet are so soft that we place them gently on our breasts, fearing that Your feet will be hurt. Our life rests only in You. Our minds, therefore, are filled with anxiety that Your tender feet might be wounded by pebbles as You roam about on the forest path.
The translation of this verse is from Śrīla Prabhupāda's English rendering of Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi 4.173).
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda to the Tenth Canto, Thirty-first Chapter, of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Gopīs' Songs of Separation."


Song Gopis singing the pastimes of Krsna
TEXTS 2-3
™aIgAAepya Ocau:
vaAmabaAḍ"k{(tavaAmak(paAelaAe
vailgAta”aur"Dar"AipaRtavaeNAuma,
k(AemalaAṄḷilaiBar"Ai™atamaAgA<
gAAepya wRr"yaita ya‡a mauku(nd":
vyaAemayaAnavainataA: s$ah" is$aŪE"r,"
ivaismataAstaāu"paDaAyaR s$alaṀaA:
k(AmamaAgARNAs$amaipaRtaicaÔaA:
k(zmalaM yayaur"pasma{tanaIvya:
śrī-gopya ūcuḥ
vāma-bāhu-kṛta-vāma-kapolo
valgita-bhrur adharārpita-veṇum
komalāṅgulibhir āśrita-mārgaṁ
gopya īrayati yatra mukundaḥ
vyoma-yāna-vanitāḥ saha siddhair
vismitās tad upadhārya sa-lajjāḥ
kāma-mārgaṇa-samarpita-cittāḥ
kaśmalaṁ yayur apasmṛta-nīvyaḥ
śrī-gopyaḥ ūcuḥ—the gopīs said; vāma—left; bāhu—on His arm; kṛta—putting; vāma—left; kapolaḥ—His cheek; valgita—moving; bhruḥ—His eyebrows; adhara—upon His lips; arpita—placed; veṇum—His flute; komala—tender; aṅgulibhiḥ—with His fingers; āśrita-mārgam—its holes stopped; gopyaḥ—O gopīs; īrayati—vibrates; yatra—where; mukundaḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa; vyoma—in the sky; yāna—traveling; vanitāḥ—the ladies; saha—together with; siddhaiḥ—the Siddha demigods; vismitāḥ—amazed; tat—to that; upadhārya—listening; sa—with; lajjāḥ—embarrassment; kāma—of lust; mārgaṇa—to the pursuit; samarpita—offered; cittāḥ—their minds; kaśmalam—distress; yayuḥ—they experienced; apasmṛta—forgetting; nīvyaḥ—the belts of their dresses.
The gopīs said: O gopīs, when Mukunda vibrates the flute He has placed to His lips, stopping its holes with His tender fingers, He rests His left cheek on His left arm and makes His eyebrows dance. At that time the demigoddesses traveling in the sky with their husbands, the Siddhas, become amazed. As those ladies listen, they are embarrassed to find their minds yielding to the pursuit of lusty desires, and in their distress they are unaware that the belts of their garments are loosening.
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī states that this chapter consists of a collection of statements the gopīs made at various times as they stood in small groups here and there in Vṛndāvana.
TEXTS 4-5
h"nta ica‡amabalaA: Za{NAutaedM"
h"Ar"h"As$a or"is$a isTar"ivaâuta,
nand"s$aUnaur"yamaAtaRjanaAnaAM
namaRd"Ae yaihR" kU(ijatavaeNAu:
va{nd"zAAe ˜ajava{SaA ma{gAgAAvaAe
vaeNAuvaAâô$tacaetas$a @Ar"Ata,
d"ntad"í"k(valaA Da{tak(NAAR
inai‰"taA ilaiKataica‡aimavaAs$ana,
hanta citram abalāḥ śṛṇutedaṁ
hāra-hāsa urasi sthira-vidyut
nanda-sūnur ayam ārta-janānāṁ
narma-do yarhi kūjita-veṇuḥ
vṛndaśo vraja-vṛṣā mṛga-gāvo
veṇu-vādya-hṛta-cetasa ārāt
danta-daṣṭa-kavalā dhṛta-karṇā
nidritā likhita-citram ivāsan
hanta—ah; citram—wonder; abalāḥ—O girls; śṛṇuta—hear; idam—this; hāra—(brilliant) like a necklace; hāsaḥ—whose smile; urasi—upon the chest; sthira—motionless; vidyut—lightning; nanda-sūnuḥ—son of Nanda Mahārāja; ayam—this; ārta—troubled; janānām—for persons; narma—of joy; daḥ—the giver; yarhi—when; kūjita—has vibrated; veṇuḥ—His flute; vrṇdaśaḥ—in groups; vraja—kept in the pasture; vṛṣāḥ—the bulls; mṛga—the deer; gāvaḥ—and the cows; veṇu—of the flute; vādya—by the playing; hṛta—stolen away; cetasaḥ—their minds; ārāt—at a distance; danta—by their teeth; daṣṭa—bit; kavalāḥ—whose mouthfuls; dhṛta—holding up; karṇāḥ—their ears; nidritāḥ—asleep; likhita—drawn; citram—an illustration; iva—as if; āsan—they were.
O girls! This son of Nanda, who gives joy to the distressed, bears steady lightning on His chest and has a smile like a jeweled necklace. Now please hear something wonderful. When He vibrates His flute, Vraja's bulls, deer and cows, standing in groups at a great distance, are all captivated by the sound, and they stop chewing the food in their mouths and cock their ears. Stunned, they appear as if asleep, or like figures in a painting.
The word sthira-vidyut, "steady lightning," refers to the goddess of fortune, who resides on the chest of the Supreme Lord. When the animals of Vṛndāvana hear the sound of the flute, they become stunned in ecstasy, and thus they stop chewing their food and cannot swallow it. The gopīs, in separation from Kṛṣṇa, marvel at the extraordinary effect of the Lord's flute-playing.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī gives the following explanation of the compound word hāra-hāsa, which compares Lord Kṛṣṇa's smile to a necklace: "The word can mean 'He whose smile is brilliantly clear like a jeweled necklace' or 'He whose smile is reflected from His jeweled necklaces,' because while Kṛṣṇa plays the flute He bends His head down and smiles. The word can also mean 'He whose smile, like a jeweled necklace, casts its effulgence upon His chest' or 'He whose necklaces shine brilliantly, just like a smile.' "
TEXTS 6-7
baihR"NAstabak(DaAtaupalaAzAEr,"
baŪ"maīapair"bahR"ivax"mba:
k(ihR"icats$abala @Aila s$a gAAepaEr,"
gAA: s$amaAḥ"yaita ya‡a mauku(nd":
taihR" Ba¢agAtaya: s$air"taAe vaE
tatpad"Ambaujar"jaAe'inalanaItama,
s$pa{h"yataIvaRyaimavaAbaḍ"pauNyaA:
‘aemavaeipataBaujaA: istaimataApa:
barhiṇa-stabaka-dhātu-palāśair
baddha-malla-paribarha-viḍambaḥ
karhicit sa-bala āli sa gopair
gāḥ samāhvayati yatra mukundaḥ
tarhi bhagna-gatayaḥ sarito vai
tat-padāmbuja-rajo 'nila-nītam
spṛhayatīr vayam ivābahu-puṇyāḥ
prema-vepita-bhujāḥ stimitāpaḥ
barhiṇa—of peacocks; stabaka—with the tail feathers; dhātu—with colored minerals; palāśaiḥ—and with leaves; baddha—arranged; malla—of a wrestler; paribarha—the apparel; viḍambaḥ—imitating; karhicit—sometimes; sa-balaḥ—with Balarāma; āli—my dear gopī; saḥ—He; gopaiḥ—with the cowherd boys; gāḥ—the cows; samāhvayati—calls; yatra—when; mukundaḥ—Lord Mukunda; tarhi—then; bhagna—broken; gatayaḥ—their movement; saritaḥ—the rivers; vai—indeed; tat—His; pada-ambuja—of the lotus feet; rajaḥ—the dust; anila—by the wind; nītam—brought; spṛhayatīḥ—hankering for; vayam—ourselves; iva—just like; abahu—slight; puṇyāḥ—the piety to whose credit; prema—due to love of God; vepita—trembling; bhujāḥ—whose arms (waves); stimita—stopped; āpaḥ—whose water.
My dear gopī, sometimes Mukunda imitates the appearance of a wrestler by decorating Himself with leaves, peacock feathers and colored minerals. Then, in the company of Balarāma and the cowherd boys, He plays His flute to call the cows. At that time the rivers stop flowing, their water stunned by the ecstasy they feel as they eagerly wait for the wind to bring them the dust of His lotus feet. But like us, the rivers are not very pious, and thus they merely wait with their arms trembling out of love.
The gopīs state here that the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute causes even inanimate objects like rivers to become conscious and then stunned in ecstasy. Just as the gopīs could not always be in Kṛṣṇa's physical association, the rivers could not come to the Lord's lotus feet. Although they desired the Lord, their movement was checked by ecstasy, and their "arms," their waves, trembled with love of Godhead.
TEXTS 8-11
@naucarE": s$amanauvaiNARtavaIyaR
@Aid"paUś&Sa wvaAcalaBaUita:
vanacar"Ae igAir"taqe%Sau car"ntaIr,"
vaeNAunaAḥ"yaita gAA: s$a yad"A ih"
vanalataAstar"va @Atmaina ivaSNAuM
vyaÃayantya wva pauSpaP(laAX#YaA:
‘aNAtaBaAr"ivaq%paA maDauDaAr"A:
‘aemaô$í"tanavaAe vava{Sau: sma
d"zARnaIyaitalak(Ae vanamaAlaA-
id"vyagAnDataulas$aImaDaumaÔaE:
@ilaku(laEr"laGau gAItamaBaIí"maa,
@Ai‰"yana, yaihR" s$ainDatavaeNAu:
s$ar"is$a s$aAr"s$ahM"s$aivah"ṆḷAzA,
caAś&gAItaAô$tacaetas$a Wtya
h"ir"maupaAs$ata tae yataicaÔaA
h"nta maIilataā{"zAAe Da{tamaAEnaA:
anucaraiḥ samanuvarṇita-vīrya
ādi-pūruṣa ivācala-bhūtiḥ
vana-caro giri-taṭeṣu carantīr
veṇunāhvayati gāḥ sa yadā hi
vana-latās tarava ātmani viṣṇuṁ
vyañjayantya iva puṣpa-phalāḍhyāḥ
praṇata-bhāra-viṭapā madhu-dhārāḥ
prema-hṛṣṭa-tanavo vavṛṣuḥ sma
darśanīya-tilako vana-mālā-
divya-gandha-tulasī-madhu-mattaiḥ
ali-kulair alaghu gītam abhīṣṭam
ādriyan yarhi sandhita-veṇuḥ
sarasi sārasa-haṁsa-vihaṅgāś
cāru-gītā-hṛta-cetasa etya
harim upāsata te yata-cittā
hanta mīlita-dṛśo dhṛta-maunāḥ
anucaraiḥ—by His companions; samanuvarṇita—being elaborately described; vīryaḥ—whose prowess; ādi-pūruṣaḥ—the original Personality of Godhead; iva—as if; acala—unchanging; bhūtiḥ—whose opulences; vana—in the forest; caraḥ—moving about; giri—of the mountains; taṭesu—on the sides; carantīḥ—who are grazing; veṇunā—with His flute; āhvayati—calls; gāḥ—the cows; saḥ—He; yadā—when; hi—indeed; vana-latāḥ—the forest creepers; taravaḥ—and the trees; ātmani—within themselves; viṣṇum—the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu; vyañjayantyaḥ—revealing; iva—as if; puṣpa—with flowers; phala—and fruits; āḍhyāḥ—richly endowed; praṇata—bowed down; bhāra—because of the weight; viṭapāḥ—whose branches; madhu—of sweet sap; dhārāḥ—torrents; prema—out of ecstatic love; hṛṣṭa—hairs standing on end; tanavaḥ—on whose bodies (trunks); vavṛṣuḥ sma—they have rained down; darśanīya—of persons who are attractive to see; tilakaḥ—the most excellent; vana-mālā—upon His garland made of forest flowers; divya—divine; gandha—whose fragrance; tulasī—of the tulasī flowers; madhu—by the honeylike sweetness; mattaiḥ—intoxicated; ali—of bees; kulaiḥ—by the swarms; alaghu—strong; gītam—the singing; abhīṣṭam—desirable; ādriyan—thankfully acknowledging; yarhi—when; sandhita—placed; veṇuḥ—His flute; sarasi—in the lake; sārasa—the cranes; haṁsa—swans; vihaṅgāḥ—and other birds; cāru—charming; gīta—by the song (of His flute); hṛta—taken away; cetasaḥ—whose minds; etya—coming forward; harim—Lord Kṛṣṇa; upāsata—worship; te—they; yata—under control; cittāḥ—whose minds; hanta—ah; mīlita—closed; dṛśaḥ—their eyes; dhṛta—maintaining; maunāḥ—silence.
Kṛṣṇa moves about the forest in the company of His friends, who vividly chant the glories of His magnificent deeds. He thus appears just like the Supreme Personality of Godhead exhibiting His inexhaustible opulences. When the cows wander onto the mountainsides and Kṛṣṇa calls out to them with the sound of His flute, the trees and creepers in the forest respond by becoming so luxuriant with fruits and flowers that they seem to be manifesting Lord Viṣṇu within their hearts. As their branches bend low with the weight, the filaments on their trunks and vines stand erect out of the ecstasy of love of God, and both the trees and the creepers pour down a rain of sweet sap.
Maddened by the divine, honeylike aroma of the tulasī flowers on the garland Kṛṣṇa wears, swarms of bees sing loudly for Him, and that most beautiful of all persons thankfully acknowledges and acclaims their song by taking His flute to His lips and playing it. The charming flute song then steals away the minds of the cranes, swans and other lake-dwelling birds. Indeed, they approach Kṛṣṇa, close their eyes and, maintaining strict silence, worship Him by fixing their consciousness upon Him in deep meditation.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has made several illuminating comments on these verses. He gives the analogy that just as when householder Vaiṣṇavas hear a saṅkīrtana party approaching they become ecstatic and offer obeisances, so the trees and creepers in Vṛndāvana became ecstatic when they heard Kṛṣṇa's flute and bowed low with their branches and vines. The word darśanīya-tilaka in Text 10 indicates not only that the Lord is "the most excellent (to see)," but also that He decorated Himself with attractive reddish tilaka taken from the mineral-rich earth of Vṛndāvana forest.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī also points out that tulasī, although exalted in many ways, is not normally considered an especially fragrant plant. However, early in the morning tulasī emits a transcendental fragrance that ordinary people cannot perceive but that transcendental personalities fully appreciate. The bees who are privileged to swarm about the flower garlands worn by the Supreme Personality of Godhead certainly appreciate this fragrance, and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī quotes from the Bhāgavatam (3.15.19) to the effect that the most fragrant plants in Vaikuṇṭha also appreciate the special qualifications of Tulasī-devī.
The word sandhita-veṇuḥ in Text 10 indicates that Lord Kṛṣṇa placed His flute firmly upon His lips. And the melody emanating from that flute is certainly the most enchanting of sounds, as the gopīs describe in this chapter.
TEXTS 12-13
s$ah"bala: ›agAvataMs$aivalaAs$a:
s$aAnauSau iºaitaBa{taAe ˜ajade"vya:
h"SaRyana, yaihR" vaeNAur"vaeNA
jaAtah"SaR opar"mBaita ivaṅma,
mah"d"ita‚(maNAzAiÆḷtacaetaA
mand"mand"manaugAjaRita maeGa:
s$auô$d"maByavaSaRts$aumanaAeiBazA,
C$AyayaA ca ivad"Dat‘atapa‡ama,
saha-balaḥ srag-avataṁsa-vilāsaḥ
sānuṣu kṣiti-bhṛto vraja-devyaḥ
harṣayan yarhi veṇu-raveṇa
jāta-harṣa uparambhati viśvam
mahad-atikramaṇa-śaṅkita-cetā
manda-mandam anugarjati meghaḥ
suhṛdam abhyavarṣat sumanobhiś
chāyayā ca vidadhat pratapatram
saha-balaḥ—together with Balarāma; srak—a flower garland; avataṁsa—as the ornament on His head; vilāsaḥ—playfully wearing; sānuṣu—on the sides; kṣiti-bhṛtaḥ—of a mountain; vraja-devyaḥ—O goddesses of Vṛndāvana (gopīs); harṣayan—creating joy; yarhi—when; veṇu—of His flute; raveṇa—by the resounding vibration; jāta-harṣaḥ—becoming joyful; uparambhati—causes to relish; viśvam—the entire world; mahat—against a great personality; atikramaṇa—of a transgression; śaṅkita—fearful; cetāḥ—in his mind; manda-mandam—very gently; anugarjati—thunders in response; meghaḥ—the cloud; suhṛdam—upon his friend; abhyavarṣat—has rained down; sumanobhiḥ—with flowers; chāyayā—with his shade; ca—and; vidadhat—providing; pratapatram—an umbrella as protection from the sun.
O goddesses of Vraja, when Kṛṣṇa is enjoying Himself with Balarāma on the mountain slopes, playfully wearing a flower garland on the top of His head, He engladdens all with the resonant vibrations of His flute. Thus He delights the entire world. At that time the nearby cloud, afraid of offending a great personality, thunders very gently in accompaniment. The cloud showers flowers onto his dear friend Kṛṣṇa and shades Him from the sun like an umbrella.
TEXTS 14-15
ivaivaDagAAepacar"NAeSau ivad"gDaAe
vaeNAuvaAâ oś&DaA inajaizAºaA:
tava s$auta: s$aita yad"ADar"ibambae
d"ÔavaeNAur"nayatsvar"jaAtaI:
s$avanazAstaāu"paDaAyaR s$aure"zAA:
zA‚(zAvaRpar"maeiñ"paur"AegAA:
k(vaya @Anatak(nDar"icaÔaA:
k(zmalaM yayaur"inaiêtataÔvaA:
vividha-gopa-caraṇeṣu vidagdho
veṇu-vādya urudhā nija-śikṣāḥ
tava sutaḥ sati yadādhara-bimbe
datta-veṇur anayat svara-jātīḥ
savanaśas tad upadhārya sureśāḥ
śakra-śarva-parameṣṭhi-purogāḥ
kavaya ānata-kandhara-cittāḥ
kaśmalaṁ yayur aniścita-tattvāḥ
vividha—various; gopa—of cowherds; caraṇeṣu—in the activities; vidagdhaḥ—expert; veṇu—of the flute; vādye—in the matter of playing; urudhā—manifold; nija—of His own production; śikṣāḥ—whose teachings; tava—your; sutaḥ—son; sati—O pious lady (Yaśodā); yadā—when; adhara—upon His lips; bimbe—which are like red bimba fruits; datta—placing; veṇuḥ—His flute; anayat—He brought forth; svara—of musical sound; jātīḥ—the harmonic tones; savanaśaḥ—with a variety of low, high and middle pitches; tat—that; upadhārya—hearing; sura-īśāḥ—the principal demigods; śakra—Indra; śarva—Śiva; parameṣṭhi—and Brahmā; puraḥ-gāḥ—headed by; kavayaḥ—learned scholars; ānata—bowed; kandhara—their necks; cittāḥ—and minds; kaśmalam yayuḥ—they became bewildered; aniścita—unable to ascertain; tattvāḥ—its essence.
O pious Mother Yaśodā, your son, who is expert in all the arts of herding cows, has invented many new styles of flute-playing. When He takes His flute to His bimba-red lips and sends forth the tones of the harmonic scale in variegated melodies, Brahmā, Śiva, Indra and other chief demigods become confused upon hearing the sound. Although they are the most learned authorities, they cannot ascertain the essence of that music, and thus they bow down their heads and hearts.
The words tava sutaḥ sati, "your son, O chaste lady," clearly indicate that at this point Mother Yaśodā is among the young gopīs as they earnestly describe Lord Kṛṣṇa's glories. According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, among the demigods led by Śakra (Lord Indra) were Upendra, Agni and Yamarāja, among those led by Śarva (Lord Śiva) were Kātyāyanī, Skanda and Gaṇeśa, and among those led by Parameṣṭhī (Lord Brahmā) were the four Kumāras and Nārada. Thus the best collective intelligence in the universe could not definitively analyze the enchanting musical arrangements of the Supreme Lord.
TEXTS 16-17
inajapad"Abjad"laEDvaRjava†a
naIr"jaAŚḷzAivaica‡alalaAmaE:
˜ajaBauva: zAmayana, Kaur"taAedM"
vaSmaRDauyaRgAitar"Iix"tavaeNAu:
˜ajaita taena vayaM s$aivalaAs$a
vaIºaNAAipaRtamanaAeBavavaegAA:
ku(jagAitaM gAimataA na ivad"Ama:
k(zmalaena k(varM" vas$anaM vaA
nija-padābja-dalair dhvaja-vajra-
nīrajāṅkuśa-vicitra-lalāmaiḥ
vraja-bhuvaḥ śamayan khura-todaṁ
varṣma-dhurya-gatir īḍita-veṇuḥ
vrajati tena vayaṁ sa-vilāsa-
vīkṣaṇārpita-manobhava-vegāḥ
kuja-gatiṁ gamitā na vidāmaḥ
kaśmalena kavaraṁ vasanaṁ vā
nija—His own; pada-abja—of the lotus feet; dalaiḥ—like flower petals; dhvaja—of a flag; vajra—thunderbolt; nīraja—lotus; aṅkuśa—and elephant goad; vicitra—variegated; lalāmaiḥ—by the markings; vraja—of Vraja; bhuvaḥ—of the ground; śamayan—relieving; khura—from the hooves (of the cows); todam—the pain; varṣma—with His body; dhurya—like an elephant's; gatiḥ—whose movement; īḍita—extolled; veṇuḥ—whose flute; vrajati—He walks; tena—by that; vayam—we; savilāsa—playful; vīkṣaṇa—with His glances; arpita—bestowed; manaḥ-bhava—of lust; vegāḥ—whose agitation; kuja—like that of trees; gatim—whose movement (i.e., complete lack of movement); gamitāḥ—attaining; na vidāmaḥ—we do not recognize; kaśmaleṇa—because of our bewilderment; kavaram—the braids of our hair; vasanam—our dress; vā—or.
As Kṛṣṇa strolls through Vraja with His lotus-petal-like feet, marking the ground with the distinctive emblems of flag, thunderbolt, lotus and elephant goad, He relieves the distress the ground feels from the cows' hooves. As He plays His renowned flute, His body moves with the grace of an elephant. Thus we gopīs, who become agitated by Cupid when Kṛṣṇa playfully glances at us, stand as still as trees, unaware that our hair and garments are slackening.
Here Mother Yaśodā is no longer in the company of the gopīs, who are confidentially describing their conjugal attraction to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It is clear from the comments of Jīva Gosvāmī and other ācāryas that the statements in this chapter were made at various times and places. This is natural, since the gopīs were always absorbed in thoughts of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, day and night.
TEXTS 18-19
maiNADar": ¸(icad"AgANAyana, gAA
maAlayaA d"iyatagAnDataulasyaA:
‘aNAiyanaAe'naucar"sya k(d"AMs$ae
‘aiºapana, BaujamagAAyata ya‡a
¸(iNAtavaeNAur"vavaiÂataicaÔaA:
k{(SNAmanvas$ata k{(SNAgA{ih"Nya:
gAuNAgANAANARmanaugAtya h"ir"NyaAe
gAAeipak(A wva ivamau·(gA{h"AzAA:
maṇi-dharaḥ kvacid āgaṇayan gā
mālayā dayita-gandha-tulasyāḥ
praṇayino 'nucarasya kadāṁse
prakṣipan bhujam agāyata yatra
kvaṇita-veṇu-rava-vañcita-cittāḥ
kṛṣṇam anvasata kṛṣṇa-gṛhiṇyaḥ
guṇa-gaṇārṇam anugatya hariṇyo
gopikā iva vimukta-gṛhāśāḥ
maṇi—(a string of) gems; dharaḥ—holding; kvacit—somewhere; āgaṇayan—counting; gāḥ—the cows; mālayā—with a flower garland; dayita—of His beloved; gandha—having the fragrance; tulasyāḥ—the tulasī flowers upon which; praṇayinaḥ—loving; anucarasya—of a companion; kadā—at some time; aṁse—on the shoulder; prakṣipan—throwing; bhujam—His arm; agāyata—He sang; yatra—when; kvaṇita—vibrated; veṇu—of His flute; rava—by the sound; vañcita—stolen; cittāḥ—their hearts; kṛṣṇam—Kṛṣṇa; anvasata—they sat down beside; kṛṣṇa—of the black deer; gṛhiṇyaḥ—the wives; guṇa-gaṇa—of all transcendental qualities; arṇam—the ocean; anugatya—approaching; hariṇyaḥ—the does; gopikāḥ—the gopīs; iva—just like; vimukta—having given up; gṛha—for home and family; āśāḥ—their hopes.
Now Kṛṣṇa is standing somewhere counting His cows on a string of gems. He wears a garland of tulasī flowers that bear the fragrance of His beloved, and He has thrown His arm over the shoulder of an affectionate cowherd boyfriend. As Kṛṣṇa plays His flute and sings, the music attracts the black deer's wives, who approach that ocean of transcendental qualities and sit down beside Him. Just like us cowherd girls, they have given up all hope for happiness in family life.
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī explains that in the afternoon Śrī Kṛṣṇa dressed Himself in a different outfit and then went out to call the cows home. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī gives the following information about the transcendental cows of Vṛndāvana: "For each of the four colors of cows—white, red, black and yellow—there are twenty-five subdivisions, making a total of one hundred colors. And such qualities as being colored like sandalwood-pulp tilaka [speckled] or having a head shaped like a mṛdaṅga drum create eight further groups. To count these 108 groups of cows, distinguished by color and form, Kṛṣṇa is using a string of 108 jewel-beads....
"Thus when Kṛṣṇa calls out 'Hey Dhavalī [the name of a white cow],' a whole group of white cows come forward, and when He calls 'Haṁsī, Candanī, Gaṅgā, Muktā' and so on, the twenty-four other groups of white cows come. The reddish cows are called Aruṇī, Kuṅkuma, Sarasvatī, etc., the blackish ones Śyāmalā, Dhūmalā, Yamunā, etc., and the yellowish ones Pītā, Piṅgalā, Haritālikā, etc. Those in the group with tilaka marks on their foreheads are called Citritā, Citra-tilakā, Dīrgha-tilakā and Tiryak-tilakā, and there are groups known as Mṛdaṅga-mukhī [mṛdaṅga-head], Siṁha-mukhī [lion-head] and so on.
"Thus being called by name, the cows are coming forward, and Kṛṣṇa, thinking that when it is time to bring them back from the forest none should be forgotten, is counting them on His jewel-beads."
TEXTS 20-21
ku(nd"d"Amak{(tak(AEtauk(vaeSaAe
gAAepagAAeDanava{taAe yamaunaAyaAma,
nand"s$aUnaur"naGae tava vats$aAe
namaRd": ‘aNAiyaNAAM ivajah"Ar"
mand"vaAyauś&pavaAtyanakU(laM
maAnayanmalayajas$pazAeRna
vaind"nastamaupade"vagANAA yae
vaAâgAItabailaiBa: pair"va˜au:
kunda-dāma-kṛta-kautuka-veṣo
gopa-godhana-vṛto yamunāyām
nanda-sūnur anaghe tava vatso
narma-daḥ praṇayiṇāṁ vijahāra
manda-vāyur upavāty anukūlam
mānayan malayaja-sparśena
vandinas tam upadeva-gaṇā ye
vādya-gīta-balibhiḥ parivavruḥ
kunda—of jasmine flowers; dāma—with a garland; kṛta—made; kautuka—playful; veṣaḥ—His array; gopa—by the cowherd boys; godhana—and the cows; vṛtaḥ—surrounded; yamunāyām—along the Yamunā; nanda-sūnuḥ—the son of Nanda Mahārāja; anaghe—O sinless lady; tava—your; vatsaḥ—darling child; narma-daḥ—amusing; praṇayiṇām—His dear companions; vijahāra—He has played; manda—gentle; vāyuḥ—the wind; upavāti—blows; anukūlam—favorably; mānayan—showing honor; malaya-ja—of (the fragrance of) sandalwood; sparśena—the touch; vandinaḥ—those who offer praise; tam—Him; upadeva—of the minor demigods; gaṇāḥ—members of the various categories; ye—who; vādya—with instrumental music; gīta—singing; balibhiḥ—and presentation of gifts; parivavruḥ—they have encircled.
O sinless Yaśodā, your darling child, the son of Mahārāja Nanda, has festively enhanced His attire with a jasmine garland, and He is now playing along the Yamunā in the company of the cows and cowherd boys, amusing His dear companions. The gentle breeze honors Him with its soothing fragrance of sandalwood, while the various Upadevas, standing on all sides like panegyrists, offer their music, singing and gifts of tribute.
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī explains that the gopīs are again in the courtyard of Mother Yaśodā, the queen of Vraja. They are trying to encourage her by describing Kṛṣṇa's return to Vṛndāvana after He has spent the day herding cows and playing.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī comments that the Upadevas, the minor demigods mentioned here, include the Gandharvas, who are famous for their celestial music and dancing.
TEXTS 22-23
vats$alaAe ˜ajagAvaAM yad"gA‹aAe
vanâmaAnacar"NA: paiTa va{ŪE":
k{(tµagAAeDanamaupaAe÷ id"naAntae
gAItavaeNAur"naugAeix"tak(LitaR:
ots$avaM ™amaś&caAipa ā{"zAInaAma,
oªayana, Kaur"r"jazC]$ir"ta›ak,(
id"ts$ayaEita s$auô$d"Ais$aSa WSa
de"vak(LjaQ&r"BaUś&x"]r"Aja:
vatsalo vraja-gavāṁ yad aga-dhro
vandyamāna-caraṇaḥ pathi vṛddhaiḥ
kṛtsna-go-dhanam upohya dinānte
gīta-veṇur anugeḍita-kīrtiḥ
utsavaṁ śrama-rucāpi dṛśīnām
unnayan khura-rajaś-churita-srak
ditsayaiti suhṛd-āsiṣa eṣa
devakī-jaṭhara-bhūr uḍu-rājaḥ
vatsalaḥ—affectionate; vraja-gavām—to the cows of Vraja; yat—because; aga—of the mountain; dhraḥ—the lifter; vandyamāna—being worshiped; caraṇaḥ—His feet; pathi—along the path; vṛddhaiḥ—by the exalted demigods; kṛtsna—entire; go-dhanam—the herd of cows; upohya—collecting; dina—of the day; ante—at the end; gītā-veṇuḥ—playing His flute; anuga—by His companions; īḍita—praised; kīrtiḥ—His glories; utsavam—a festival; śrama—of fatigue; rucā—by His coloring; api—even; dṛśīnām—for the eyes; unnayan—raising; khura—from the hooves (of the cows); rajaḥ—with the dust; churita—powdered; srak—His garland; ditsayā—with the desire; eti—He is coming; suhṛt—to His friends; āśiṣaḥ—their desires; eṣaḥ—this; devakī—of Mother Yaśodā; jaṭhara—from the womb; bhūḥ—born; uḍu-rājaḥ—moon.
Out of great affection for the cows of Vraja, Kṛṣṇa became the lifter of Govardhana Hill. At the end of the day, having rounded up all His own cows, He plays a song on His flute, while exalted demigods standing along the path worship His lotus feet and the cowherd boys accompanying Him chant His glories. His garland is powdered by the dust raised by the cows' hooves, and His beauty, enhanced by His fatigue, creates an ecstatic festival for everyone's eyes. Eager to fulfill His friends' desires, Kṛṣṇa is the moon arisen from the womb of Mother Yaśodā.
According to the ācāryas, at this point the gopīs climbed into the watchtowers of Vṛndāvana's houses so they could see Kṛṣṇa as soon as possible when He returned home. Mother Yaśodā was very anxious for her son to come back, and therefore she had the tallest of the beautiful young gopīs climb up to see when He would arrive. It is implied here that Kṛṣṇa was somewhat delayed on the way home because His lotus feet were being worshiped by great demigods along the path.
TEXTS 24-25
mad"ivaGaUiNARtalaAecana wRSata,
maAnad": svas$auô$d"AM vanamaAlaI
bad"r"paANx"]vad"naAe ma{āu"gANxM"
maNx"yana, k(nak(ku(Nx"lalaºmyaA
yaāu"paitaiãR"r"d"r"Ajaivah"Ar"Ae
yaAimanaIpaitair"vaESa id"naAntae
mauid"tavaf‡a opayaAita āu"r"ntaM
maAecayana, ˜ajagAvaAM id"nataApama,
mada-vighūrṇita-locana īṣat
māna-daḥ sva-suhṛdāṁ vana-mālī
badara-pāṇḍu-vadano mṛdu-gaṇḍaṁ
maṇḍayan kanaka-kuṇḍala-lakṣmyā
yadu-patir dvirada-rāja-vihāro
yāminī-patir ivaiṣa dinānte
mudita-vaktra upayāti durantaṁ
mocayan vraja-gavāṁ dina-tāpam
mada—by intoxication; vighūrṇita—rolling; locanaḥ—His eyes; īṣat—slightly; māna-daḥ—showing honor; sva-suhṛdām—to His well-wishing friends; vana-mālī—wearing a garland of forest flowers; badara—like a badara fruit; pāṇḍu—whitish; vadanaḥ—His face; mṛdu—soft; gaṇḍam—His cheeks; maṇḍayan—ornamenting; kanaka—golden; kuṇḍala—of His earrings; lakṣmyā—with the beauty; yadu-patiḥ—the Lord of the Yadu dynasty; dvirada-rāja—like a kingly elephant; vihāraḥ—His sporting; yāminī-patiḥ—the lord of the night (the moon); iva—like; eṣaḥ—He; dina-ante—at the end of the day; mudita—joyful; vaktraḥ—His face; upayāti—is coming; durantam—insurmountable; mocayan—driving away; vraja—of Vraja; gavām—of the cows, or of those who are to be shown mercy; dina—of the daytime; tāpam—the painful heat.
As Kṛṣṇa respectfully greets His well-wishing friends, His eyes roll slightly as if from intoxication. He wears a flower garland, and the beauty of His soft cheeks is accentuated by the brilliance of His golden earrings and the whiteness of His face, which has the color of a badara berry. With His cheerful face resembling the moon, lord of the night, the Lord of the Yadus moves with the grace of a regal elephant. Thus He returns in the evening, delivering the cows of Vraja from the heat of the day.
The word gavām is constructed from the Sanskrit word go, which means "cow" or "senses." Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa, by coming back to the village of Vraja, relieved the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana from the distress their eyes and other senses felt during the day because of being separated from direct contact with Him.

Song Prayers by Narada Muni
TEXTS 10-11
k{(SNA k{(SNAA‘amaeyaAtmana,
yaAegAezA jagAd"Iṅr"
vaAs$aude"vaAiKalaAvaAs$a
s$aAtvataAM ‘avar" ‘aBaAe
tvamaAtmaA s$avaRBaUtaAnaAma,
Wk(Ae jyaAeitair"vaEDas$aAma,
gAUX#Ae gAuh"AzAya: s$aAºaI
mah"Apauś&Sa wRṅr":
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇāprameyātman
yogeśa jagad-īśvara
vāsudevākhilāvāsa
sātvatāṁ pravara prabho
tvam ātmā sarva-bhūtānām
eko jyotir ivaidhasām
gūḍho guhā-śayaḥ sākṣī
mahā-puruṣa īśvaraḥ
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa; aprameya-ātman—O immeasurable one; yoga-īśa—O source of all mystic power; jagat-īśvara—O Lord of the universe; vāsudeva—O son of Vasudeva; akhila-āvāsa—O shelter of all beings; sātvatām—of the Yadu dynasty; pravara—O You who are the best; prabho—O master; tvam—You; ātmā—the Supreme Soul; sarva—of all; bhūtānām—created beings; ekaḥ—alone; jyotiḥ—fire; iva—like; edhasām—in kindling wood; gūḍhaḥ—hidden; guhā—within the cave of the heart; śayaḥ—sitting; sākṣī—the witness; mahā-puruṣaḥ—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; īśvaraḥ—the supreme controller.
[Nārada Muni said:] O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, unlimited Lord, source of all mystic power, Lord of the universe! O Vāsudeva, shelter of all beings and best of the Yadus! O master, You are the Supreme Soul of all created beings, sitting unseen within the cave of the heart like the fire dormant within kindling wood. You are the witness within everyone, the Supreme Personality and the ultimate controlling Deity.
TEXT 12
@AtmanaAtmaA™aya: paUva<
maAyayaA s$as$a{jae gAuNAAna,
taEir"dM" s$atyas$aÆḷlpa:
s$a{jasyatsyavas$aIṅr":
ātmanātmāśrayaḥ pūrvaṁ
māyayā sasṛje guṇān
tair idaṁ satya-saṅkalpaḥ
sṛjasy atsy avasīśvaraḥ
ātmanā—by Your personal potency; ātma—of the spirit soul; āśrayaḥ—the shelter; pūrvam—first; māyayā—by Your creative energy; sasṛje—You produced; guṇān—the basic modes of material nature; taiḥ—through these; idam—this (universe); satya—always realized in fact; saṅkalpaḥ—whose desires; sṛjasi—You create; atsi—withdraw; avasi—and maintain; īśvaraḥ—the controller.
You are the shelter of all souls, and being the supreme controller, You fulfill Your desires simply by Your will. By Your personal creative potency You manifested in the beginning the primal modes of material nature, and through their agency You create, maintain and then destroy this universe.
TEXT 13
s$a tvaM BaUDar"BaUtaAnaAM
dE"tya‘amaTar"ºas$aAma,
@vataINAAeR ivanaAzAAya
s$aADaunaAM r"ºaNAAya ca
sa tvaṁ bhūdhara-bhūtānāṁ
daitya-pramatha-rakṣasām
avatīrṇo vināśāya
sādhunāṁ rakṣaṇāya ca
saḥ—He; tvam—Yourself; bhū-dhara—as kings; bhūtānām—who are appearing; daitya-pramatha-rakṣasām—of various kinds of demons; avatīrṇaḥ—You have descended; vināśāya—for the destruction; sādhūnām—of saintly persons; rakṣaṇāya—for the protection; ca—and.
You, that very same creator, have now descended to the earth to annihilate the Daitya, Pramatha and Rākṣasa demons who are posing as kings, and also to protect the godly.
TEXT 14
id"í"YaA tae inah"taAe dE"tyaAe
laIlayaAyaM h"yaAk{(ita:
yasya he"iSatas$an‡astaAs$a,
tyajantyainaimaSaA id"vama,
diṣṭyā te nihato daityo
līlayāyaṁ hayākṛtiḥ
yasya heṣita-santrastās
tyajanty animiṣā divam
diṣṭyā—by (our) good fortune; te—by You; nihataḥ—killed; daityaḥ—demon; līlayā—as a game; ayam—this; haya-ākṛtiḥ—having the form of a horse; yasya—whose; heṣita—by the neighing; santrastāḥ—terrified; tyajanti—abandon; animiṣāḥ—the demigods; divam—heaven.
The horse demon was so terrifying that his neighing frightened the demigods into leaving their heavenly kingdom. But by our good fortune You have enjoyed the sport of killing him.
TEXTS 15-20
caANAUrM" mauií"kM( caEva
maīaAnanyaAMê h"istanama,
kM(s$aM ca inah"taM ‰"ºyae
par"ṅAe'h"ina tae ivaBaAe
tasyaAnau zAÊḷyavana-
maur"ANAAM nar"k(sya ca
paAir"jaAtaApah"r"NAma,
wn‰"sya ca par"Ajayama,
oã"AhM" vaIr"k(nyaAnaAM
vaIyaRzAulk(Aid"laºaNAma,
na{gAsya maAeºaNAM zAApaAā,"
ã"Ar"k(AyaAM jagAtpatae
syamantak(sya ca maNAer,"
@Ad"AnaM s$ah" BaAyaRyaA
ma{tapau‡a‘ad"AnaM ca
“aAṭNAsya svaDaAmata:
paAENx")k(sya vaDaM paêAta,
k(AizApauyaARê d"Ipanama,
d"ntava‚(sya inaDanaM
caEâsya ca mah"A‚(taAE
yaAina caAnyaAina vaIyaARiNA
ã"Ar"k(AmaAvas$ana, BavaAna,
k(taAR ‰"ºyaAmyahM" taAina
gAeyaAina k(ivaiBaBauRiva
cāṇūraṁ muṣṭikaṁ caiva
mallān anyāṁś ca hastinam
kaṁsaṁ ca nihataṁ drakṣye
paraśvo 'hani te vibho
tasyānu śaṅkha-yavana-
murāṇāṁ narakasya ca
pārijātāpaharaṇam
indrasya ca parājayam
udvāhaṁ vīra-kanyānāṁ
vīrya-śulkādi-lakṣaṇam
nṛgasya mokṣaṇaṁ śāpād
dvārakāyāṁ jagat-pate
syamantakasya ca maṇer
ādānaṁ saha bhāryayā
mṛta-putra-pradānaṁ ca
brāhmaṇasya sva-dhāmataḥ
pauṇḍrakasya vadhaṁ paścāt
kāśi-puryāś ca dīpanam
dantavakrasya nidhanaṁ
caidyasya ca mahā-kratau
yāni cānyāni vīryāṇi
dvārakām āvasan bhavān
kartā drakṣyāmy ahaṁ tāni
geyāni kavibhir bhuvi
cāṇūram—Cāṇūra; muṣṭikam—Muṣṭika; ca—and; eva—also; mallān—the wrestlers; anyān—others; ca—and; hastinam—the elephant (Kuvalayāpīḍa); kaṁsam—King Kaṁsa; ca—and; nihatam—killed; drakṣye—I will see; para-śvaḥ—the day after tomorrow; ahani—on that day; te—by You; vibho—O almighty Lord; tasya anu—after that; śaṅkha-yavana-murāṇām—of the demons Śaṅkha (Pañcajana), Kālayavana and Mura; narakasya—of Narakāsura; ca—as well; pārijāta—of the heavenly pārijāta flower; apaharaṇam—the stealing; indrasya—of Lord Indra; ca—and; parājayam—the defeat; udvāham—the marriage; vīra—of heroic kings; kanyānām—of the daughters; vīrya—by Your valor; śulka—as the payment for the brides; ādi—and so forth; lakṣaṇam—characterized; nṛgasya—of King Nṛga; mokṣaṇam—the deliverance; śāpāt—from his curse; dvārakāyām—in the city of Dvārakā; jagat-pate—O master of the universe; syamantakasya—named Syamantaka; ca—and; maṇeḥ—of the jewel; ādānam—the taking; saha—together with; bhāryayā—a wife (Jāmbavatī); mṛta—dead; putra—of the son; pradānam—the presenting; ca—and; brāhmaṇasya—of a brāhmaṇa; sva-dhāmataḥ—from Your own domain (i.e., from the abode of Death); pauṇḍrakasya—of Pauṇḍraka; vadham—the killing; paścāt—after; kāśi-puryāḥ—of the city of Kāśī (Benares); ca—and; dīpanam—the burning; dantavakrasya—of Dantavakra; nidhanam—the demise; caidyasya—of Caidya (Śiśupāla); ca—and; mahā-kratau—during the great sacrificial performance (the Rājasūya yajña of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira); yāni—which; ca—and; anyāni—other; vīryāṇi—great feats; dvārakām—in Dvārakā; āvasan—dwelling; bhavān—You; kartā—are going to perform; drakṣyāmi—will see; aham—I; tāni—them; geyāni—to be sung about; kavibhiḥ—by poets; bhuvi—on this earth.
In just two days, O almighty Lord, I will see the deaths of Cāṇūra, Muṣṭika and other wrestlers, along with those of the elephant Kuvalayāpīḍa and King Kaṁsa—all by Your hand. Then I will see You kill Kālayavana, Mura, Naraka and the conch demon, and I will also see You steal the pārijāta flower and defeat Indra. I will then see You marry many daughters of heroic kings after paying for them with Your valor. Then, O Lord of the universe, in Dvārakā You will deliver King Nṛga from a curse and take for Yourself the Syamantaka jewel, together with another wife. You will bring back a brāhmaṇa's dead son from the abode of Your servant Yamarāja, and thereafter You will kill Pauṇḍraka, burn down the city of Kāśī and slay Dantavakra, and You will also put an end to the king of Cedi during the great Rājasūya sacrifice. I shall see all these heroic pastimes, along with many others You will perform during Your residence in Dvārakā. These pastimes are glorified on this earth in the songs of transcendental poets.
TEXT 21
@Ta tae k(Alaṝ&pasya
ºapaiyaSNAAer"mauSya vaE
@ºaAEih"NAInaAM inaDanaM
‰"ºyaAmyajauRnas$aAr"Tae:
atha te kāla-rūpasya
kṣapayiṣṇor amuṣya vai
akṣauhiṇīnāṁ nidhanaṁ
drakṣyāmy arjuna-sāratheḥ
atha—then; te—by You; kāla-rūpasya—who are assuming the form of time; kṣapayiṣṇoḥ—who is intending to effect the destruction; amuṣya—of (the burden of) this world; vai—indeed; akṣauhiṇīnām—of entire armies; nidhanam—the destruction; drakṣyāmi—I will see; arjuna sāratheḥ—by the chariot driver of Arjuna.
Subsequently I will see You appear as time personified, serving as Arjuna's chariot driver and destroying entire armies of soldiers to rid the earth of her burden.
TEXT 22
ivazAuŪ"ivaÁaAnaGanaM svas$aMsTayaA
s$amaAæas$avaARTaRmamaAeGavaAiHC$tama,
svataejas$aA inatyainava{ÔamaAyaA-
gAuNA‘avaAhM" BagAvantamaImaih"
viśuddha-vijñāna-ghanaṁ sva-saṁsthayā
samāpta-sarvārtham amogha-vāñchitam
sva-tejasā nitya-nivṛtta-māyā-
guṇa-pravāhaṁ bhagavantam īmahi
viśuddha—perfectly pure; vijñāna—spiritual awareness; ghanam—full of; sva-saṁsthayā—in His original identity; samāpta—already fulfilled; sarva—in all; artham—purposes; amogha—never frustrated; vāñchitam—whose desires; sva-tejasā—by His own potency; nitya—eternally; nivṛtta—desisting; māyā—of the illusory, material energy; guṇa—of the manifest modes; pravāham—from the flowing interaction; bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; īmahi—let us approach.
Let us approach You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for shelter. You are full of perfectly pure spiritual awareness and are always situated in Your original identity. Since Your will is never thwarted, You have already achieved all possible desirable things, and by the power of Your spiritual energy You remain eternally aloof from the flow of the qualities of illusion.
TEXT 23
tvaAmaIṅrM" svaA™ayamaAtmamaAyayaA
ivainaimaRtaAzAeSaivazAeSak(lpanama,
‚(Lx"ATaRmaâAÔamanauSyaivaƒahM"
nataAe'isma Dauya< yaāu"va{iSNAs$aAtvataAma,
tvām īśvaraṁ svāśrayam ātma-māyayā
vinirmitāśeṣa-viśeṣa-kalpanam
krīḍārtham adyātta-manuṣya-vigrahaṁ
nato 'smi dhuryaṁ yadu-vṛṣṇi-sātvatām
tvām—to You; īśvaram—the supreme controller; sva-āśrayam—self-contained; ātma—Your own; māyayā—by the creative potency; vinirmita—constructed; aśeṣa—unlimited; viśeṣa—particular; kalpanam—arrangements; krīḍa—of playing; artham—for the sake; adya—now; ātta—taken on; manuṣya—among humans; vigraham—battle; nataḥ—bowed down; asmi—I am; dhuryam—to the greatest; yadu-vṛṣṇi-sātvatām—of the Yadu, Vṛṣṇi and Sātvata dynasties.
I bow down to You, the supreme controller, who are dependent only on Yourself. By Your potency You have constructed the unlimited particular arrangements of this universe. Now you have appeared as the greatest hero among the Yadus, Vṛṣṇis and Sātvatas and have chosen to participate in human warfare.


Song Gopis Crying for Krsna
TEXT 19
™aIgAAepya Ocau:
@h"Ae ivaDaAtastava na ¸(icaÚ"yaA
s$aMyaAejya maE‡yaA ‘aNAyaena de"ih"na:
taAMêAk{(taATaARna, ivayaunaĪḷYapaATaRkM(
iva‚(Lix"taM tae'BaRk(caeií"taM yaTaA
śrī-gopya ūcuḥ
aho vidhātas tava na kvacid dayā
saṁyojya maitryā praṇayena dehinaḥ
tāṁś cākṛtārthān viyunaṅkṣy apārthakaṁ
vikrīḍitaṁ te 'rbhaka-ceṣṭitaṁ yathā
śrī-gopyaḥ ūcuḥ—the gopīs said; aho—O; vidhātaḥ—Providence; tava—your; na—there is not; kvacit—anywhere; dayā—mercy; saṁyojya—bringing together; maitryā—with friendship; praṇayena—and with love; dehinaḥ—embodied living beings; tān—them; ca—and; akṛta—unfulfilled; arthān—their aims; viyunaṅkṣi—you separate; apārthakam—uselessly; vikrīḍitam—play; te—your; arbhaka—of a child; ceṣṭitam—the activity; yathā—as.
The gopīs said: O Providence, you have no mercy! You bring embodied creatures together in friendship and love and then senselessly separate them before they fulfill their desires. This whimsical play of yours is like a child's game.
TEXT 20
yastvaM ‘ad"zyaARis$ataku(ntalaAva{taM
mauku(nd"vaf‡aM s$auk(paAelamauªas$ama,
zAAek(ApanaAed"ismatalaezAs$aund"rM"
k(r"AeiSa paAr"Aeºyamas$aADau tae k{(tama,
yas tvaṁ pradarśyāsita-kuntalāvṛtaṁ
mukunda-vaktraṁ su-kapolam un-nasam
śokāpanoda-smita-leśa-sundaraṁ
karoṣi pārokṣyam asādhu te kṛtam
yaḥ—who; tvam—you; pradarśya—showing; asita—black; kuntala—by locks; āvṛtam—framed; mukunda—of Kṛṣṇa; vaktram—the face; su-kapolam—with fine cheeks; ut-nasam—and raised nose; śoka—misery; apanoda—eradicating; smita—with His smile; leśa—slight; sundaram—beautiful; karoṣi—you make; pārokṣyam—invisible; asādhu—not good; te—by you; kṛtam—done.
Having shown us Mukunda's face, framed by dark locks and beautified by His fine cheeks, raised nose and gentle smiles, which eradicate all misery, you are now making that face invisible. This behavior of yours is not at all good.
TEXT 21
‚U(r"stvama‚U(r"s$amaAKyayaA sma nazA,
caºauihR" d"ÔaM h"r"s$ae bataAÁavata,
yaenaEk(de"zAe'iKalas$agARs$aAEñ"vaM
tvad"Iyama‰"Aºma vayaM maDauiã"Sa:
krūras tvam akrūra-samākhyayā sma naś
cakṣur hi dattaṁ harase batājña-vat
yenaika-deśe 'khila-sarga-sauṣṭhavaṁ
tvadīyam adrākṣma vayaṁ madhu-dviṣaḥ
krūraḥ—cruel; tvam—you (are); akrūra-samākhyayā—by the name Akrūra (which means "not cruel"); sma—certainly; naḥ—our; cakṣuḥ—eyes; hi—indeed; dattam—given; harase—you are taking; bata—alas; ajña—a fool; vat—just like; yena—with which (eyes); eka—in one; deśe—place; akhila—of all; sarga—the creation; sauṣṭhavam—the perfection; tvadīyam—your; adrākṣma—have seen; vayam—we; madhudviṣaḥ—of Lord Kṛṣṇa, enemy of the demon Madhu.
O Providence, though you come here with the name Akrūra, you are indeed cruel, for like a fool you are taking away what you once gave us—those eyes with which we have seen, even in one feature of Lord Madhudviṣa's form, the perfection of your entire creation.
The gopīs did not care to see anything but Kṛṣṇa; therefore if Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, their eyes would have no function. Thus Kṛṣṇa's departure was blinding these poor girls, and in their distress they berated Akrūra, whose name means "not cruel," as cruel indeed.
TEXT 22
na nand"s$aUnau: ºaNABaṆḷs$aAEô$d":
s$amaIºatae na: svak{(taAtaur"A bata
ivah"Aya gAeh"Ana, svajanaAna, s$autaAna, pataI%Ms$a,
taÚ"AsyamaŪ"AepagAtaA navai‘aya:
na nanda-sūnuḥ kṣaṇa-bhaṅga-sauhṛdaḥ
samīkṣate naḥ sva-kṛtāturā bata
vihāya gehān sva-janān sutān patīṁs
tad-dāsyam addhopagatā nava-priyaḥ
na—does not; nanda-sūnuḥ—the son of Nanda Mahārāja; kṣaṇa—in a moment; bhaṅga—the breaking; sauhṛdaḥ—of whose friendship; samīkṣate—look upon; naḥ—us; sva—by Him; kṛta—made; āturāḥ—under His control; bata—alas; vihāya—giving up; gehān—our homes; sva-janān—relatives; sutān—children; patīn—husbands; tat—to Him; dāsyam—servitude; addhā—directly; upagatāḥ—who have taken up; nava—ever new; priyaḥ—whose lovers.
Alas, Nanda's son, who breaks loving friendships in a second, will not even look directly at us. Forcibly brought under His control, we abandoned our homes, relatives, children and husbands just to serve Him, but He is always looking for new lovers.
TEXT 23
s$auKaM ‘aBaAtaA r"janaIyamaAizASa:
s$atyaA baBaUvau: paur"yaAeiSataAM ‹auvama,
yaA: s$aM‘aivaí"sya mauKaM ˜ajas$patae:
paAsyantyapaAṆḷAetk(ilataismataAs$avama,
sukhaṁ prabhātā rajanīyam āśiṣaḥ
satyā babhūvuḥ pura-yoṣitāṁ dhruvam
yāḥ saṁpraviṣṭasya mukhaṁ vrajas-pateḥ
pāsyanty apāṅgotkalita-smitāsavam
sukham—happy; prabhātā—its dawn; rajanī—the night; iyam—this; āśiṣaḥ—the hopes; satyāḥ—true; babhūvuḥ—have become; pura—of the city; yoṣitām—of the women; dhruvam—certainly; yāḥ—who; saṁpraviṣṭasya—of Him who has entered (Mathurā); mukham—the face; vrajaḥ-pateḥ—of the master of Vraja; pāsyanti—they will drink; apāṅga—upon the corners of His eyes; utkalita—expanded; smita—a smile; āsavam—nectar.
The dawn following this night will certainly be auspicious for the women of Mathurā. All their hopes will now be fulfilled, for as the Lord of Vraja enters their city, they will be able to drink from His face the nectar of the smile emanating from the corners of His eyes.
TEXT 24
taAs$aAM mauku(nd"Ae maDaumaÃauBaAiSataEr,"
gA{h"ItaicaÔa: par"vaAnmanasvyaipa
k(TaM paunanaR: ‘aitayaAsyatae'balaA
ƒaAmyaA: s$alaṀaismataiva”amaE”aRmana,
tāsāṁ mukundo madhu-mañju-bhāṣitair
gṛhīta-cittaḥ para-vān manasvy api
kathaṁ punar naḥ pratiyāsyate 'balā
grāmyāḥ salajja-smita-vibhramair bhraman
tāsām—their; mukundaḥ—Kṛṣṇa; madhu—like honey; mañju—sweet; bhāṣitaiḥ—by the words; gṛhīta—seized; cittaḥ—whose mind; paravān—subservient; manasvī—intelligent; api—although; katham—how; punaḥ—again; naḥ—to us; pratiyāsyate—will He return; abalāḥ—O girls; grāmyāḥ—who are rustic; sa-lajja—shyly; smita—smiling; vibhramaiḥ—by their enchantments; bhraman—becoming bewildered.
O gopīs, although our Mukunda is intelligent and very obedient to His parents, once He has fallen under the spell of the honey-sweet words of the women of Mathurā and been enchanted by their alluring, shy smiles, how will He ever return to us unsophisticated village girls?
TEXT 25
@â ‹auvaM ta‡a ā{"zAAe BaivaSyatae
d"AzAAhR"BaAejaAnDak(va{iSNAs$aAtvataAma,
mah"Aets$ava: ™aIr"maNAM gAuNAAs$padM"
‰"ºyainta yae caADvaina de"vak(Ls$autama,
adya dhruvaṁ tatra dṛśo bhaviṣyate
dāśārha-bhojāndhaka-vṛṣṇi-sātvatām
mahotsavaḥ śrī-ramaṇaṁ guṇāspadaṁ
drakṣyanti ye cādhvani devakī-sutam
adya—today; dhruvam—certainly; tatra—there; dṛśaḥ—for the eyes; bhaviṣyate—there will be; dāśārha-bhoja-andhaka-vṛṣṇi-sātvatām—of the members of the Dāśārha, Bhoja, Andhaka, Vṛṣṇi and Sātvata clans; mahā-utsavaḥ—a great festivity; śrī—of the goddess of fortune; ramaṇam—the darling; guṇa—of all transcendental qualities; āspadam—the reservoir; drakṣyanti—they will see; ye—those who; ca—also; adhvani—on the road; devakī-sutam—Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī.
When the Dāśārhas, Bhojas, Andhakas, Vṛṣṇis and Sātvatas see the son of Devakī in Mathurā, they will certainly enjoy a great festival for their eyes, as will all those who see Him traveling along the road to the city. After all, He is the darling of the goddess of fortune and the reservoir of all transcendental qualities.
TEXT 26
maEtaiã"DasyaAk(ś&NAsya naAma BaUā,"
@‚U(r" wtyaetad"taIva d"Aś&NA:
yaAe's$aAvanaAṅAsya s$auāu":iKatamjanaM
i‘ayaAit‘ayaM naeSyaita paAr"maDvana:
maitad-vidhasyākaruṇasya nāma bhūd
akrūra ity etad atīva dāruṇaḥ
yo 'sāv anāśvāsya su-duḥkhitam janaṁ
priyāt priyaṁ neṣyati pāram adhvanaḥ
mā—should not; etat-vidhasya—of such; akaruṇasya—an unkind person; nāma—the name; bhūt—be; akrūraḥ iti—"Akrūra"; etat—this; atīva—extremely; dāruṇaḥ—cruel; yaḥ—who; asau—he; anāśvāsya—not consoling; su-duḥkhitam—who are very miserable; janam—people; priyāt—than the most dear; priyam—dear (Kṛṣṇa); neṣyati—will take; pāram adhvanaḥ—beyond our sight.
He who is doing this merciless deed should not be called Akrūra. He is so extremely cruel that without even trying to console the sorrowful residents of Vraja, he is taking away Kṛṣṇa, who is more dear to us than life itself.
TEXT 27
@naA‰R"DaIre"Sa s$amaAisTataAe r"TaM
tamanvamaI ca tvar"yainta āu"maRd"A:
gAAepaA @naAeiBa: sTaivarE"ś&paeiºataM
dE"vaM ca naAe'â ‘aitakU(lamaIh"tae
anārdra-dhīr eṣa samāsthito rathaṁ
tam anv amī ca tvarayanti durmadāḥ
gopā anobhiḥ sthavirair upekṣitaṁ
daivaṁ ca no 'dya pratikūlam īhate
anārdra-dhīḥ—hardhearted; eṣaḥ—this (Kṛṣṇa); samāsthitaḥ—having mounted; ratham—the chariot; tam—Him; anu—following; amī—these; ca—and; tvarayanti—hurry; durmadāḥ—befooled; gopāḥ—cowherds; anobhiḥ—in their bullock carts; sthaviraiḥ—by the elders; upekṣitam—disregarded; daivam—fate; ca—and; naḥ—with us; adya—today; pratikūlam—unfavorably; īhate—is acting.
Hardhearted Kṛṣṇa has already mounted the chariot, and now the foolish cowherds are hurrying after Him in their bullock carts. Even the elders are saying nothing to stop Him. Today fate is working against us.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī reveals what the gopīs thought: "These foolish cowherd men and elders are not even trying to stop Kṛṣṇa. Don't they realize they are committing suicide? They are helping Kṛṣṇa go to Mathurā, but they will have to come back to Vṛndāvana and will certainly die in His absence. The whole world has become nonsensical."
TEXT 28
inavaAr"yaAma: s$amaupaetya maADavaM
ikM( naAe'k(ir"Syana, ku(lava{Ū"baAnDavaA:
mauku(nd"s$aṆḷAiªaimaSaADaRāu"styajaAā,"
dE"vaena ivaDvaMis$atad"Inacaetas$aAma,
nivārayāmaḥ samupetya mādhavaṁ
kiṁ no 'kariṣyan kula-vṛddha-bāndhavāḥ
mukunda-saṅgān nimiṣārdha-dustyajād
daivena vidhvaṁsita-dīna-cetasām
nivārayāmaḥ—let us stop; samupetya—going up to Him; mādhavam—Kṛṣṇa; kim—what; naḥ—to us; akariṣyan—will do; kula—of the family; vṛddha—the elders; bāndhavāḥ—and our relatives; mukunda-saṅgāt—from the association of Lord Mukunda; nimiṣa—of the wink of an eye; ardha—for one half; dustyajāt—which is impossible to give up; daivena—by fate; vidhvaṁsita—separated; dīna—wretched; cetasām—whose hearts.
Let us directly approach Mādhava and stop Him from going. What can our family elders and other relatives do to us? Now that fate is separating us from Mukunda, our hearts are already wretched, for we cannot bear to give up His association even for a fraction of a second.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī describes what the gopīs thought: "Let us go right up to Kṛṣṇa and pull at His clothes and hands and insist that He get down from His chariot and stay here with us. We will tell Him, 'Don't bring upon Yourself the sinful reaction for murdering so many women!' "
"But if we do that," said other gopīs, "our relatives and the village elders will discover our secret love for Kṛṣṇa and abandon us."
"But what can they do to us?"
"Yes, our lives are already wretched now that Kṛṣṇa is leaving. We have nothing to lose."
"That's right. We will remain in the Vṛndāvana forest just like presiding goddesses, and then we can fulfill our true desire—to stay with Kṛṣṇa in the forest."
"Yes, and even if the elders and our relatives punish us by beating us or locking us up, we can still live happily with the knowledge that Kṛṣṇa is residing in our village. Some of our girlfriends who are not imprisoned will cleverly find a way to bring us the remnants of Kṛṣṇa's food, and then we can remain alive. But if Kṛṣṇa is not stopped, we will certainly die."
TEXT 29
yasyaAnaur"AgAlailataismatavalgAuman‡a
laIlaAvalaAek(pair"r"mBaNAr"As$agAAeñ"Ama,
naItaA: sma na: ºaNAimava ºaNAd"A ivanaA taM
gAAepya: k(TaM nvaitatare"ma tamaAe āu"r"ntama,
yasyānurāga-lalita-smita-valgu-mantra-
līlāvaloka-parirambhaṇa-rāsa-goṣṭhām
nītāḥ sma naḥ kṣaṇam iva kṣaṇadā vinā taṁ
gopyaḥ kathaṁ nv atitarema tamo durantam
yasya—whose; anurāga—with loving affection; lalita—charming; smita—(where there were) smiles; valgu—attractive; mantra—intimate discussions; līlā—playful; avaloka—glances; parirambhaṇa—and embraces; rāsa—of the rāsa dance; goṣṭhām—to the assembly; nītāḥ sma—who were brought; naḥ—for us; kṣaṇam—a moment; iva—like; kṣaṇadāḥ—the nights; vinā—without; tam—Him; gopyaḥ—O gopīs; katham—how; nu—indeed; atitarema—will we cross over; tamaḥ—the darkness; durantam—insurmountable.
When He brought us to the assembly of the rāsa dance, where we enjoyed His affectionate and charming smiles, His delightful secret talks, His playful glances and His embraces, we passed many nights as if they were a single moment. O gopīs, how can we possibly cross over the insurmountable darkness of His absence?
For the gopīs, a long time in Kṛṣṇa's association passed like a moment, and a single moment in His absence seemed like a very long time.
TEXT 30
yaAe'¶": ºayae ˜ajamanantas$aKa: par"ItaAe
gAAepaEivaRzAna, Kaur"r"jazC]$ir"taAlak(›ak,(
vaeNAuM ¸(NAna, ismatak(taAºainar"IºaNAena
icaÔaM iºaNAAetyamauma{tae nau k(TaM Bavaema
yo 'hnaḥ kṣaye vrajam ananta-sakhaḥ parīto
gopair viśan khura-rajaś-churitālaka-srak
veṇuṁ kvaṇan smita-katākṣa-nirīkṣaṇena
cittaṁ kṣiṇoty amum ṛte nu kathaṁ bhavema
yaḥ—who; ahnaḥ—of the day; kṣaye—at the demise; vrajam—the village of Vraja; ananta—of Ananta, Lord Balarāma; sakhaḥ—the friend Kṛṣṇa; parītaḥ—accompanied on all sides; gopaiḥ—by the cowherd boys; viśan—entering; khura—of the hoofprints (of the cows); rajaḥ—with the dust; churita—smeared; alaka—the locks of His hair; srak—and His garlands; veṇum—His flute; kvaṇan—playing; smita—smiling; kaṭa-akṣa—from the corners of His eyes; nirīkṣaṇena—with glances; cittam—our minds; kṣiṇoti—He destroys; amum—Him; ṛte—without; nu—indeed; katham—how; bhavema—we can exist.
How can we exist without Ananta's friend Kṛṣṇa, who in the evening would return to Vraja in the company of the cowherd boys, His hair and garland powdered with the dust raised by the cows' hooves? As He played His flute, He would captivate our minds with His smiling sidelong glances.



Song Prayers by Akrura 
TEXT 1
™aI@‚U(r" ovaAca
nataAe'smyahM" tvaAiKalahe"tauhe"tauM
naAr"AyaNAM paUś&SamaAâmavyayama,
yaªaAiBajaAtaAd"r"ivand"k(AeSaAā,"
“aṭAivar"As$aIâta WSa laAek(:
śrī-akrūra uvāca
nato 'smy ahaṁ tvākhila-hetu-hetuṁ
nārāyaṇaṁ pūruṣam ādyam avyayam
yan-nābhi-jātād aravinda-koṣād
brahmāvirāsīd yata eṣa lokaḥ
śrī-akrūraḥ uvāca—Śrī Akrūra said; nataḥ—bowed down; asmi—am; aham—I; tvā—to You; akhila—of all; hetu—causes; hetum—the cause; nārāyaṇam—Lord Nārāyaṇa; pūruṣam—the Supreme Person; ādyam—original; avyayam—inexhaustible; yat—from whose; nābhi—navel; jātāt—which was generated; aravinda—of a lotus plant; koṣāt—from the whorl; brahmā—Brahmā; avirāsīt—appeared; yataḥ—from whom; eṣaḥ—this; lokaḥ—world.
Śrī Akrūra said: I bow down to You, the cause of all causes, the original and inexhaustible Supreme Person, Nārāyaṇa. From the whorl of the lotus born from Your navel, Brahmā appeared, and by his agency this universe has come into being.
TEXT 2
BaUstaAeyamai¢a: pavanaM KamaAid"r,"
mah"AnajaAid"maRna win‰"yaAiNA
s$avaeRin‰"yaATaAR ivabauDaAê s$avaeR
yae he"tavastae jagAtaAe'ṆḷBaUtaA:
bhūs toyam agniḥ pavanaṁ kham ādir
mahān ajādir mana indriyāṇi
sarvendriyārthā vibudhāś ca sarve
ye hetavas te jagato 'ṅga-bhūtāḥ
bhūḥ—earth; toyam—water; agniḥ—fire; pavanam—air; kham—ether; ādiḥ—and its source, false ego; mahān—the mahat-tattva; ajā—the total material nature; ādiḥ—her source, the Supreme Lord; manaḥ—the mind; indriyāṇi—the senses; sarva-indriya—of all the senses; arthāḥ—the objects; vibudhāḥ—the demigods; ca—and; sarve—all; ye—which; hetavaḥ—causes; te—Your; jagataḥ—of the universe; aṅga—from the body; bhūtāḥ—generated.
Earth; water; fire; air; ether and its source, false ego; the mahat-tattva; the total material nature and her source, the Supreme Lord's puruṣa expansion; the mind; the senses; the sense objects; and the senses' presiding deities—all these causes of the cosmic manifestation are born from Your transcendental body.
TEXT 3
naEtae svaṝ&paM ivaāu"r"Atmanastae
÷jaAd"yaAe'naAtmatayaA gA{h"Ita:
@jaAe'naubaŪ": s$a gAuNAEr"jaAyaA
gAuNAAtparM" vaed" na tae svaṝ&pama,
naite svarūpaṁ vidur ātmanas te
hy ajādayo 'nātmatayā gṛhītaḥ
ajo 'nubaddhaḥ sa guṇair ajāyā
guṇāt paraṁ veda na te svarūpam
na—do not; ete—these (elements of creation); svarūpam—the true identity; viduḥ—know; ātmanaḥ—of the Supreme Soul; te—You; hi—indeed; ajā-ādayaḥ—headed by the total material nature; anātmatayā—by the status of being nonliving matter; gṛhītāḥ—seized; ajaḥ—Lord Brahmā; anubaddhaḥ—bound up; saḥ—he; guṇaiḥ—by the modes; ajāyāḥ—of material nature; guṇāt—to these modes; param—transcendental; veda na—he does not know; te—Your; svarūpam—true form.
The total material nature and these other elements of creation certainly cannot know You as You are, for they are manifested in the realm of dull matter. Since You are beyond the modes of nature, even Lord Brahma, who is bound up in these modes, does not know Your true identity.
God is transcendental to material nature. Unless we also transcend the limited consciousness of material existence, we cannot know Him. Even the greatest living entity in the universe, Brahmā, cannot understand the Supreme unless he comes to the platform of pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
TEXT 4
tvaAM yaAeigAnaAe yajantyaŪ"A
mah"Apauś&SamaIṅr"ma,
s$aADyaAtmaM s$aAiDaBaUtaM ca
s$aAiDadE"vaM ca s$aADava:
tvāṁ yogino yajanty addhā
mahā-puruṣam īśvaram
sādhyātmaṁ sādhibhūtaṁ ca
sādhidaivaṁ ca sādhavaḥ
tvam—for You; yoginaḥ—yogīs; yajanti—perform sacrifice; addhā—certainly; mahā-puruṣam—for the Supreme Personality; īśvaram—the Godhead; sa-adhyātmam—(the witness of) the living entities; sa-adhibhutam—of the material elements; ca—and; sa-adhidaivam—of the controlling demigods; ca—and; sādhavaḥ—purified persons.
Pure yogīs worship You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by conceiving of You in the threefold form comprising the living entities, the material elements that constitute the living entities' bodies, and the controlling deities of those elements.
TEXT 5
‡ayyaA ca ivaâyaA ke(icata,
tvaAM vaE vaEtaAinak(A iã"jaA:
yajantae ivatataEyaR"ÁaEr,"
naAnaAṝ&paAmar"AKyayaA
trayyā ca vidyayā kecit
tvāṁ vai vaitānikā dvijāḥ
yajante vitatair yajñair
nānā-rūpāmarākhyayā
trayyā—of the three Vedas; ca—and; vidyayā—by the mantras; kecit—some; tvām—You; vai—indeed; vaitānikāḥ—who respect the regulations of the three sacred fires; dvijāḥ—brāhmaṇas; yajante—worship; vitataiḥ—elaborate; yajñaiḥ—with ritual sacrifices; nānā—various; rūpa—having forms; amara—of demigods; ākhyayā—by the designations.
Brāhmaṇas who follow the regulations concerning the three sacred fires worship You by chanting mantras from the three Vedas and performing elaborate fire sacrifices for the various demigods, who have many forms and names.
Akrūra has now described how those who follow the paths of Sāṅkhya, yoga and the three Vedas worship the Supreme Lord in different ways. In the various places where the Vedas appear to recommend that one worship Indra, Varuṇa and other demigods, these demigods are stated to be supreme. But at the same time the Vedas state that there is one supreme controller, the Absolute Truth. That is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, who expands His potency through material creation into the forms of the demigods. Thus worship of the demigods goes to Him through the indirect method of karma-kāṇḍa, or fruitive religious rituals. Ultimately, however, one who wants to achieve eternal perfection should worship the Lord directly, in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
TEXT 6
Wke( tvaAiKalak(maARiNA
s$aªyasyaAepazAmaM gAtaA:
ÁaAinanaAe ÁaAnayaÁaena
yajainta ÁaAnaivaƒah"ma,
eke tvākhila-karmāṇi
sannyasyopaśamaṁ gatāḥ
jñānino jñāna-yajñena
yajanti jñāna-vigraham
eke—some; tvā—to You; akhila—all; karmāṇi—activities; sannyasya—resigning; upaśamam—peace; gatāḥ—attaining; jñāninaḥ—pursuers of knowledge; jñāna-yajñena—by the sacrifice of cultivating knowledge; yajanti—they worship; jñāna-vigraham—the embodiment of knowledge.
In pursuit of spiritual knowledge, some persons renounce all material activities and, having thus become peaceful, perform the sacrifice of philosophic investigation to worship You, the original form of all knowledge.
Modern philosophers pursue knowledge without bothering to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus they naturally end up with meager, if not trivial, results.
TEXT 7
@nyae ca s$aMs$k{(taAtmaAnaAe
ivaiDanaAiBaih"taena tae
yajainta tvanmayaAstvaAM vaE
baḍ"maUtyaeRk(maUitaRk(ma,
anye ca saṁskṛtātmāno
vidhinābhihitena te
yajanti tvan-mayās tvāṁ vai
bahu-mūrty-eka-mūrtikam
anye—others; ca—and; saṁskṛta—purified; ātmānaḥ—whose intelligence; vidhinā—by the injunctions (of such scriptures as the Pañcarātra); abhihitena—presented; te—by You; yajanti—worship; tvat-mayāḥ—filled with thought of You; tvām—You; vai—indeed; bahu-mūrti—having many forms; eka-mūrtikam—having one form.
And yet others—those whose intelligence is pure—follow the injunctions of Vaiṣṇava scriptures promulgated by You. Absorbing their minds in thought of You, they worship You as the one Supreme Lord manifesting in multiple forms.
The word saṁskṛtātmānaḥ, "they whose intelligence is pure," is significant here. It implies that the worshipers mentioned before have not completely purified their intelligence of material contamination and thus worship the Lord indirectly. Those who are purified, however, directly worship the Lord, either as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa, or as one of His various plenary forms, such as Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna or Aniruddha, as indicated here.
TEXT 8
tvaAmaevaAnyae izAvaAe·e(na
maAgAeRNA izAvaṝ&ipaNAma,
baḥ"AcaAyaRivaBaede"na
BagAvantanauRpaAs$atae
tvām evānye śivoktena
mārgeṇa śiva-rūpiṇam
bahv-ācārya-vibhedena
bhagavantam upāsate
tvām—You; eva—also; anye—others; śiva—by Lord Śiva; uktena—spoken; mārgeṇa—by the path; śiva-rūpiṇam—in the form of Lord Śiva; bahu-ācārya—of many teachers; vibhedena—following the different presentations; bhagavantam—the Supreme Lord; upāsate—they worship.
There are still others, who worship You, the Supreme Lord, in the form of Lord Śiva. They follow the path described by him and interpreted in various ways by many teachers.
The words tvām eva, "You also," indicate that the path of worshiping Lord Śiva is indirect and therefore inferior. Akrūra himself is following the superior method by directly worshiping Kṛṣṇa, or Viṣṇu, with his prayers.
TEXT 9
s$avaR Wva yajainta tvaAM
s$avaR$de"vamayaeṅr"ma,
yae'pyanyade"vataABa·(A
yaâpyanyaiDaya: ‘aBaAe
sarva eva yajanti tvāṁ
sarva-deva-mayeśvaram
ye 'py anya-devatā-bhaktā
yady apy anya-dhiyaḥ prabho
sarve—all; eva—indeed; yajanti—worship; tvam—You; sarva-deva—all the demigods; maya—O You who comprise; īśvaram—the Supreme Lord; ye—they; api—even; anya—of other; devatā—deities; bhaktāḥ—devotees; yadi api—although; anya—turned elsewhere; dhiyaḥ—their attention; prabho—O master.
But all these people, my Lord, even those who have turned their attention away from You and are worshiping other deities, are actually worshiping You alone, O embodiment of all the demigods.
The idea here is that even those who worship the demigods are indirectly worshiping the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu. The understanding of such worshipers, however, is imperfect.
TEXT 10
yaTaAi‰"‘aBavaA naâ:
pajaRnyaApaUir"taA: ‘aBaAe
ivazAinta s$avaRta: is$anDauM
taã"ÔvaAM gAtayaAe'ntata:
yathādri-prabhavā nadyaḥ
parjanyāpūritāḥ prabho
viśanti sarvataḥ sindhuṁ
tadvat tvāṁ gatayo 'ntataḥ
yathā—as; adri—from the mountains; prabhavāḥ—born; nadyaḥ—rivers; parjanya—by the rain; āpūritāḥ—filled; prabho—O master; viśanti—enter; sarvataḥ—from all sides; sindhum—the ocean; tadvat—similarly; tvām—You; gatayaḥ—these paths; antataḥ—finally.
As rivers born from the mountains and filled by the rain flow from all sides into the sea, so do all these paths in the end reach You, O master.
Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself speaks on this issue of worship in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.23-25):
ye 'py anya-devatā-bhaktā
yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ
te 'pi mām eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam
ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ
bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca
na tu mām abhijānanti
tattvenātaś cyavanti te
yānti deva-vratā devān
pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ
bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā
yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām
 [Bg. 9.25]
"Those who are devotees of other gods and who worship them with faith actually worship only Me, O son of Kuntī, but they do so in a wrong way. I am the only enjoyer and master of all sacrifices. Therefore, those who do not recognize My true transcendental nature fall down. Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those who worship the ancestors go to the ancestors; those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; and those who worship Me will live with Me."
TEXT 11
s$aÔvaM r"jastama wita
Bavata: ‘ak{(taegAuRNAA:
taeSau ih" ‘aAk{(taA: ‘aAetaA
@A“aṭsTaAvar"Ad"ya:
sattvaṁ rajas tama iti
bhavataḥ prakṛter guṇāḥ
teṣu hi prākṛtāḥ protā
ā-brahma-sthāvarādayaḥ
sattvam—goodness; rajaḥ—passion; tamaḥ—ignorance; iti—thus known; bhavataḥ—Your; prakṛteḥ—of the material nature; guṇāḥ—the qualities; teṣu—to them; hi—certainly; prākṛtāḥ—the conditioned living entities; protāḥ—woven; ā-brahma—up to Lord Brahmā; sthāvara-ādayaḥ—starting with the nonmoving creatures.
Goodness, passion and ignorance, the qualities of Your material nature, entangle all conditioned living beings, from Brahmā down to the nonmoving creatures.
TEXT 12
tauByaM namastae tvaivaSa·(ā{"í"yae
s$avaARtmanae s$avaRiDayaAM ca s$aAiºaNAe
gAuNA‘avaAh"Ae'yamaivaâyaA k{(ta:
‘avataRtae de"vana{itayaRgAAtmas$au
tubhyaṁ namas te tv aviṣakta-dṛṣṭaye
sarvātmane sarva-dhiyāṁ ca sākṣiṇe
guṇa-pravāho 'yam avidyayā kṛtaḥ
pravartate deva-nṛ-tiryag-ātmasu
tubhyam—to You; namaḥ—obeisances; te—Your; tu—and; aviṣakta—aloof; dṛṣṭaye—whose vision; sarva-ātmane—to the Soul of all; sarva—of everyone; dhiyām—of the consciousness; ca—and; sākṣiṇe—to the witness; guṇa—of the material modes; pravāhaḥ—the flow; ayam—this; avidyayā—by the force of ignorance; kṛtaḥ—created; pravartate—goes on; deva—as demigods; nṛ—humans; tiryak—and animals; ātmasu—among those who assume the identities.
I offer My obeisances to You, who as the Supreme Soul of all beings witness everyone's consciousness with unbiased vision. The current of Your material modes, produced by the force of ignorance, flows strongly among the living beings who assume identities as demigods, humans and animals.
TEXTS 13-14
@i¢amauRKaM tae'vainar"x.~i„ar"IºaNAM
s$aUyaAeR naBaAe naAiBar"TaAe id"zA: ™auita:
âAE: kM( s$aure"n‰"Astava baAh"vaAe'NARvaA:
ku(iºamaRś&t‘aANAbalaM ‘ak(ilpatama,
r"AemaAiNA va{ºaAESaDaya: izAr"Aeś&h"A
maeGaA: par"syaAisTanaKaAina tae'‰"ya:
inamaeSaNAM r"A‡yah"naI ‘ajaApaitar,"
maeX#)stau va{ií"stava vaIyaRimaSyatae
agnir mukhaṁ te 'vanir aṅghrir īkṣaṇaṁ
sūryo nabho nābhir atho diśaḥ śrutiḥ
dyauḥ kaṁ surendrās tava bāhavo 'rṇavāḥ
kukṣir marut prāṇa-balaṁ prakalpitam
romāṇi vṛkṣauṣadhayaḥ śiroruhā
meghāḥ parasyāsthi-nakhāni te 'drayaḥ
nimeṣaṇaṁ rātry-ahanī prajāpatir
meḍhras tu vṛṣṭis tava vīryam iṣyate
agniḥ—fire; mukham—face; te—Your; avaniḥ—the earth; aṅghriḥ—feet; ikṣaṇam—eye; sūryaḥ—the sun; nabhaḥ—the sky; nābhiḥ—navel; atha u—and also; diśaḥ—the directions; śrutiḥ—sense of hearing; dyauḥ—heaven; kam—head; sura-indrāḥ—the chief demigods; tava—Your; bāhavaḥ—arms; arṇavāḥ—the oceans; kukṣiḥ—abdomen; marut—the wind; prāṇa—vital air; balam—and physical strength; prakalpitam—conceived; romāṇi—bodily hairs; vṛkṣa—the trees; oṣadhayaḥ—the plants; śiraḥ-ruhāḥ—the hair on Your head; meghāḥ—the clouds; parasya—of the Supreme; asthi—bones; nakhāni—and nails; te—of You; adrayaḥ—the mountains; nimeṣaṇam—the blinking of Your eyes; rātri-ahanī—day and night; prajāpatiḥ—the progenitor of mankind; meḍhraḥ—genitals; tu—and; vṛṣṭiḥ—the rain; tava—Your; vīryam—semen; iṣyate—is considered.
Fire is said to be Your face, the earth Your feet, the sun Your eye, and the sky Your navel. The directions are Your sense of hearing, the chief demigods Your arms, and the oceans Your abdomen. Heaven is thought to be Your head, and the wind Your vital air and physical strength. The trees and plants are the hairs on Your body, the clouds the hair on Your head, and the mountains the bones and nails of You, the Supreme. The passage of day and night is the blinking of Your eyes, the progenitor of mankind Your genitals, and the rain Your semen.
TEXT 15
tvayyavyayaAtmana, pauś&Sae ‘ak(ilpataA
laAek(A: s$apaAlaA baḍ"jaIvas$aŚḷlaA:
yaTaA jalae s$aiÃah"tae jalaAEk(s$aAe
'pyauāu"mbare" vaA mazAk(A manaAemayae
tvayy avyayātman puruṣe prakalpitā
lokāḥ sa-pālā bahu-jīva-saṅkulāḥ
yathā jale sañjihate jalaukaso
'py udumbare vā maśakā mano-maye
tvayi—within You; avyaya-ātman—the inexhaustible one; puruṣe—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prakalpitāḥ—created; lokāḥ—the worlds; sa-pālāḥ—together with their protecting demigods; bahu—with many; jīva—living beings; saṅkulāḥ—crowded; yathā—just as; jale—in water; sañjihate—move about; jala-okasaḥ—aquatic animals; api—indeed; udumbare—in an udumbara fruit (a kind of fig); vā—or; maśakāḥ—small biting insects; manaḥ—the mind (and other senses); maye—(in You) who comprise.
All the worlds, with their presiding demigods and teeming populations, originate in You, the inexhaustible Supreme Personality of Godhead. These worlds travel within You, the basis of the mind and senses, just as aquatics swim in the sea or tiny insects burrow within an udumbara fruit.
TEXT 16
yaAina yaAnaIh" ṝ&paAiNA
‚(Lx"naATa< ibaBaiSaR ih"
taEr"Ama{í"zAucaAe laAek(A
maud"A gAAyainta tae yazA:
yāni yānīha rūpāṇi
krīḍanārthaṁ bibharṣi hi
tair āmṛṣṭa-śuco lokā
mudā gāyanti te yaśaḥ
yāni yāni—which various; iha—in this material world; rūpāṇi—forms; krīḍana—of play; artham—for the sake; bibharṣi—You manifest; hi—indeed; taiḥ—by them; āmṛṣṭa—cleansed; śucaḥ—of their unhappiness; lokāḥ—people; mudā—joyfully; gāyanti—sing; te—Your; yaśaḥ—glories.
To enjoy Your pastimes You manifest Yourself in various forms in this material world, and these incarnations cleanse away all the unhappiness of those who joyfully chant Your glories.
TEXTS 17-18
nama: k(Ar"NAmatsyaAya
‘alayaAibDacar"Aya ca
h"yazAISNAeR namastauByaM
maDaukE(q%Bama{tyavae
@kU(paAr"Aya ba{h"tae
namaAe mand"r"DaAir"NAe
iºatyauŪ"Ar"ivah"Ar"Aya
nama: zAUk(r"maUtaRyae
namaḥ kāraṇa-matsyāya
pralayābdhi-carāya ca
hayaśīrṣṇe namas tubhyaṁ
madhu-kaiṭabha-mṛtyave
akūpārāya bṛhate
namo mandara-dhāriṇe
kṣity-uddhāra-vihārāya
namaḥ śūkara-mūrtaye
namaḥ—obeisances; kāraṇa—who is the original cause of creation; matsyāya—to the Supreme Lord's appearance as a fish; pralaya—of annihilation; abdhi—in the ocean; carāya—who moved about; ca—and; haya-śīrṣṇe—to the incarnation who appeared with the head of a horse; namaḥ—obeisances; tubhyam—to You; madhu-kaiṭabha—of the demons Madhu and Kaiṭabha; mṛtyave—to the killer; akūpārāya—to the tortoise; bṛhate—huge; namaḥ—obeisances; mandara—of Mandara Mountain; dhāriṇe—to the holder; kṣiti—of the earth; uddhāra—the lifting up; vihārāya—whose pleasure; namaḥ—obeisances; śūkara—of a boar; mūrtaye—to the form.
I offer my obeisances to You, the cause of the creation, Lord Matsya, who swam about in the ocean of dissolution, to Lord Hayagrīva, the killer of Madhu and Kaiṭabha, to the immense tortoise [Lord Kūrma], who supported Mandara Mountain, and to the boar incarnation [Lord Varāha], who enjoyed lifting the earth.
The Viśva-kośa dictionary states that the word akūpārāya indicates the king of tortoises.
TEXT 19
namastae'ṁu"tais$aMh"Aya
s$aADaulaAek(BayaApah"
vaAmanaAya namastauByaM
‚(Antai‡aBauvanaAya ca
namas te 'dbhuta-siṁhāya
sādhu-loka-bhayāpaha
vāmanāya namas tubhyaṁ
krānta-tribhuvanāya ca
namaḥ—obeisances; te—to You; adbhuta—amazing; siṁhāya—to the lion; sadhu-loka—of all saintly devotees; bhaya—of the fear; apaha—O remover; vāmanāya—to the dwarf; namaḥ—obeisances; tubhyam—to You; krānta—who stepped over; tri-bhuvanāya—the three planetary systems of the universe; ca—and.
Obeisances to You, the amazing lion [Lord Nṛsiṁha], who remove Your saintly devotees' fear, and to the dwarf Vāmana, who stepped over the three worlds.
TEXT 20
namaAe Ba{gAuNAAM patayae
ā{"æaºa‡avanaicC$de"
namastae r"GauvayaARya
r"AvaNAAntak(r"Aya ca
namo bhṛguṇāṁ pataye
dṛpta-kṣatra-vana-cchide
namas te raghu-varyāya
rāvaṇānta-karāya ca
namaḥ—obeisances; bhṛgūṇām—of the descendants of Bhṛgu; pataye—to the chief (Lord Paraśurāma); dṛpta—conceited; kṣatra—of the members of the royal order; vana—the forest; chide—who cut down; namaḥ—obeisances; te—to You; raghu-varyāya—the best of the descendants of Raghu; rāvaṇa—of Rāvaṇa; anta-karāya—who put an end; ca—and.
Obeisances to You, Lord of the Bhṛgus, who cut down the forest of the conceited royal order, and to Lord Rāma, the best of the Raghu dynasty, who put an end to the demon Rāvaṇa.
TEXT 21
namastae vaAs$aude"vaAya
nama: s$aÆḷSaRNAAya ca
‘aâu°aAyainaś&Ū"Aya
s$aAtvataAM patayae nama:
namas te vāsudevāya
namaḥ saṅkarṣaṇāya ca
pradyumnāyaniruddhāya
sātvatāṁ pataye namaḥ
namaḥ—obeisances; te—unto You; vāsudevāya—Lord Śrī Vāsudeva; namaḥ—obeisances; saṅkarṣaṇāya—to Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa; ca—and; pradyumnāya—to Lord Pradyumna; aniruddhāya—and to Lord Aniruddha; sātvatām—of the Yādavas; pataye—to the chief; namaḥ—obeisances.
Obeisances to You, Lord of the Sātvatas, and to Your forms of Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha.
TEXT 22
namaAe bauŪ"Aya zAuŪ"Aya
dE"tyad"AnavamaAeih"nae
mlaecC$‘aAyaºa‡ah"n‡ae
namastae k(ilk(ṝ&ipaNAe
namo buddhāya śuddhāya
daitya-dānava-mohine
mleccha-prāya-kṣatra-hantre
namas te kalki-rūpiṇe
namaḥ—obeisances; buddhāya—to Lord Buddha; śuddhāya—the pure; daitya-dānava—of the demoniac descendants of Diti and Danu; mohine—to the bewilderer; mleccha—of the outcaste meat-eaters; prāya—resembling; kṣatra—kings; hantre—to the killer; namaḥ—obeisances; te—to You; kalki-rūpiṇe—in the form of Kalki.
Obeisances to Your form as the faultless Lord Buddha, who will bewilder the Daityas and Dānavas, and to Lord Kalki, the annihilator of the meat-eaters posing as kings.
TEXT 23
BagAvana, jaIvalaAek(Ae'yaM
maAeih"tastava maAyayaA
@hM" mamaetyas$aØ"Ah"Ae
”aAmyatae k(maRvatmaRs$au
bhagavan jīva-loko 'yaṁ
mohitas tava māyayā
ahaṁ mamety asad-grāho
bhrāmyate karma-vartmasu
bhagavan—O Supreme Lord; jīva—of living entities; lokaḥ—the world; ayam—this; mohitaḥ—bewildered; tava—Your; māyayā—by the illusory energy; aham mama iti—based on the conceptions of "I" and "my"; asat—false; grāhaḥ—whose conception; bhrāmyate—is made to wander; karma—of fruitive work; vartmasu—along the paths.
O Supreme Lord, the living entities in this world are bewildered by Your illusory energy. Becoming involved in the false concepts of "I" and "my," they are forced to wander along the paths of fruitive work.
TEXT 24
@hM" caAtmaAtmajaAgAAr"-
d"Ar"ATaRsvajanaAid"Sau
”amaAima sva«ak(lpaeSau
maUX#: s$atyaiDayaA ivaBaAe
ahaṁ cātmātmajāgāra-
dārārtha-svajanādiṣu
bhramāmi svapna-kalpeṣu
mūḍhaḥ satya-dhiyā vibho
aham—I; ca—also; ātma—concerning my body; ātma-ja—children; agāra—home; dāra—wife; artha—wealth; sva-jana—followers; ādiṣu—and so on; bhramāmi—am deluded; svapna—a dream; kalpeṣu—who are just like; mūḍhaḥ—foolish; satya—that they are real; dhiyā—with the idea; vibho—O almighty Lord.
I too am deluded in this way, O almighty Lord, foolishly thinking my body, children, home, wife, money and followers to be real, though they are actually as unreal as a dream.
TEXT 25
@inatyaAnaAtmaāu":KaeSau
ivapayaRyamaita÷Rh"ma,
ã"nã"Ar"AmastamaAeivaí"Ae
na jaAnae tvaAtmana: i‘ayama,
anityānātma-duḥkheṣu
viparyaya-matir hy aham
dvandvārāmas tamo-viṣṭo
na jāne tvātmanaḥ priyam
anitya—not eternal; anātma—not the real self; duḥkheṣu—in the sources of misery; viparyaya—backwards; matiḥ—whose mentality; hi—indeed; aham—I; dvandva—in duality; ārāmaḥ—taking pleasure; tamaḥ—in ignorance; viṣṭaḥ—absorbed; na jāne—I fail to recognize; tvā—You; ātmanaḥ—of myself; priyam—the dearmost.
Thus mistaking the temporary for the eternal, my body for my self, and sources of misery for sources of happiness, I have tried to take pleasure in material dualities. Covered in this way by ignorance, I could not recognize You as the real object of my love.
TEXT 26
yaTaAbauDaAe jalaM ih"tvaA
‘aitacC$ªaM taāu"ṁ"vaE:
@Byaeita ma{gAta{SNAAM vaE
taã"ÔvaAhM" par"Ax.~mauKa:
yathābudho jalaṁ hitvā
praticchannaṁ tad-udbhavaiḥ
abhyeti mṛga-tṛṣṇāṁ vai
tadvat tvāhaṁ parāṅ-mukhaḥ
yathā—as; abudhaḥ—someone who is unintelligent; jalam—water; hitvā—overlooking; praticchannam—covered; tat-udbhavaiḥ—by the plants growing in it; abhyeti—approaches; mṛga-tṛṣṇām—a mirage; vai—indeed; tadvat—in that same way; tvā—You; aham—I; parāk-mukhaḥ—turned away.
Just as a fool overlooks a body of water covered by the vegetation growing in it and chases a mirage, so I have turned away from You.
TEXT 27
naAets$ahe"'hM" k{(paNADaI:
k(Amak(maRh"taM mana:
r"Aeā,"DauM ‘amaAiTaiBaêAºaEr,"
iœ"yamaANAimatastata:
notsahe 'haṁ kṛpaṇa-dhīḥ
kāma-karma-hataṁ manaḥ
roddhuṁ pramāthibhiś cākṣair
hriyamāṇam itas tataḥ
na utsahe—am not able to find the strength; aham—I; kṛpaṇa—crippled; dhīḥ—whose intelligence; kāma—by material desires; karma—and material activities; hatam—disturbed; manaḥ—my mind; roddhum—to keep in check; pramāthibhiḥ—which are very powerful and willful; ca—and; akṣaiḥ—by the senses; hriyamāṇam—being dragged; itaḥ tataḥ—here and there.
My intelligence is so crippled that I cannot find the strength to curb my mind, which is disturbed by material desires and activities and constantly dragged here and there by my obstinate senses.
TEXT 28
s$aAe'hM" tavaAx.~„yaupagAtaAe'smyas$ataAM āu"r"ApaM
ta»aApyahM" Bavad"nauƒah" wRzA manyae
pauMs$aAe BavaeâihR" s$aMs$ar"NAApavagARs$a,
tvayyabjanaABa s$aāu"paAs$anayaA maita: syaAta,
so 'haṁ tavāṅghry-upagato 'smy asatāṁ durāpaṁ
tac cāpy ahaṁ bhavad-anugraha īśa manye
puṁso bhaved yarhi saṁsaraṇāpavargas
tvayy abja-nābha sad-upāsanayā matiḥ syāt
saḥ—being such; aham—I; tava—Your; aṅghri—feet; upagataḥ asmi—am approaching; asatām—for those who are impure; durāpam—impossible to attain; tat—that; ca—and; api—also; aham—I; bhavat—Your; anugrahaḥ—mercy; īśa—O Lord; manye—think; puṁsaḥ—of a person; bhavet—occurs; yarhi—when; saṁsaraṇa—of his rotation in the cycle of material existence; apavargaḥ—the cessation; tvayi—of You; abja—like a lotus; nābha—O You whose navel; sat—of pure devotees; upāsanayā—by worship; matiḥ—consciousness; syāt—develops.
Being thus fallen, I am approaching Your feet for shelter, O Lord, because although the impure can never attain Your feet, I think it is nevertheless possible by Your mercy. Only when one's material life has ceased, O lotus-naveled Lord, can one develop consciousness of You by serving Your pure devotees.
TEXT 29
namaAe ivaÁaAnamaA‡aAya
s$avaR‘atyayahe"tavae
pauś&SaezA‘aDaAnaAya
“aṭNAe'nantazA·(yae
namo vijñāna-mātrāya
sarva-pratyaya-hetave
puruṣeśa-pradhānāya
brahmaṇe 'nanta-śaktaye
namaḥ—obeisances; vijñāna—of pure knowledge; mātrāya—to the embodiment; sarva—of all; pratyaya—forms of knowledge; hetave—to the source; puruṣa—of a person; īśa—the controlling forces; pradhānāya—to Him who predominates; brahmaṇe—to the Supreme Absolute Truth; ananta—unlimited; śaktaye—whose potencies.
Obeisances to the Supreme Absolute Truth, the possessor of unlimited energies. He is the embodiment of pure, transcendental knowledge, the source of all kinds of awareness, and the predominator of the forces of nature that rule over the living being.
TEXT 30
namastae vaAs$aude"vaAya
s$avaRBaUtaºayaAya ca
ô$SaIke(zA namastauByaM
‘apaªaM paAih" maAM ‘aBaAe
namas te vāsudevāya
sarva-bhūta-kṣayāya ca
hṛṣīkeśa namas tubhyaṁ
prapannaṁ pāhi māṁ prabho
namaḥ—obeisances; te—to You; vāsudevāya—the son of Vasudeva; sarva—of all; bhūta—living beings; kṣayāya—the residence; ca—and; hṛṣīka-īśa—O Lord of the mind and senses; namaḥ—obeisances; tubhyam—to You; prapannam—who am surrendered; pāhi—please protect; mām—me; prabho—O master.
O son of Vasudeva, obeisances to You, within whom all living beings reside. O Lord of the mind and senses, again I offer You my obeisances. O master, please protect me, who am surrendered unto You.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda to the Tenth Canto, Fortieth Chapter, of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Prayers of Akrūra."



Song Bhramara gita
TEXT 12
gAAepyauvaAca
maDaupa ik(tavabanDaAe maA s$pa{zAx.~i„aM s$apatnyaA:
ku(caivalauilatamaAlaAku(Śḷmazma™auiBanaR:
vah"tau maDaupaitastanmaAinanaInaAM ‘as$aAdM"
yaāu"s$ad"is$a ivax"mbyaM yasya āU"tastvamaIā{"k,(
gopy uvāca
madhupa kitava-bandho mā spṛśaṅghriṁ sapatnyāḥ
kuca-vilulita-mālā-kuṅkuma-śmaśrubhir naḥ
vahatu madhu-patis tan-māninīnāṁ prasādaṁ
yadu-sadasi viḍambyaṁ yasya dūtas tvam īdṛk
gopī uvāca—the gopī said; madhupa—O bumblebee; kitava—of a cheater; bandho—O friend; mā spṛśa—please do not touch; aṅghrim—the feet; sapatnyāḥ—of the lover who is our rival; kuca—the breast; vilulita—fallen from; mālā—from the garland; kuṅkuma—with the red cosmetic; śmaśrubhiḥ—with the whiskers; naḥ—our; vahatu—let Him bring; madhu-patiḥ—the Lord of the Madhu dynasty; tat—His; māninīnām—to the women; prasādam—mercy or kindness; yadu-sadasi—in the royal assembly of the Yadus; viḍambyam—an object of ridicule or contempt; yasya—whose; dūtaḥ—messenger; tvam—you; īdṛk—such.
The gopī said: O honeybee, O friend of a cheater, don't touch My feet with your whiskers, which are smeared with the kuṅkuma that rubbed onto Kṛṣṇa's garland when it was crushed by the breasts of a rival lover! Let Kṛṣṇa satisfy the women of Mathurā. One who sends a messenger like you will certainly be ridiculed in the Yadus' assembly.
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī indirectly chastised Kṛṣṇa by chastising the bumblebee, which She took for His messenger. She addressed the bumblebee as madhupa, "one who drinks the nectar (of flowers)," and She addressed Kṛṣṇa as madhu-pati, "the Lord of Madhu."
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī points out that this and the following nine verses exemplify ten kinds of impulsive speech spoken by a lover. This verse illustrates the qualities of prajalpa, as described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in the following verse from his Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.182):
asūyerṣyā-mada-yujā
yo 'vadhīraṇa-mudrayā
priyasyākauśalodgāraḥ
prajalpaḥ sa tu kīrtyate
"Prajalpa is speech that denigrates the tactlessness of one's lover with expressions of disrespect. It is spoken in a mood of envy, jealousy and pride." Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī points out that the word kitava-bandho expresses envy; the phrase from sapatnyāḥ to naḥ, jealousy; the phrase mā spṛśa aṅghrim, pride; and the phrase from vahatu to prasādam, disrespect, while the phrase from yadu-sadasi to the end of the verse decries Kṛṣṇa's tactless treatment of Rādhārāṇī.
TEXT 13
s$ak{(d"Dar"s$auDaAM svaAM maAeih"naI%M paAyaiyatvaA
s$aumanas$a wva s$aâstatyajae'smaAna, BavaAā{"k,(
pair"car"ita k(TaM tatpaAd"paáM nau paáA
÷ipa bata ô$tacaetaA ÷uÔamaṇAek(jalpaE:
sakṛd adhara-sudhāṁ svāṁ mohinīṁ pāyayitvā
sumanasa iva sadyas tatyaje 'smān bhavādṛk
paricarati kathaṁ tat-pāda-padmaṁ nu padmā
hy api bata hṛta-cetā hy uttama-śloka-jalpaiḥ
sakṛt—once; adhara—of the lips; sudhām—the nectar; svām—His own; mohinīm—bewildering; pāyayitvā—making drink; sumanasaḥ—flowers; iva—like; sadyaḥ—suddenly; tatyaje—He abandoned; asmān—us; bhavādṛk—like you; paricarati—serves; katham—why; tat—His; pāda-padmam—lotus feet; nu—I wonder; padmā—Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune; hi api—indeed, because; bata—alas; hṛta—taken away; cetāḥ—her mind; hi—certainly; uttama-śloka—of Kṛṣṇa; jalpaiḥ—by the false speech.
After making us drink the enchanting nectar of His lips only once, Kṛṣṇa suddenly abandoned us, just as you might quickly abandon some flowers. How is it, then, that Goddess Padmā willingly serves His lotus feet? Alas! The answer must certainly be that her mind has been stolen away by His deceitful words.
In this verse Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī continues to compare Śrī Kṛṣṇa to the bumblebee, and in Her distress She states that the reason the goddess of fortune is constantly devoted to His lotus feet must be that she has been fooled by Kṛṣṇa's promises. According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, this statement of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's illustrates parijalpa, as described in Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.184):
prabhor nidayatā-śāṭhya-
cāpalyādy-upapādanāt
sva-vicakṣaṇatā-vyaktir
bhaṅgyā syāt parijalpitam
"Parijalpa is that speech which, through various devices, shows one's own cleverness by exposing the mercilessness, duplicity, unreliability and so on of one's Lord."
TEXT 14
ik(imah" baḍ" Sax"x.~„ae gAAyais$a tvaM yaāU"naAma,
@iDapaitamagA{h"ANAAmaƒataAe na: paur"ANAma,
ivajayas$aKas$aKaInaAM gAIyataAM tat‘as$aṆḷ:
ºaipataku(caś&jastae k(lpayantaIí"imaí"A:
kim iha bahu ṣaḍ-aṅghre gāyasi tvaṁ yadūnām
adhipatim agṛhāṇām agrato naḥ purāṇam
vijaya-sakha-sakhīnāṁ gīyatāṁ tat-prasaṅgaḥ
kṣapita-kuca-rujas te kalpayantīṣṭam iṣṭāḥ
kim—why; iha—here; bahu—much; ṣaṭ-aṅghre—O bee (six-footed one); gāyasi—are singing; tvam—you; yadūnām—of the Yadus; adhipatim—about the master; agṛhāṇām—who have no home; agrataḥ—in front of; naḥ—us; purāṇam—old; vijaya—of Arjuna; sakha—of the friend; sakhīnām—for the friends; gīyatām—should be sung; tat—of Him; prasaṅgaḥ—the topics; kṣapita—relieved; kuca—of whose breasts; rujaḥ—the pain; te—they; kalpayanti—will provide; iṣṭam—the charity you desire; iṣṭāḥ—His beloveds.
O bee, why do you sing here so much about the Lord of the Yadus, in front of us homeless people? These topics are old news to us. Better you sing about that friend of Arjuna in front of His new girlfriends, the burning desire in whose breasts He has now relieved. Those ladies will surely give you the charity you are begging.
With the words agṛhāṇām agrato naḥ, Rādhārāṇī laments that even though She and the other gopīs gave up their homes to love Kṛṣṇa in a conjugal relationship, the Lord left them and became a prince in the great royal city of the Yadus. Besides meaning "Arjuna, the victor," the word vijaya also directly indicates Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is always victorious in His endeavors, and besides meaning "old (news)," the word purāṇam also indicates that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is glorified in the ancient Vedic scriptures of that name.
In this verse we observe in Rādhārāṇī's mood the seed of jealous anger, which arises from an apparent disdain for Kṛṣṇa, accompanied by a sarcastic sidelong glance directed toward Him. Thus this verse fits the following description of vijalpa from the Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.186):
vyaktayāsūyayā gūḍha-
māna-mudrāntarālayā
agha-dviṣi kaṭākṣoktir
vijalpo viduṣāṁ mataḥ
"According to learned authorities, vijalpa is sarcastic speech that is addressed to the killer of Agha and that openly expresses jealousy while at the same time hinting at one's angry pride."
TEXT 15
id"iva Bauiva ca r"s$aAyaAM k(A: iṣyastaā,"āu"r"ApaA:
k(paq%ś&icar"h"As$a”aUivaja{mBasya yaA: syau:
car"NAr"ja opaAstae yasya BaUitavaRyaM k(A
@ipa ca k{(paNApaºae ÷uÔamaṇAek(zAbd":
divi bhuvi ca rasāyāṁ kāḥ striyas tad-durāpāḥ
kapaṭa-rucira-hāsa-bhrū-vijṛmbhasya yāḥ syuḥ
caraṇa-raja upāste yasya bhūtir vayaṁ kā
api ca kṛpaṇa-pakṣe hy uttama-śloka-śabdaḥ
divi—in the heavenly region; bhuvi—on the earth; ca—and; rasāyām—in the subterranean sphere; kāḥ—what; striyaḥ—women; tat—by Him; durāpāḥ—unobtainable; kapaṭa—deceptive; rucira—charming; hāsa—with smiles; bhrū—of whose eyebrows; vijṛmbhasya—the arching; yāḥ—who; syuḥ—become; caraṇa—of the feet; rajaḥ—the dust; upāste—worships; yasya—whose; bhūtiḥ—the goddess of fortune, wife of Lord Nārāyaṇa; vayam—we; kā—who; api ca—nevertheless; kṛpaṇa-pakṣe—for those who are wretched; hi—indeed; uttama-śloka—the Supreme Lord, who is glorified by the most sublime prayers; śabdaḥ—the name.
In heaven, on earth or in the subterranean sphere, what women are unavailable to Him? He simply arches His eyebrows and smiles with deceptive charm, and they all become His. The supreme goddess herself worships the dust of His feet, so what is our position in comparison? But at least those who are wretched can chant His name, Uttamaśloka.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī states that Rādhārāṇī's speech, expressing all the feelings of a disappointed lover, indicates an intensity of love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa surpassing even that of the goddess of fortune. While all the gopīs are perfectly compatible with Śrī Kṛṣṇa in terms of their beauty, temperament and so on, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is especially so. In Her forlorn state, Rādhārāṇī indicates to Kṛṣṇa, "You are called Uttamaśloka because You are merciful to the wretched and fallen, but if You would be merciful to Me, then You would actually deserve this exalted name."
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī further points out that in this verse, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī expresses Her spite born of pride, accuses Kṛṣṇa of being a cheater and finds fault with His behavior. Thus this verse contains speech known as ujjalpa, as described in the following verse of the Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.188):
hareḥ kuhakatākhyānaṁ
garva-garbhitayerṣyayā
sāsūyaś ca tad-ākṣepo
dhīrair ujjalpa īryate
"The declaration of Lord Hari's duplicitous nature in a mood of spite born of pride, together with jealously spoken insults directed against Him, has been termed ujjalpa by the wise."
TEXT 16
ivas$a{ja izAr"is$a paAdM" vaeáYahM" caAtauk(ArE"r,"
@naunayaivaāu"Sastae'Byaetya d"AEtyaEmauRku(nd"Ata,
svak{(ta wh" ivaSa{í"ApatyapatyanyalaAek(A
vyas$a{jad"k{(tacaetaA: ikM( nau s$anDaeyamaismana,
visṛja śirasi pādaṁ vedmy ahaṁ cāṭu-kārair
anunaya-viduṣas te 'bhyetya dautyair mukundāt
sva-kṛta iha viṣṛṣṭāpatya-paty-anya-lokā
vyasṛjad akṛta-cetāḥ kiṁ nu sandheyam asmin
visṛja—let go of; śirasi—on your head; pādam—My foot; vedmi—know; aham—I; cāṭu-kāraiḥ—with flattering words; anunaya—in the art of conciliation; viduṣaḥ—who are expert; te—of you; abhyetya—having learned; dautyaiḥ—by acting as a messenger; mukundāt—from Kṛṣṇa; sva—for His own; kṛte—sake; iha—in this life; visṛṣṭa—who have abandoned; apatya—children; patī—husbands; anya-lokāḥ—and everyone else; vyasṛjat—He abandoned; akṛta-cetāḥ—ungrateful; kim nu—why indeed; sandheyam—should I make reconciliation; asmin—with Him.
Keep your head off My feet! I know what you're doing. You expertly learned diplomacy from Mukunda, and now you come as His messenger with flattering words. But He abandoned those who for His sake alone gave up their children, husbands and all other relations. He's simply ungrateful. Why should I make up with Him now?
According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, this verse illustrates the qualities of sañjalpa, as described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in the following verse of his Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.190):
solluṇṭhayā gahanayā
kayāpy ākṣepa-mudrayā
tasyākṛta-jñatādy-uktiḥ
sañjalpaḥ kathito budhaiḥ
"The learned describe sañjalpa as that speech which decries with deep irony and insulting gestures the beloved's ungratefulness and so on." Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī points out that the word ādi, "and so on," implies the perception in one's lover of hardheartedness, of an inimical attitude and of a complete lack of love.
TEXT 17
ma{gAyauir"va k(paIn‰M" ivavyaDae laubDaDamaAR
iṣyamak{(ta ivaṝ&paAM ṣIijata: k(AmayaAnaAma,
bailamaipa bailamaÔvaAvaeí"yaā," DvaAĪḷvaâs$a,
tad"lamais$atas$aKyaEāuR"styajastatk(TaATaR:
mṛgayur iva kapīndraṁ vivyadhe lubdha-dharmā
striyam akṛta virūpāṁ strī-jitaḥ kāma-yānām
balim api balim attvāveṣṭayad dhvāṅkṣa-vad yas
tad alam asita-sakhyair dustyajas tat-kathārthaḥ
mṛgayuḥ—a hunter; iva—like; kapi—of the monkeys; indram—the king; vivyadhe—shot; lubdha-dharmā—behaving like a cruel hunter; striyam—a woman (namely, Śūrpaṇakhā); akṛta—made; virūpām—disfigured; strī—by a woman (Sītā-devī); jitaḥ—conquered; kāmayānām—who was impelled by lusty desire; balim—King Bali; api—also; balim—his tribute; attvā—consuming; aveṣṭayat—bound up; dhvāṅkṣavat—just like a crow; yaḥ—who; tat—therefore; alam—enough; asita—with black Kṛṣṇa; sakhyaiḥ—of all kinds of friendship; dustyajaḥ—impossible to give up; tat—about Him; kathā—of the topics; arthaḥ—the elaboration.
Like a hunter, He cruelly shot the king of the monkeys with arrows. Because He was conquered by a woman, He disfigured another woman who came to Him with lusty desires. And even after consuming the gifts of Bali Mahārāja, He bound him up with ropes as if he were a crow. So let us give up all friendship with this dark-complexioned boy, even if we can't give up talking about Him.
In Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrīla Prabhupāda explains the meaning of this verse as follows: "[Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said to the bee,] 'You poor messenger, you are only a less intelligent servant. You do not know much about Kṛṣṇa—how ungrateful and hardhearted He has been, not only in this life but in His previous lives also. We have heard this from Our grandmother Paurṇamāsī. She has informed Us that Kṛṣṇa was born in a kṣatriya family previous to this birth and was known as Rāmacandra. In that birth, instead of killing Vāli, an enemy of His friend, in the manner of a kṣatriya, He killed him just like a hunter. A hunter takes a secure hiding place and then kills an animal without facing it. So Lord Rāmacandra, as a kṣatriya, should have fought with Vāli face to face, but instigated by His friend, He killed him from behind a tree. Thus He deviated from the religious principles of a kṣatriya. Also, He was so attracted by the beauty of Sītā that He converted Śūrpaṇakhā, the sister of Rāvaṇa, into an ugly woman by cutting off her nose and ears. Śūrpaṇakhā proposed an intimate relationship with Him, and as a kṣatriya He should have satisfied her. But He was so henpecked that He could not forget Sītā-devī and converted Śūrpaṇakhā into an ugly woman. Before that birth as a kṣatriya, He took birth as a brāhmaṇa boy known as Vāmanadeva and asked charity from Bali Mahārāja. Bali was so magnanimous that he gave Him whatever he had, yet Kṛṣṇa as Vāmanadeva ungratefully arrested him just like a crow and pushed him down to the Pātāla kingdom. We know all about Kṛṣṇa and how ungrateful He is. But here is the difficulty: In spite of His being so cruel and hardhearted, it is very difficult for us to give up talking about Him.' "
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī points out that this speech of Rādhārāṇī's is called avajalpa, as described by Rūpa Gosvāmī in the following verse from the Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.192):
harau kāṭhinya-kāmitva-
dhaurtyād āsakty-ayogyatā
yatra serṣyā-bhiyevoktā
so 'vajalpaḥ satāṁ mataḥ
"Saintly persons have concluded that when a lover, impelled by jealousy and fear, declares that Lord Hari is unworthy of her attachment because of His harshness, lustiness and dishonesty, such speech is called avajalpa."
TEXT 18
yad"naucair"talaIlaAk(NARpaIyaUSaiva‘auq%.-
s$ak{(d"d"naivaDaUtaã"nã"DamaAR ivanaí"A:
s$apaid" gA{h"ku(q%]mbaM d"Inamauts$a{jya d"InaA
bah"va wh" ivah"ṆḷA iBaºaucayaA< car"inta
yad-anucarita-līlā-karṇa-pīyūṣa-vipruṭ-
sakṛd-adana-vidhūta-dvandva-dharmā vinaṣṭāḥ
sapadi gṛha-kuṭumbaṁ dīnam utsṛjya dīnā
bahava iha vihaṅgā bhikṣu-caryāṁ caranti
yat—whose; anucarita—constantly performed activities; līlā—of such pastimes; karṇa—for the ears; pīyūṣa—of the nectar; vipruṭ—of a drop; sakṛt—just once; adana—by the partaking; vidhūta—removed entirely; dvandva—of duality; dharmāḥ—their propensities; vinaṣṭāḥ—ruined; sapadi—immediately; gṛha—their homes; kuṭumbam—and families; dīnam—wretched; utsṛjya—rejecting; dīnāḥ—becoming themselves wretched; bahavaḥ—many persons; iha—here (in Vṛndāvana); vihaṅgāḥ—(like) birds; bhikṣu—of begging; caryām—the livelihood; caranti—they pursue.
To hear about the pastimes that Kṛṣṇa regularly performs is nectar for the ears. For those who relish just a single drop of that nectar, even once, their dedication to material duality is ruined. Many such persons have suddenly given up their wretched homes and families and, themselves becoming wretched, traveled here to Vṛndāvana to wander about like birds, begging for their living.
Material duality is based on falsely thinking, "This is mine, and that is yours," or "This is our country, and that is yours," or "This is my family, and that is yours," and so on. In fact, there is one Absolute Truth, in which we all exist and to whom everything belongs. His beauty and pleasure are also absolute and infinite, and if one actually hears about this Absolute Truth, called Kṛṣṇa, one's dedication to the illusion of mundane duality is spoiled.
According to the ācāryas, and certainly in accord with Sanskrit grammar, the last two words of the second line of this text may also be divided dharma-avinaṣṭāḥ. Then the entire line becomes part of a single compound, the meaning of which is that hearing about Kṛṣṇa cleanses one of irreligious duality and thus one is not vanquished (avinaṣṭa) by material illusion. The word dīnāḥ is then given the alternate reading of dhīrāḥ, meaning that one becomes spiritually sober and thus gives up attachment to fleeting material relationships. The word vihaṅgāḥ, "birds," would in this case refer to swans, the symbol of essential discrimination.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī quotes Rūpa Gosvāmī as follows in connection with this verse:
bhaṅgyā tyāgaucitī tasya
khagānām api khedanāt
yatra sānuśayaṁ proktā
tad bhaved abhijalpitam
"When a lover indirectly states with remorse that her beloved is fit to be given up, such speech, uttered like the plaintive crying of a bird, is called abhijalpa." (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 14.194)
TEXT 19
vayama{taimava ijaṭvyaAô$taM ™aÚ"DaAnaA:
ku(ilak(ś&taimavaAÁaA: k{(SNAvaDvaAe h"ir"Nya:
d"ā{"zAur"s$ak{(de"taÔaªaKas$pazARtaI˜a
smar"ś&ja opamain‡ana, BaNyataAmanyavaAtaAR
vayam ṛtam iva jihma-vyāhṛtaṁ śraddadhānāḥ
kulika-rutam ivājñāḥ kṛṣṇa-vadhvo hariṇyaḥ
dadṛśur asakṛd etat tan-nakha-sparśa-tīvra-
smara-ruja upamantrin bhaṇyatām anya-vārtā
vayam—we; ṛtam—true; iva—as if; jihma—deceptive; vyāhṛtam—His speech; śraddadhānāḥ—trusting; kulika—of a hunter; rutam—the song; iva—as if; ajñāḥ—foolish; kṛṣṇa—of the black deer; vadhvaḥ—wives; hariṇyaḥ—the doe; dadṛśuḥ—experienced; asakṛt—repeatedly; etat—this; tat—His; nakha—of the fingernails; sparśa—by the touch; tīvra—sharp; smara—of lust; rujaḥ—the pain; upamantrin—O messenger; bhaṇyatām—please speak; anya—another; vārtā—topic.
Faithfully taking His deceitful words as true, we became just like the black deer's foolish wives, who trust the cruel hunter's song. Thus we repeatedly felt the sharp pain of lust caused by the touch of His nails. O messenger, please talk about something besides Kṛṣṇa.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī categorizes this statement of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's as ājalpa, as defined by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī:
jaihmyaṁ tasyārti-datvaṁ ca
nirvedād yatra kīrtitam
bhaṅgyānya-sukha-datvaṁ ca
sa ājalpa udīritaḥ
"A statement spoken in disgust, describing how the male lover is deceitful and brings one misery, and also implying that He gives happiness to others, is known as ājalpa." (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 14.196)
TEXT 20
i‘ayas$aKa paunar"AgAA: ‘aeyas$aA ‘aeiSata: ikM(
var"ya ik(manauś&nDae maAnanaIyaAe'is$a mae'Ṇḷ
nayais$a k(Taimah"AsmaAnāu"styajaã"nã"paAṅ<
s$atatamaur"is$a s$aAEmya ™aIvaRDaU: s$aAk(maAstae
priya-sakha punar āgāḥ preyasā preṣitaḥ kiṁ
varaya kim anurundhe mānanīyo 'si me 'ṅga
nayasi katham ihāsmān dustyaja-dvandva-pārśvaṁ
satatam urasi saumya śrīr vadhūḥ sākam āste
priya—of My beloved; sakha—O friend; punaḥ—once again; āgāḥ—you have come; preyasā—by My beloved; preṣitaḥ—sent; kim—whether; varaya—please choose; kim—what; anurundhe—do you wish; mānanīyaḥ—to be honored; asi—you are; me—by Me; aṅga—My dear one; nayasi—you are bringing; katham—why; iha—here; asmān—us; dustyaja—impossible to give up; dvandva—conjugal connection with whom; pārśvam—to the side; satatam—always; urasi—on the chest; saumya—O gentle one; śrīḥ—the goddess of fortune; vadhūḥ—His consort; sākam—together with Him; āste—is present.
O friend of My dear one, has My beloved sent you here again? I should honor you, friend, so please choose whatever boon you wish. But why have you come back here to take us to Him, whose conjugal love is so difficult to give up? After all, gentle bee, His consort is the goddess Śrī, and she is always with Him, staying upon His chest.
In Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrīla Prabhupāda explains the context of this verse: "While Rādhārāṇī was talking with the bee and the bee was flying hither and thither, it all of a sudden disappeared from Her sight. She was in full mourning due to separation from Kṛṣṇa and felt ecstasy by talking with the bee. But as soon as the bee disappeared, She became almost mad, thinking that the messenger-bee might have returned to Kṛṣṇa to inform Him all about Her talking against Him. 'Kṛṣṇa must be very sorry to hear it,' She thought. In this way She was overwhelmed by another type of ecstasy.
"In the meantime, the bee, flying hither and thither, appeared before Her again. She thought, 'Kṛṣṇa is still kind to Me. In spite of the messenger's carrying disruptive messages, He is so kind that He has again sent the bee to take Me to Him.' Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was very careful this time not to say anything against Kṛṣṇa."
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī explains that the goddess of fortune, Śrī, has the power to assume many different forms. Thus when Kṛṣṇa enjoys other women, she stays on His chest in the form of a golden line. When He is not consorting with other women, she puts aside this form and gives Him pleasure in Her naturally beautiful form of a young woman.
According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, this statement of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's expresses pratijalpa, as described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī:
dustyaja-dvandva-bhāve 'smin
prāptir nārhety anuddhatam
dūta-sammānanenoktaṁ
yatra sa pratijalpakaḥ
"When the lover humbly states that although she is unworthy of attaining her beloved she cannot give up hoping for a conjugal relationship with Him, such words, spoken with respect for her beloved's message, are called pratijalpa." (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 14.198)
Here Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī has given up Her harsh feelings and humbly acknowledges the greatness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT 21
@ipa bata maDaupauyaARmaAyaRpau‡aAe'DaunaAstae
smar"ita s$a ipata{gAeh"Ana, s$aAEmya banDaUMê gAAepaAna,
¸(icad"ipa s$a k(TaA na: ik(Æḷr"INAAM gA{NAItae
BaujamagAuś&s$augAnDaM maUDnyaRDaAsyatk(d"A nau
api bata madhu-puryām ārya-putro 'dhunāste
smarati sa pitṛ-gehān saumya bandhūṁś ca gopān
kvacid api sa kathā naḥ kiṅkarīṇāṁ gṛṇīte
bhujam aguru-sugandhaṁ mūrdhny adhāsyat kadā nu
api—certainly; bata—regrettable; madhu-puryām—in the city of Mathurā; ārya-putraḥ—the son of Nanda Mahārāja; adhunā—now; āste—resides; smarati—remembers; saḥ—He; pitṛ-gehān—the household affairs of His father; saumya—O great soul (Uddhava); bandhūn—His friends; ca—and; gopān—the cowherd boys; kvacit—sometimes; api—or; saḥ—He; kathāḥ—talks; naḥ—of us; kiṅkarīṇām—of the maidservants; gṛṇīte—relates; bhujam—hand; aguru-su-gandham—having the fragrance of aguru; mūrdhni—on the head; adhāsyat—will keep; kadā—when; nu—maybe.
O Uddhava! It is indeed regrettable that Kṛṣṇa resides in Mathurā. Does He remember His father's household affairs and His friends, the cowherd boys? O great soul! Does He ever talk about us, His maidservants? When will He lay on our heads His aguru-scented hand?
The translation and word meanings for this verse are taken from Śrīla Prabhupāda's Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi 6.68).
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī writes very poetically, with deep spiritual insight, about the emotions expressed in this and the previous nine verses. He interprets Rādhārāṇī's feelings as follows:
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī thought, "Since Kṛṣṇa was once satisfied in Vraja but left for Mathurā City, won't He also develop a desire to leave that place and go somewhere else? Mathurā is so close to Vṛndāvana that it's possible He may even come back here.
"Kṛṣṇa is the son of a respectable gentleman, Nanda Mahārāja, so He must be staying in Mathurā because of His sense of obligation to His father, who authorized His going there. On the other hand, while Nanda's whole life is dedicated exclusively to Kṛṣṇa, Nanda is so innocent that he allowed himself to be tricked by the Yadus, who brought Kṛṣṇa to Mathurā. Kṛṣṇa must be thinking, 'Alas, alas! Since even My father could not bring Me back to Vraja, what can I do to return there?' Thus Kṛṣṇa must be impatient to come back here, and so He has sent you, a messenger.
"It is only because Nanda is so innocent that he allowed his son to leave. If Nanda had allowed Kṛṣṇa's mother, the queen of Vraja, to do so, she would have climbed onto Akrūra's chariot and, holding her son by the neck, gone off to Mathurā with Him, followed by all the gopīs. But this was not possible.
"Ever since Kṛṣṇa left, Nanda has been stunned by separation from Him, and Nanda's treasury rooms, storehouses, kitchens, sleeping quarters, opulent houses and so on are now vacant. Unswept and uncleansed, they are littered with grass, dust, leaves and cobwebs. Does Kṛṣṇa ever remember His father's houses? And does He sometimes remember Subala and His other friends, who are now lying stunned in other neglected houses?
"The women in Mathurā who now associate with Kṛṣṇa cannot know how to serve Him in the way that pleases Him most. When they see He is not satisfied and ask how they can make Him happy, does He tell them about us gopīs?
"Kṛṣṇa must tell them, 'You city ladies cannot please Me as much as the gopīs of Vraja. They are most expert in stringing flower garlands, perfuming their bodies with ointments, playing various rhythms and melodies on stringed instruments, dancing and singing in the rāsa performance, displaying their beauty, charm and cleverness, and skillfully playing at questions and answers. They are especially expert in the pastimes of meeting one's lover and showing jealous anger and other signs of pure love and affection.' Surely Kṛṣṇa must know this. Therefore He'll probably tell the women of Mathurā, 'My dear women of the Yadu clan, please go back to your families. I no longer desire to associate with you. In fact, I'm going back to Vraja early tomorrow morning.'
"When will Kṛṣṇa speak like this and come back here to place His hand, fragrant with aguru, on our heads? Then He will console us, saying, 'O beloveds of My heart, I swear to you that I will never abandon you again and go elsewhere. Indeed, I have not been able to find anyone in all the three worlds with even a trace of your good qualities.' "
Thus Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī interprets the feelings of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. The ācārya further explains that the present text displays the speech called sujalpa, as described by Rūpa Gosvāmī:
yatrārjavāt sa-gāmbhīryaṁ
sa-dainyaṁ saha-cāpalam
sotkaṇṭhaṁ ca hariḥ pṛṣṭaḥ
sa sujalpo nigadyate
"When, out of honest sincerity, a lover questions Śrī Hari with gravity, humility, unsteadiness and eagerness, such speech is known as sujalpa." (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 14.200)
Concluding this section of Chapter Forty-seven, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī explains that there are ten divisions of divine madness (divyonmāda), which are expressed by the ten divisions of citra-jalpa, or variegated speech. Such divine madness is shown in the special pastime of bewilderment, which is itself part of the supreme bliss, mahā-bhāva, of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. The ācārya quotes the following verses from Rūpa Gosvāmī's Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.174, 178-80) to explain these ecstasies:
prāyo vṛndāvaneśvaryāṁ
mohano 'yam udañcati
etasya mohanākhyasya
gatiṁ kām apy upeyuṣaḥ
bhramābhā kāpi vaicitrī
divyonmāda itīryate
udghūrṇā citra-jalpādyās
tad-bhedā bahavo matāḥ
preṣṭhasya suhṛd-āloke
gūḍha-roṣābhijṛmbhitaḥ
bhūri-bhāva-mayo jalpo
yas tīvrotkaṇṭhitāntimaḥ
citra-jalpo daśāṅgo 'yaṁ
prajalpaḥ parijalpitaḥ
vijalpo 'jjalpa-sañjalpaḥ
avajalpo 'bhijalpitam
ājalpaḥ pratijalpaś ca
sujalpaś ceti kīrtitaḥ
"It is virtually only within the princess of Vṛndāvana [Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī] that the ecstasy of bewilderment arises. She has attained to a special stage of this bewilderment, a wonderful state that resembles delusion. Known as divyonmāda, it has many aspects, which come and go unsteadily, and one of these manifestations is citra-jalpa. This talk, induced by Her seeing Her beloved's friend, is filled with covered anger and comprises many different ecstasies. It culminates in Her intense, anxious eagerness.
"This citra-jalpa has ten divisions, known as prajalpa, parijalpa, vijalpa, ujjalpa, sañjalpa, avajalpa, abhijalpa, ājalpa, pratijalpa and sujalpa."
Finally, some authorities say that Kṛṣṇa Himself, eager to drink the sweetness of His beloved's speech, assumed the form of the messenger bee.


Song Glorification of Gopis by Uddhava
TEXT 58
WtaA: parM" tanauBa{taAe Bauiva gAAepavaDvaAe
gAAeivand" Wva inaiKalaAtmaina ṝ&X#BaAvaA:
vaAHC$inta yaṁ"vaiBayaAe maunayaAe vayaM ca
ikM( “aṭjanmaiBar"nantak(TaAr"s$asya
etāḥ paraṁ tanu-bhṛto bhuvi gopa-vadhvo
govinda eva nikhilātmani rūḍha-bhāvāḥ
vāñchanti yad bhava-bhiyo munayo vayaṁ ca
kiṁ brahma-janmabhir ananta-kathā-rasasya
etāḥ—these women; param—alone; tanu—their bodies; bhṛtaḥ—maintain successfully; bhuvi—on the earth; gopa-vadhvaḥ—the young cowherd women; govinde—for Lord Kṛṣṇa; eva—exclusively; nikhila—of all; ātmani—the Soul; rūḍha—perfected; bhāvāḥ—ecstatic loving attraction; vāñchanti—they desire; yat—which; bhava—material existence; bhiyaḥ—those who are afraid of; munayaḥ—sages; vayam—we; ca—also; kim—what use; brahma—as a brāhmaṇa or as Lord Brahmā; janmabhiḥ—with births; ananta—of the unlimited Lord; kathā—for the topics; rasasya—for one who has a taste.
[Uddhava sang:] Among all persons on earth, these cowherd women alone have actually perfected their embodied lives, for they have achieved the perfection of unalloyed love for Lord Govinda. Their pure love is hankered after by those who fear material existence, by great sages, and by ourselves as well. For one who has tasted the narrations of the infinite Lord, what is the use of taking birth as a high-class brāhmaṇa, or even as Lord Brahmā himself?
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī explains that here the term brahma-janmabhiḥ, "brahminical births," refers to the threefold birth by (1) seminal parenthood, (2) sacred-thread initiation and (3) sacrificial initiation. These cannot compare to pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness. 

TEXT 59
¸e(maA: iṣyaAe vanacar"IvyaRiBacaAr"āu"í"A:
k{(SNAe ¸( caESa par"maAtmaina ṝ&X#BaAva:
nanvaIṅr"Ae'nauBajataAe'ivaāu"SaAe'ipa s$aAºaAca,
C)e$yastanaAetyagAd"r"Aja wvaAepayau·(:
kvemāḥ striyo vana-carīr vyabhicāra-duṣṭāḥ
kṛṣṇe kva caiṣa paramātmani rūḍha-bhāvaḥ
nanv īśvaro 'nubhajato 'viduṣo 'pi sākṣāc
chreyas tanoty agada-rāja ivopayuktaḥ
kva—where, in comparison; imāḥ—these; striyaḥ—women; vana—in the forests; carīḥ—who wander; vyabhicāra—by improper behavior; duṣṭāḥ—contaminated; kṛṣṇe—for Kṛṣṇa; kva ca—and where; eṣaḥ—this; parama-ātmani—for the Supreme Soul; rūḍha-bhāvaḥ—stage of perfect love (known technically as mahā-bhāva); nanu—certainly; īśvaraḥ—the Personality of Godhead; anubhajataḥ—to one who constantly worships Him; aviduṣaḥ—not learned; api—even though; sākṣāt—directly; śreyaḥ—the highest good; tanoti—bestows; agada—of medicines; rājaḥ—the king (namely, the nectar which the demigods drink for long life); iva—as if; upayuktaḥ—taken.
How amazing it is that these simple women who wander about the forest, seemingly spoiled by improper behavior, have achieved the perfection of unalloyed love for Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Soul! Still, it is true that the Supreme Lord Himself awards His blessings even to an ignorant worshiper, just as the best medicine works even when taken by a person ignorant of its ingredients.
The use of the word kva in the first two lines indicates a sharp contrast between apparently incompatible items, in this case the apparently insignificant and even impure position of the gopīs, mentioned in the first line, and their attainment of the highest perfection of life, mentioned in the second. In this regard Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī describes three types of adulterous women. The first is a woman who enjoys both her husband and a lover, being faithful to neither. Both ordinary society and the scriptures condemn this conduct. The second type of adulterous woman is she who abandons her husband to enjoy only with her lover. Society and the scriptures also condemn this behavior, although such a fallen woman may be said to at least have the good quality of dedicating herself to a single man. The last kind of adulterous woman is she who abandons her husband and enjoys in the attitude of being a lover of the Supreme Lord alone. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī explains that although foolish, common people criticize this position, such behavior is commended by those who are wise in spiritual science. Therefore learned members of society and the revealed scriptures praise such single-minded devotion to the Lord. Such was the gopīs' behavior. Thus the term vyabhicāra-duṣṭāḥ, "corrupted by deviation," indicates the apparent resemblance between the gopīs' behavior and that of ordinary adulterous women.
TEXT 60
naAyaM i™ayaAe'Ṇḷ o inataAntar"tae: ‘as$aAd":
svayaAeRiSataAM nailanagAnDaś&caAM ku(taAe'nyaA:
r"As$aAets$avae'sya Baujad"Nx"gA{h"Itak(NQ&-
labDaAizASaAM ya od"gAAā," ˜ajavaīaBaInaAma,
nāyaṁ śriyo 'ṅga u nitānta-rateḥ prasādaḥ
svar-yoṣitāṁ nalina-gandha-rucāṁ kuto 'nyāḥ
rāsotsave 'sya bhuja-daṇḍa-gṛhīta-kaṇṭha-
labdhāśiṣāṁ ya udagād vraja-vallabhīnām
na—not; ayam—this; śriyaḥ—of the goddess of fortune; aṅge—on the chest; u—alas; nitānta-rateḥ—who is very intimately related; prasādaḥ—the favor; svaḥ—of the heavenly planets; yoṣitām—of women; nalina—of the lotus flower; gandha—having the aroma; rucām—and bodily luster; kutaḥ—much less; anyāḥ—others; rasa-utsave—in the festival of the rāsa dance; asya—of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhuja-daṇḍa—by the arms; gṛhīta—embraced; kaṇṭha—their necks; labdha-āśiṣām—who achieved such a blessing; yaḥ—which; udagāt—became manifest; vraja-vallabhīnām—of the beautiful gopīs, the transcendental girls of Vrajabhūmi.
When Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa was dancing with the gopīs in the rāsa-līlā, the gopīs were embraced by the arms of the Lord. This transcendental favor was never bestowed upon the goddess of fortune or other consorts in the spiritual world. Indeed, never was such a thing even imagined by the most beautiful girls in the heavenly planets, whose bodily luster and aroma resemble the beauty and fragrance of a lotus flower. And what to speak of worldly women who are very beautiful according to material estimation?
The word meanings and translation for this verse are taken from Śrīla Prabhupāda's English rendering of Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 8.80).
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī comments as follows: Lord Kṛṣṇa, the best of all avatāras, exists on the highest platform of purity and morality, and thus He always remained praiseworthy by all, even while accepting worldly criticism for His cow-tending, wandering in the forest, taking meals with young monkeys, stealing yogurt, seducing other men's wives, and so on. Similarly, the gopīs, who are constituted of the Lord's pleasure potency, achieved the highest standard of purity and auspiciousness, even in comparison to the goddesses of fortune, and thus the gopīs are supremely glorious, even though they were criticized by worldly people because they were mere cowherd women living in the forest and behaving in an apparently improper way.
TEXT 61
@As$aAmah"Ae car"NAre"NAujauSaAmahM" syaAM
va{nd"Avanae ik(maipa gAulmalataAESaDaInaAma,
yaA āu"styajaM svajanamaAyaRpaTaM ca ih"tvaA
BaejaumauRku(nd"pad"vaI%M ™auitaiBaivaRma{gyaAma,
āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ
vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām
yā dustyajaṁ sva-janam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā
bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām
āsam—of the gopīs; aho—oh; caraṇa-reṇu—the dust of the lotus feet; juṣām—devoted to; aham syām—let me become; vṛndāvane—in Vṛndāvana; kim api—any one; gulma-latā-oṣadhīnām—among bushes, creepers and herbs; yā—they who; dustyajam—very difficult to give up; sva-janam—family members; ārya-patham—the path of chastity; ca—and; hitvā—giving up; bhejuḥ—worshiped; mukunda-padavīm—the lotus feet of Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa; śrutibhiḥ—by the Vedas; vimṛgyām—to be searched for.
The gopīs of Vṛndāvana have given up the association of their husbands, sons and other family members, who are very difficult to give up, and they have forsaken the path of chastity to take shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa, which one should search for by Vedic knowledge. Oh, let me be fortunate enough to become one of the bushes, creepers or herbs in Vṛndāvana, because the gopīs trample them and bless them with the dust of their lotus feet.
The word meanings and translation for this verse are taken from Śrīla Prabhupāda's English rendering of Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya 7.47).
Śrī Uddhava here shows the perfect Vaiṣṇava attitude of humility. He does not pray to be equal to the gopīs in their exalted stage of love, but rather to take birth as a bush or creeper in Vṛndāvana so that when they walk upon him he will get the dust of their feet and thus be blessed. The shy gopīs would never agree to give such blessings to a great personality like Uddhava; therefore he cleverly sought to get such mercy by taking birth as a plant in Vṛndāvana.
TEXT 62
yaA vaE i™ayaAicaRtamajaAid"iBar"Aæak(AmaEr,"
yaAegAeṅrE"r"ipa yad"Atmaina r"As$agAAeñ"YaAma,
k{(SNAsya taṁ"gAvata: car"NAAr"ivandM"
nyastaM stanaeSau ivajaḍ": pair"r"Bya taApama,
yā vai śriyārcitam ajādibhir āpta-kāmair
yogeśvarair api yad ātmani rāsa-goṣṭhyām
kṛṣṇasya tad bhagavataḥ caraṇāravindaṁ
nyastaṁ staneṣu vijahuḥ parirabhya tāpam
yāḥ—who (the gopīs); vai—indeed; śriyā—by the goddess of fortune; arcitam—worshiped; aja—by unborn Brahmā; ādibhiḥ—and other demigods; āpta-kāmaiḥ—who have already realized all desires; yoga-īśvaraiḥ—masters of mystic power; api—even though; yat—which; ātmani—in the mind; rāsa—of the rāsa dance; goṣṭhyām—in the gathering; kṛṣṇasya—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; tat—those; bhagavataḥ—of the Supreme Lord; caraṇa-aravindam—the lotus feet; nyastam—placed; staneṣu—on their breasts; vijahuḥ—they gave up; parirabhya—by embracing; tāpam—their torment.
The goddess of fortune herself, along with Lord Brahmā and all the other demigods, who are masters of yogic perfection, can worship the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa only within her mind. But during the rāsa dance Lord Kṛṣṇa placed His feet upon these gopīs' breasts, and by embracing those feet the gopīs gave up all distress.
TEXT 63
vande" nand"˜ajaṣINAAM
paAd"re"NAumaBaIºNAzA:
yaAs$aAM h"ir"k(TaAeÕ"ItaM
paunaAita Bauvana‡ayama,
vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ
pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ
yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ
punāti bhuvana-trayam
vande—I offer my respects; nanda-vraja—of the cowherd village of Nanda Mahārāja; strīṇām—of the women; pāda—of the feet; reṇum—to the dust; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ—perpetually; yāsām—whose; hari—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kathā—about the topics; udgītam—loud chanting; punāti—purifies; bhuvana-trayam—the three worlds.
I repeatedly offer my respects to the dust from the feet of the women of Nanda Mahārāja's cowherd village. When these gopīs loudly chant the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the vibration purifies the three worlds.
Śrī Uddhava, having established the glories of the gopīs in the previous verses, now directly offers his obeisances to them. According to the Śrī Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī, Śrī Uddhava did not offer such respect even to Lord Kṛṣṇa's queens in Dvārakā.



Song Prayers by Akrura to Krsna & Balarama in Mathura
TEXT 17
id"í"YaA paApaAe h"ta: kM(s$a:
s$aAnaugAAe vaAimadM" ku(lama,
Bavaṁ"YaAmauā,"Da{taM k{(cC)$Aā,"
āu"r"ntaA»a s$amaeiDatama,
diṣṭyā pāpo hataḥ kaṁsaḥ
sānugo vām idaṁ kulam
bhavadbhyām uddhṛtaṁ kṛcchrād
durantāc ca samedhitam
diṣṭyā—by good fortune; pāpaḥ—sinful; hataḥ—killed; kaṁsaḥ-Kaṁsa; sa-anugaḥ—together with his brothers and other followers; vām—of Yours; idam—this; kulam—dynasty; bhavadbhyām—by You two; uddhṛtam—delivered; kṛcchrāt—from difficulty; durantāt—endless; ca—and; samedhitam—made prosperous.
[Akrūra said:] It is our good fortune that You two Lords have killed the evil Kaṁsa and his followers, thus delivering Your dynasty from endless suffering and causing it to flourish.
TEXT 18
yauvaAM ‘aDaAnapauś&SaAE
jagAŪe"taU jagAnmayaAE
Bavaṁ"YaAM na ivanaA ik(iÂata,
par"maista na caApar"ma,
yuvāṁ pradhāna-puruṣau
jagad-dhetū jagan-mayau
bhavadbhyāṁ na vinā kiñcit
param asti na cāparam
yuvām—You two; pradhāna-puruṣau—the original persons; jagat—of the universe; hetū—the causes; jagat-mayau—identical with the universe; bhavadbhyām—than You; na—not; vinā—apart from; kiñcit—anything; param—cause; asti—there is; na ca—nor; aparam—product.
You both are the original Supreme Person, the cause of the universe and its very substance. Not the slightest subtle cause or manifest product of creation exists apart from You.
After praising Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma for having saved Their dynasty, Akrūra now points out that the Lord actually has no mundane connection with any social or political institution. He is the original Personality of Godhead, performing His pastimes for the benefit of the entire universe.
TEXT 19
@Atmas$a{í"imadM" ivaṅma,
@nvaAivazya svazAi·(iBa:
wRyatae baḍ"DaA “aṭna,
™au ta‘atyaºagAAecar"ma,
ātma-sṛṣṭam idaṁ viśvam
anvāviśya sva-śaktibhiḥ
īyate bahudhā brahman
śruta-pratyakṣa-gocaram
ātma-sṛṣṭam—created by You; idam—this; viśvam—universe; anvāviśya—subsequently entering; sva—with Your own; śaktibhiḥ—energies; īyate—You are perceived; bahudhā—manifold; brahman—O Supreme; śruta—by hearing from scripture; pratyakṣa—and by direct perception; gocaram—knowable.
O Supreme Absolute Truth, with Your personal energies You create this universe and then enter into it. Thus one can perceive You in many different forms by hearing from authorities and by direct experience.
The grammatical agreement of śruta-pratyakṣa-gocaram, in the neuter gender, with ātma-sṛṣṭam idaṁ viśvam indicates that the Supreme Lord, by entering His creation with His potencies, makes Himself perceivable within the universe. Throughout the Bhāgavatam and other authorized Vedic literatures, we often find descriptions of the Lord's simultaneous supremacy over all other things and His identity with them. We cannot reasonably draw any other conclusion from Vedic literature than the one powerfully preached by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu: acintya-bhedābheda-tattva. That is, the Absolute Truth is greater than and distinct from everything (since He is the omnipotent creator and controller of all), and simultaneously one with everything (since all that exists is the expansion of His own power).
Throughout these chapters of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, we also observe one of the unique, extraordinary features of this great work. Whether Kṛṣṇa is sending His message to the gopīs or accepting the prayers of Akrūra, there is constant philosophical discussion. Throughout the Bhāgavatam, the steady combination of fascinating pastimes with persistent spiritual philosophy is an extraordinary feature. We are allowed to glimpse and even to relish the spiritual emotions of the Lord and His liberated associates, and yet we are constantly reminded of their ontological position lest we lapse into a cheap, anthropomorphic vision. Thus it is entirely in character with the work that Akrūra, in his ecstasy, glorifies the Lord with precise philosophical prayers.
TEXT 20
yaTaA ih" BaUtaeSau car"Acare"Sau
ma÷Ad"yaAe yaAeinaSau BaAinta naAnaA
WvaM BavaAna, ke(vala @AtmayaAeinaSva,
@AtmaAtmatan‡aAe baḍ"DaA ivaBaAita
yathā hi bhūteṣu carācareṣu
mahy-ādayo yoniṣu bhānti nānā
evaṁ bhavān kevala ātma-yoniṣv
ātmātma-tantro bahudhā vibhāti
yathā—as; hi—indeed; bhūteṣu—among manifested beings; cara—mobile; acareṣu—and immobile; mahī-ādayaḥ—earth and so on (the primary elements of creation); yoniṣu—in species; bhānti—manifest; nānā—variously; evam—so; bhavān—You; kevalaḥ—one alone; ātma—Yourself; yoniṣu—in those whose source; ātmā—the Supreme Soul; ātma-tantraḥ—self-reliant; bahudhā—manifold; vibhāti—appear.
Just as the primary elements—earth and so on—manifest themselves in abundant variety among all the species of mobile and immobile life, so You, the one independent Supreme Soul, appear to be manifold among the variegated objects of Your creation.
TEXT 21
s$a{jasyaTaAe laumpais$a paAis$a ivaṅM
r"jastama:s$aÔvagAuNAE: svazAi·(iBa:
na baDyas$ae taṬ"NAk(maRiBavaAR
ÁaAnaAtmanastae ¸( ca banDahe"tau:
sṛjasy atho lumpasi pāsi viśvaṁ
rajas-tamaḥ-sattva-guṇaiḥ sva-śaktibhiḥ
na badhyase tad-guṇa-karmabhir vā
jñānātmanas te kva ca bandha-hetuḥ
sṛjasi—You create; atha u—and then; lumpasi—You destroy; pāsi—You protect; viśvam—the universe; rajaḥ—known as passion; tamaḥ—ignorance; sattva—and goodness; guṇaiḥ—by the modes; sva-śaktibhiḥ—Your personal potencies; na badhyase—You are not bound; tat—of this world; guṇa—by the modes; karmabhiḥ—by the material activities; vā—or; jñāna-ātmanaḥ—who are knowledge itself; te—for You; kva ca—where at all; bandha—of bondage; hetuḥ—cause.
You create, destroy and also maintain this universe with Your personal energies—the modes of passion, ignorance and goodness—yet You are never entangled by these modes or the activities they generate. Since You are the original source of all knowledge, what could ever cause You to be bound by illusion?
The phrase jñānātmanas te kva ca bandha-hetuḥ, "Since You are constituted of knowledge, what could be a cause of bondage for You?" definitely indicates the obvious, that the omniscient Supreme God is never in illusion. Therefore the impersonalistic theory that we are all God but have forgotten and are now in illusion is refuted here in the pages of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
TEXT 22
de"h"AâupaADaer"inaṝ&ipatatvaAā,"
BavaAe na s$aAºaAªa iBad"Atmana: syaAta,
@taAe na banDastava naEva maAeºa:
syaAtaAi°ak(Amastvaiya naAe'ivavaek(:
dehādy-upādher anirūpitatvād
bhavo na sākṣān na bhidātmanaḥ syāt
ato na bandhas tava naiva mokṣaḥ
syātām nikāmas tvayi no 'vivekaḥ
deha—of the body; ādi—and so on; upādheḥ—as material, designative coverings; anirūpitatvāt—because of not being determined; bhavaḥ—birth; na—not; sākṣāt—literal; na—nor; bhidā—duality; ātmanaḥ—for the Supreme Soul; syāt—exists; ataḥ—therefore; na—no; bandhaḥ—bondage; tava—Your; na eva—nor, in fact; mokṣaḥ—liberation; syātām—if they occur; nikāmaḥ—by Your sweet will; tvayi—concerning You; naḥ—our; avivekaḥ—erroneous discrimination.
Since it has never been demonstrated that You are covered by material, bodily designations, it must be concluded that for You there is neither birth in a literal sense nor any duality. Therefore You never undergo bondage or liberation, and if You appear to, it is only because of Your desire that we see You in that way, or simply because of our lack of discrimination.
Here Akrūra states two reasons why the Lord appears to be covered by a material form, or to take birth like a human being. First, when Lord Kṛṣṇa executes His pastimes, His loving devotees think of Him as their beloved child, friend, lover and so on. In the ecstasy of this loving reciprocation, they do not think of Kṛṣṇa as God. For example, because of her extraordinary love for Him, Mother Yaśodā worries that Kṛṣṇa will be injured in the forest. That she feels this way is the desire of the Lord, which is here indicated by the word nikāmaḥ. The second reason the Lord may appear material is indicated by the word avivekaḥ: Simply because of ignorance, a lack of discrimination, one may misunderstand the position of the Personality of Godhead. In the Eleventh Canto of the Bhāgavatam, in Lord Kṛṣṇa's discussion with Śrī Uddhava, the Lord elaborately discusses His transcendental position beyond bondage and liberation. As stated in Vedic literature, deha-dehi-vibhāgo 'yaṁ neśvare vidyate kvacit: "There is never a distinction of body and soul in the Supreme Lord." In other words, Śrī Kṛṣṇa's body is eternal, spiritual, omniscient and the reservoir of all pleasure.
TEXT 23
tvayaAeid"taAe'yaM jagAtaAe ih"taAya
yad"A yad"A vaed"paTa: paur"ANA:
baADyaeta paASaNx"paTaEr"s$aiṁ"s$a,
tad"A BavaAna, s$aÔvagAuNAM ibaBaitaR
tvayodito 'yaṁ jagato hitāya
yadā yadā veda-pathaḥ purāṇaḥ
bādhyeta pāṣaṇḍa-pathair asadbhis
tadā bhavān sattva-guṇaṁ bibharti
tvayā—by You; uditaḥ—enunciated; ayam—this; jagataḥ—of the universe; hitāya—for the benefit; yadā yadā—whenever; veda—of the Vedic scriptures; pathaḥ—the path (of religiousness); purāṇaḥ—ancient; bādhyeta—is obstructed; pāṣaṇḍa—of atheism; pathaiḥ—by those who follow the path; asadbhiḥ—wicked persons; tadā—at that time; bhavān—You; sattva-guṇam—the pure mode of goodness; bibharti—assume.
You originally enunciated the ancient religious path of the Vedas for the benefit of the whole universe. Whenever that path becomes obstructed by wicked persons following the path of atheism, You assume one of Your incarnations, which are all in the transcendental mode of goodness.
TEXT 24
s$a tvam‘aBaAe'â vas$aude"vagA{he"'vataINAR:
svaAMzAena BaAr"mapanaetauimah"Ais$a BaUmae:
@ºaAEih"NAIzAtavaDaena s$aure"tar"AMzA-
r"AÁaAmamauSya ca ku(lasya yazAAe ivatanvana,
sa tvam prabho 'dya vasudeva-gṛhe 'vatīrṇaḥ
svāṁśena bhāram apanetum ihāsi bhūmeḥ
akṣauhiṇī-śata-vadhena suretarāṁśa-
rājñām amuṣya ca kulasya yaśo vitanvan
saḥ—He; tvam—You; prabho—O master; adya—now; vasudeva-gṛhe—in the home of Vasudeva; avatīrṇaḥ—have descended; sva—with Your own; aṁśena—direct expansion (Lord Balarāma); bharam—the burden; apanetum—to remove; iha—here; asi—You are; bhūmeḥ—of the earth; akṣauhiṇī—of the armies; śata—hundreds; vadhena—by killing; sura-itara—of the opponents of the demigods; aṁśa—who are expansions; rājñām—of the kings; amuṣya—of this; ca—and; kulasya—dynasty (of the descendants of Yadu); yaśaḥ—the fame; vitanvan—spreading.
You are that very same Supreme Person, my Lord, and You have now appeared in the home of Vasudeva with Your plenary portion. You have done this to relieve the earth's burden by killing hundreds of armies led by kings who are expansions of the demigods' enemies, and also to spread the fame of our dynasty.
The term suretarāṁśa-rājñām indicates that the demoniac kings slain by Kṛṣṇa were in fact expansions or incarnations of the enemies of the demigods. This fact is elaborately explained in the Mahābhārata, which reveals the specific identities of the demoniac kings.
TEXT 25
@âezA naAe vas$ataya: Kalau BaUir"BaAgAA
ya: s$avaR$de"vaipata{BaUtana{de"vamaUitaR:
yatpaAd"zAAEcas$ailalaM i‡ajagAtpaunaAita
s$a tvaM jagAṬ"ś&r"DaAeºaja yaA: ‘aivaí":
adyeśa no vasatayaḥ khalu bhūri-bhāgā
yaḥ sarva-deva-pitṛ-bhūta-nṛ-deva-mūrtiḥ
yat-pāda-śauca-salilaṁ tri-jagat punāti
sa tvaṁ jagad-gurur adhokṣaja yāḥ praviṣṭaḥ
adya—today; īśa—O Lord; naḥ—our; vasatayaḥ—residence; khalu—indeed; bhūri—extremely; bhāgāḥ—fortunate; yaḥ—who; sarva-deva—the Supreme Lord; pitṛ—the forefathers; bhūta—all living creatures; nṛ—human beings; deva—and the demigods; mūrtiḥ—who embody; yat-whose; pāda—feet; śauca—which has washed; salilam—the water (of the river Ganges); tri-jagat—the three worlds; punāti—purifies; saḥ—He; tvam—You; jagat—of the universe; guruḥ—the spiritual master; adhokṣaja—O You who are beyond the purview of the material senses; yāḥ—which; praviṣṭaḥ—having entered.
Today, O Lord, my home has become most fortunate because You have entered it. As the Supreme Truth, You embody the forefathers, ordinary creatures, human beings and demigods, and the water that has washed Your feet purifies the three worlds. Indeed, O transcendent one, You are the spiritual master of the universe.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has nicely interpreted Akrūra's feelings as follows:
Akrūra said, "My Lord, although I am a householder, today my home has become more pious than the forests where sages perform austerities. Why? Simply because You have entered my home. Indeed, You are the personification of the deities who preside over the five sacrifices a householder must perform daily to atone for unavoidable violence committed to living beings in the home. You are the spiritual truth behind all these creations, and now You have entered my home."
The five daily sacrifices enjoined for a householder are (1) sacrifice to Brahman by studying the Vedas, (2) sacrifice to the forefathers by making offerings to them, (3) sacrifice to all creatures by putting aside a portion of one's meals, (4) sacrifice to human beings by extending hospitality and (5) sacrifice to the demigods by performing fire sacrifices and so on.
TEXT 26
k(: paiNx"tastvad"parM" zAr"NAM s$amaIyaAā,"
Ba·(i‘ayaAā{"taigAr": s$auô$d": k{(taÁaAta,
s$avaARnd"d"Aita s$auô$d"Ae BajataAe'iBak(AmaAna,
@AtmaAnamapyaupacayaApacayaAE na yasya
kaḥ paṇḍitas tvad aparaṁ śaraṇaṁ samīyād
bhakta-priyād ṛta-giraḥ suhṛdaḥ kṛta-jñāt
sarvān dadāti suhṛdo bhajato 'bhikāmān
ātmānam apy upacayāpacayau na yasya
kaḥ—what; paṇḍitaḥ—scholar; tvat—other than You; aparam—to another; śaraṇam—for shelter; samīyāt—would go; bhakta—to Your devotees; priyāt—affectionate; ṛta—always true; giraḥ—whose words; suhṛdaḥ—the well-wisher; kṛta-jñāt—grateful; sarvān—all; dadāti—You give; suhṛdaḥ—to Your well-wishing devotees; bhajataḥ—who are engaged in worshiping You; abhikāmān—desires; ātmānam—Yourself; api—even; upacaya—increase; apacayau—or diminution; na—never; yasya—whose.
What learned person would approach anyone but You for shelter, when You are the affectionate, grateful and truthful well-wisher of Your devotees? To those who worship You in sincere friendship You reward everything they desire, even Your own self, yet You never increase or diminish.
This verse describes both the Lord and His devotees as suhṛdaḥ "well-wishers." The Lord is the well-wisher of His devotee, and the devotee lovingly desires all happiness for the Lord. Even in this world, an excess of love may sometimes produce unnecessary solicitude. For example, we often observe that a mother's loving concern for her adult child is not always justified by an actual danger to the child. A grown child may be wealthy, competent and healthy, and yet the mother's loving concern continues. Similarly, a pure devotee always feels loving concern for Lord Kṛṣṇa, as exemplified by Mother Yaśodā, who could only think of Kṛṣṇa as her beautiful son.
Lord Kṛṣṇa had promised Akrūra that after killing Kaṁsa He would visit his home, and now the Lord kept His promise. Akrūra recognizes this and glorifies the Lord as ṛta-giraḥ, "one who is true to His word." The Lord is kṛta-jña, grateful for whatever little worship a devotee offers, and even if the devotee forgets, the Lord does not.
TEXT 27
id"í"YaA janaAdR"na BavaAinah" na: ‘ataItaAe
yaAegAeṅrE"r"ipa āu"r"ApagAita: s$aure"zAE:
iC$nDyaAzAu na: s$autak(la‡aDanaAæagAeh"-
de"h"Aid"maAeh"r"zAnaAM Bavad"IyamaAyaAma,
diṣṭyā janārdana bhavān iha naḥ pratīto
yogeśvarair api durāpa-gatiḥ sureśaiḥ
chindhy āśu naḥ suta-kalatra-dhanāpta-geha-
dehādi-moha-raśanāṁ bhavadīya-māyām
diṣṭyā—by fortune; janārdana—O Kṛṣṇa; bhavān—You; iha—here; naḥ—by us; pratītaḥ—perceivable; yoga-īśvaraiḥ—by the masters of mystic yoga; api—even; durāpa-gatiḥ—a goal hard to achieve; sura-īśaiḥ—and by the rulers of the demigods; chindhi—please cut; āśu—quickly; naḥ—our; suta—for children; kalatra—wife; dhana—wealth; āpta—worthy friends; geha—home; deha—body; ādi—and so on; moha—of delusion; raśanām—the ropes; bhavadīya—Your own; māyām—illusory material energy.
It is by our great fortune, Janārdana, that You are now visible to us, for even the masters of yoga and the foremost demigods can achieve this goal only with great difficulty. Please quickly cut the ropes of our illusory attachment for children, wife, wealth, influential friends, home and body. All such attachment is simply the effect of Your illusory material energy.





Song Prayers by King Mucukunda
TEXT 45
™aImaucauku(nd" ovaAca
ivamaAeih"taAe'yaM jana wRzA maAyayaA
tvad"IyayaA tvaAM na BajatyanaTaRā{"k,(
s$auKaAya āu":Ka‘aBavaeSau s$aṀatae
gA{he"Sau yaAeiSatpauś&Saê vaiÂata:
śrī-mucukunda uvāca
vimohito 'yaṁ jana īśa māyayā
tvadīyayā tvāṁ na bhajaty anartha-dṛk
sukhāya duḥkha-prabhaveṣu sajjate
gṛheṣu yoṣit puruṣaś ca vañcitaḥ
śrī-mucukundaḥ uvāca—Śrī Mucukunda said; vimohitaḥ—bewildered; ayam—this; janaḥ—person; īśa—O Lord; māyayā—by the illusory energy; tvadīyayā—Your own; tvām—You; na bhajati—does not worship; anartha-dṛk—not seeing one's real benefit; sukhāya—for the sake of happiness; duḥkha—misery; prabhaveṣu—in things that cause; sajjate—becomes entangled; gṛheṣu—in affairs of family life; yoṣit—woman; puruṣaḥ—man; ca—and; vañcitaḥ—cheated.
Śrī Mucukunda said: O Lord, the people of this world, both men and women, are bewildered by Your illusory energy. Unaware of their real benefit, they do not worship You but instead seek happiness by entangling themselves in family affairs, which are actually sources of misery.
Mucukunda immediately makes it clear that he is not going to ask the Lord for material blessings. He has advanced, spiritually, far beyond those who try to exploit religion for all kinds of material benefits. Artha means "value," and the negation of this word, anartha, means "that which is valueless or useless." Thus the term anartha-dṛk indicates those whose vision is focused on valueless things, who have not understood what actual artha, or value, is. All that glitters is not gold, and Mucukunda here emphatically states that we should not ruin our spiritual chances by entangling ourselves in the fool's gold of bodily relationships. We are meant to love the Lord.
TEXT 46
labDvaA janaAe āu"laRBama‡a maAnauSaM
k(TaiÂad"vyaṆḷmaya¥ataAe'naGa
paAd"Ar"ivandM" na Bajatyas$anmaitar,"
gA{h"AnDakU(pae paitataAe yaTaA pazAu:
labdhvā jano durlabham atra mānuṣaṁ
kathañcid avyaṅgam ayatnato 'nagha
pādāravindaṁ na bhajaty asan-matir
gṛhāndha-kūpe patito yathā paśuḥ
labdhvā—attaining; janaḥ—a person; durlabham—rarely obtained; atra—in this world; mānuṣam—the human form of life; kathañcit—somehow or other; avyaṅgam—with undistorted limbs (unlike the various animal forms); ayatnataḥ—without endeavor; anagha—O sinless one; pāda—Your feet; aravindam—lotuslike; na bhajati—he does not worship; asat—impure; matiḥ—his mentality; gṛha—of home; andha—blind; kūpe—in the well; patitaḥ—fallen; yathā—as; paśuḥ—an animal.
That person has an impure mind who, despite having somehow or other automatically obtained the rare and highly evolved human form of life, does not worship Your lotus feet. Like an animal that has fallen into a blind well, such a person has fallen into the darkness of a material home.
Our real home is in the kingdom of God. Despite our tenacious determination to remain in our material home, death will rudely eject us from the theater of material affairs. To stay at home is not bad, nor is it bad to devote ourselves to our loved ones. But we must understand that our real home is eternal, in the spiritual kingdom.
The word ayatnataḥ indicates that human life has been automatically awarded to us. We have not constructed our human bodies, and therefore we should not foolishly claim, "This body is mine." The human form is a gift of God and should be used to achieve the perfection of God consciousness. One who does not understand this is asan-mati, possessed of dull, mundane understanding.
TEXT 47
mamaESa k(AlaAe'ijata inaSP(laAe gAtaAe
r"Ajyai™ayaAeªaŪ"mad"sya BaUpatae:
matyaARtmabauŪe": s$autad"Ar"k(AezABaUSva,
@As$aṀamaAnasya āu"r"ntaicantayaA
mamaiṣa kālo 'jita niṣphalo gato
rājya-śriyonnaddha-madasya bhū-pateḥ
martyātma-buddheḥ suta-dāra-kośa-bhūṣv
āsajjamānasya duranta-cintayā
mama—my; eṣaḥ—this; kālaḥ—time; ajita—O unconquerable one; niṣphalaḥ—fruitlessly; gataḥ—now gone; rājya—by kingdom; śriyā—and opulence; unnaddha—built up; madasya—whose intoxication; bhūpateḥ—a king of the earth; martya—the mortal body; ātma—as the self; buddheḥ—whose mentality; suta—to children; dāra—wives; kośa—treasury; bhūṣu—and land; āsajjamānasya—becoming attached; duranta—endless; cintayā—with anxiety.
I have wasted all this time, O unconquerable one, becoming more and more intoxicated by my domain and opulence as an earthly king. Misidentifying the mortal body as the self, becoming attached to children, wives, treasury and land, I suffered endless anxiety.
Having in the previous verse condemned those who misuse the valuable human form of life for mundane purposes, Mucukunda now admits that he himself falls into this category. He intelligently wants to take advantage of the Lord's association and become a pure devotee once and for all.
TEXT 48
k(laevare"'ismana, Gaq%ku(x"Yas$aiªaBae
inaṝ&X#maAnaAe nar"de"va wtyah"ma,
va{taAe r"TaeBaAṅpad"AtyanaIk(paEr,"
gAAM payaRqM%stvaAgANAyana, s$auāu"maRd":
kalevare 'smin ghaṭa-kuḍya-sannibhe
nirūḍha-māno nara-deva ity aham
vṛto rathebhāśva-padāty-anīkapair
gāṁ paryaṭaṁs tvāgaṇayan su-durmadaḥ
kalevare—in the body; asmin—this; ghaṭa—a pot; kuḍya—or a wall; sannibhe—which is like; nirūḍha—exaggerated; mānaḥ—whose false identification; nara-devaḥ—a god among men (king); iti—thus (thinking myself); aham—I; vṛtaḥ—surrounded; ratha—by chariots; ibha—elephants; aśva—horses; padāti—infantry; anīkapaiḥ—and generals; gām—the earth; paryaṭan—traveling; tvā—You; agaṇayan—not regarding seriously; su-durmadaḥ—very much deluded by pride.
With deep arrogance I took myself to be the body, which is a material object like a pot or a wall. Thinking myself a god among men, I traveled the earth surrounded by my charioteers, elephants, cavalry, foot soldiers and generals, disregarding You in my deluding pride.
TEXT 49
‘amaÔamau»aEir"itak{(tyaicantayaA
‘ava{Ū"laAeBaM ivaSayaeSau laAlas$ama,
tvama‘amaÔa: s$ah"s$aAiBapaâs$ae
ºauīaeilah"AnaAe'ih"ir"vaAKaumantak(:
pramattam uccair itikṛtya-cintayā
pravṛddha-lobhaṁ viṣayeṣu lālasam
tvam apramattaḥ sahasābhipadyase
kṣul-lelihāno 'hir ivākhum antakaḥ
pramattam—thoroughly deluded; uccaiḥ—extensive; iti-kṛtya—of what needs to be done; cintayā—with thought; pravṛddha—increased fully; lobham—whose greed; viṣayeṣu—for sense objects; lālasam—hankering; tvam—You; apramattaḥ—not deluded; sahasā—suddenly; abhipadyase—confront; kṣut—out of hunger; lelihānaḥ—licking its fangs; ahiḥ—a snake; iva—as; ākhum—a mouse; antakaḥ—death.
A man obsessed with thoughts of what he thinks needs to be done, intensely greedy, and delighting in sense enjoyment is suddenly confronted by You, who are ever alert. Like a hungry snake licking its fangs before a mouse, You appear before him as death.
We may note here the contrast between the words pramattam and apramattaḥ. Those who are trying to exploit the material world are pramatta: "deluded, bewildered, maddened by desire." But the Lord is apramatta: "alert, sober, and unbewildered." In our madness we may deny God or His laws, but the Lord is sober and will not fail to reward or punish us according to the quality of our activities.
TEXT 50
paur"A r"TaEheR"mapair"Sk{(taEêr"na,
mataMgAjaEvaAR nar"de"vas$aMiÁata:
s$a Wva k(Alaena āu"r"tyayaena tae
k(laevar"Ae ivaq%.k{(imaBasmas$aMiÁata:
purā rathair hema-pariṣkṛtaiś caran
mataṁ-gajair vā nara-deva-saṁjñitaḥ
sa eva kālena duratyayena te
kalevaro viṭ-kṛmi-bhasma-saṁjñitaḥ
purā—previously; rathaiḥ—in chariots; hema—with gold; pariṣkṛtaiḥ—furnished; caran—riding; matam—fierce; gajaiḥ—on elephants; vā—or; nara-deva—king; saṁjñitaḥ—named; saḥ—that; eva—same; kālena—by time; duratyayena—unavoidable; te—Your; kalevaraḥ—body; viṭ—as feces; kṛmi—worms; bhasma—ashes; saṁjñitaḥ—named.
The body that at first rides high on fierce elephants or chariots adorned with gold and is known by the name "king" is later, by Your invincible power of time, called "feces," "worms," or "ashes."
In the United States and other materially developed countries, dead bodies are cosmetically disposed of in a tidy ceremonial way, but in many parts of the world old, sickly and injured people die in lonely or neglected places, where dogs and jackals consume their bodies and transform them into stool. And if one is so blessed as to be buried in a coffin, one's body may very well be consumed by worms and other minuscule creatures. Also, many earthly cadavers are burned and thus transformed into ashes. In any case, death is certain, and the ultimate fate of the body is never sublime. That is the real purport of Mucukunda's statement here—that the body, though now called "king," "prince," "beauty queen," "upper-middle class" and so on, will eventually be called "stool," "worms" and "ashes."
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī quotes the following Vedic statement:
yoneḥ sahasrāṇi bahūni gatvā
duḥkhena labdhvāpi ca mānuṣatvam
sukhāvahaṁ ye na bhajanti viṣṇuṁ
te vai manuṣyātmani śatru-bhūtāḥ
"After passing through many thousands of species and undergoing great struggle, the conditioned living entities finally obtain the human form. Thus those human beings who still do not worship Lord Viṣṇu, who can bring them real happiness, have certainly become enemies of both themselves and humanity."
TEXT 51
inaijaRtya id"fca‚(maBaUtaivaƒah"Ae
var"As$anasTa: s$amar"Ajavaind"ta:
gA{he"Sau maETaunyas$auKaeSau yaAeiSataAM
‚(Lx"Ama{gA: paUś&Sa wRzA naIyatae
nirjitya dik-cakram abhūta-vigraho
varāsana-sthaḥ sama-rāja-vanditaḥ
gṛheṣu maithunya-sukheṣu yoṣitāṁ
krīḍā-mṛgaḥ pūruṣa īśa nīyate
nirjitya—having conquered; dik—of directions; cakram—the whole circle; abhūta—nonexistent; vigrahaḥ—any conflict for whom; vara-āsana—on an exalted throne; sthaḥ—seated; sama—equal; rāja—by kings; vanditaḥ—praised; gṛheṣu—in residences; maithunya—sex; sukheṣu—whose happiness; yoṣitām—of women; krīḍā-mṛgaḥ—a pet animal; puruṣaḥ—the person; īśa—O Lord; nīyate—is led about.
Having conquered the entire circle of directions and being thus free of conflict, a man sits on a splendid throne, receiving praise from leaders who were once his equals. But when he enters the women's chambers, where sex pleasure is found, he is led about like a pet animal, O Lord.
TEXT 52
k(r"Aeita k(maARiNA tapa:s$auinaiñ"taAe
inava{ÔaBaAegAstad"paeºayaAd"d"ta,
paunaê BaUyaAs$amahM" svar"Aix"ita
‘ava{Ū"taSaAeR na s$auKaAya k(lpatae
karoti karmāṇi tapaḥ-suniṣṭhito
nivṛtta-bhogas tad-apekṣayādadat
punaś ca bhūyāsam ahaṁ sva-rāḍ iti
pravṛddha-tarṣo na sukhāya kalpate
karoti—one performs; karmāṇi—duties; tapaḥ—in the practice of austerities; su-niṣṭhitaḥ—very fixed; nivṛtta—avoiding; bhogaḥ—sense enjoyment; tat—with that (position which he already has); apekṣayā—in comparison; ādadat—assuming; punaḥ—further; ca—and; bhūyāsam—greater; aham—I; sva-rāṭ—sovereign ruler; iti—thus thinking; pravṛddha—rampant; tarṣaḥ—whose urges; na—not; sukhāya—happiness; kalpate—can attain.
A king who desires even greater power than he already has strictly performs his duties, carefully practicing austerity and forgoing sense enjoyment. But he whose urges are so rampant, thinking "I am independent and supreme," cannot attain happiness.
TEXT 53
BavaApavagAAeR ”amataAe yad"A Bavaeja,
janasya ta÷Rcyauta s$ats$amaAgAma:
s$ats$aṆḷmaAe yaihR" tadE"va s$aÕ"taAE
par"Avare"zAe tvaiya jaAyatae maita:
bhavāpavargo bhramato yadā bhavej
janasya tarhy acyuta sat-samāgamaḥ
sat-saṅgamo yarhi tadaiva sad-gatau
parāvareśe tvayi jāyate matiḥ
bhava—of material existence; apavargaḥ—the cessation; bhramataḥ—who has been wandering; yadā—when; bhavet—occurs; janasya—for a person; tarhi—at that time; acyuta—O infallible Lord; sat—of saintly devotees; samāgamaḥ—the association; sat-saṅgamaḥ—saintly association; yarhi—when; tadā—then; eva—only; sat—of the saintly; gatau—who is the goal; para—of superior (the causes of material creation); avara—and inferior (their products); īśe—for the Supreme Lord; tvayi—Yourself; jāyate—is born; matiḥ—devotion.
When the material life of a wandering soul has ceased, O Acyuta, he may attain the association of Your devotees. And when he associates with them, there awakens in him devotion unto You, who are the goal of the devotees and the Lord of all causes and their effects.
Ācāryas Jīva Gosvāmī and Viśvanātha Cakravartī agree on the following point: Although it is stated here that when material life ceases one attains the association of devotees, in fact it is the association of the Lord's devotees that enables one to transcend material existence. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī explains this apparent inversion of sequence by quoting the Kāvya-prakāśa (10.153) as follows: kārya-kāraṇayoś ca paurvāparya-viparyayo vijñeyātiśayoktiḥ syāt sa. "A statement in which the logical order of a cause and its effect is reversed should be understood as atiśayokti, emphasis by extreme assertion." Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī cites the following commentary on this statement: kāraṇasya śīghra-kārītāṁ vaktuṁ kāryasya pūrvam uktau. "To express the swift action of a cause, one may assert the result before the cause."
In this connection Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī points out that the merciful association of the Lord's devotees makes possible our determination to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. And the ācārya agrees with Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī that this verse is an instance of atiśayokti.
TEXT 54
manyae mamaAnauƒah" wRzA tae k{(taAe
r"AjyaAnaubanDaApagAmaAe yaā{"cC$yaA
ya: ‘aATyaRtae s$aADauiBare"k(cayaRyaA
vanaM ivaivaºaiṁ"r"KaNx"BaUimapaE:
manye mamānugraha īśa te kṛto
rājyānubandhāpagamo yadṛcchayā
yaḥ prārthyate sādhubhir eka-caryayā
vanaṁ vivikṣadbhir akhaṇḍa-bhūmi-paiḥ
manye—I think; mama—to me; anugrahaḥ—mercy; īśa—O Lord; te—by You; kṛtaḥ—done; rājya—to kingdom; anubandha—of attachment; apagamaḥ—the removal; yadṛcchayā—spontaneous; yaḥ—which; prārthyate—is prayed for; sādhubhiḥ—saintly; eka-caryayā—in solitude; vanam—the forest; vivikṣadbhiḥ—who desire to enter; akhaṇḍa—unlimited; bhūmi—of lands; paiḥ—by rulers.
My Lord, I think You have shown me mercy, since my attachment to my kingdom has spontaneously ceased. Such freedom is prayed for by saintly rulers of vast empires who desire to enter the forest for a life of solitude.
TEXT 55
na k(Amayae'nyaM tava paAd"s$aevanaAā,"
@ik(Âana‘aATyaRtamaAã"rM" ivaBaAe
@Ar"ADya k(stvaAM ÷pavagARdM" h"re"
va{NAIta @AyaAeR var"maAtmabanDanama,
na kāmaye 'nyaṁ tava pāda-sevanād
akiñcana-prārthyatamād varaṁ vibho
ārādhya kas tvāṁ hy apavarga-daṁ hare
vṛṇīta āryo varam ātma-bandhanam
na kāmaye—I do not desire; anyam—another; tava—Your; pāda—of the feet; sevanāt—than the service; akiñcana—by those who want nothing material; prārthya-tamāt—which is the favorite object of entreaty; varam—boon; vibho—O all-powerful one; ārādhya—worshiping; kaḥ—who; tvām—You; hi—indeed; apavarga—of liberation; dam—the bestower; hare—O Lord Hari; vṛṇīta—would choose; āryaḥ—a spiritually advanced person; varam—boon; ātma—his own; bandhanam—(cause of) bondage.
O all-powerful one, I desire no boon other than service to Your lotus feet, the boon most eagerly sought by those free of material desire. O Hari, what enlightened person who worships You, the giver of liberation, would choose a boon that causes his own bondage?
The Lord offered Mucukunda anything he desired, but Mucukunda desired only the Lord. This is pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
TEXT 56
tasmaAiã"s$a{jyaAizASa wRzA s$avaRtaAe
r"jastama:s$aÔvagAuNAAnaubanDanaA:
inar"ÃanaM inagAuRNAmaã"yaM parM"
tvaAM ÁaAiæamaA‡aM pauś&SaM ˜ajaAmyah"ma,
tasmād visṛjyāśiṣa īśa sarvato
rajas-tamaḥ-sattva-guṇānubandhanāḥ
nirañjanaṁ nirguṇam advayaṁ paraṁ
tvāṁ jñāpti-mātraṁ puruṣaṁ vrajāmy aham
tasmāt—therefore; visṛjya—putting aside; āśiṣaḥ—desirable objects; īśa—O Lord; sarvataḥ—entirely; rajaḥ—with passion; tamaḥ—ignorance; sattva—and goodness; guṇa—the material modes; anu-bandhanāḥ—entangled; nirañjanam—free from mundane designations; nirguṇam—transcendental to the material modes; advayam—nondual; param—supreme; tvām—You; jñāpti-mātram—pure knowledge; puruṣam—the original person; vrajāmi—am approaching; aham—I.
Therefore, O Lord, having put aside all objects of material desire, which are bound to the modes of passion, ignorance and goodness, I am approaching You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for shelter. You are not covered by mundane designations; rather, You are the Supreme Absolute Truth, full in pure knowledge and transcendental to the material modes.
The word nirguṇam here indicates that the Lord's existence is beyond the qualities of material nature. One might argue that Lord Kṛṣṇa's body is made of material nature, but here the word advayam refutes that argument. There is no duality in Lord Kṛṣṇa's existence. His eternal, spiritual body is Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is God.
TEXT 57
icar"imah" va{ijanaAtaRstapyamaAnaAe'nautaApaEr,"
@ivata{SaSax"ima‡aAe'labDazAAinta: k(TaiÂata,
zAr"NAd" s$amaupaetastvatpad"AbjaM par"Atmana,
@Bayama{tamazAAekM( paAih" maApaªamaIzA
ciram iha vṛjinārtas tapyamāno 'nutāpair
avitṛṣa-ṣaḍ-amitro 'labdha-śāntiḥ kathañcit
śaraṇa-da samupetas tvat-padābjaṁ parātman
abhayam ṛtam aśokaṁ pāhi māpannam īśa
ciram—for a long time; iha—in this world; vṛjina—by disturbances; ārtaḥ—distressed; tapyamānaḥ—tormented; anutāpaiḥ—with remorse; avitṛṣa—unsatiated; ṣaṭ—six; amitraḥ—whose enemies (the five senses and the mind); alabdha—not attaining; śāntiḥ—peace; kathañcit—by some means; śaraṇa—of shelter; da—O bestower; samupetaḥ—who have approached; tvat—Your; pada-abjam—lotus feet; para-ātman—O Supreme Soul; abhayam—fearless; ṛtam—the truth; aśokam—free from sorrow; pāhi—please protect; mā—me; āpannam—who am confronted with dangers; īśa—O Lord.
For so long I have been pained by troubles in this world and have been burning with lamentation. My six enemies are never satiated, and I can find no peace. Therefore, O giver of shelter, O Supreme Soul, please protect me. O Lord, in the midst of danger I have by good fortune approached Your lotus feet, which are the truth and which thus make one fearless and free of sorrow.




Letter by Rukmimi Devi
TEXT 37
™aIś&ifmaNyauvaAca
™autvaA gAuNAAna, Bauvanas$aund"r" Za{NvataAM tae
inaivaRzya k(NARivavarE"hR"r"taAe'ṆḷtaApama,
ṝ&paM ā{"zAAM ā{"izAmataAmaiKalaATaRlaABaM
tvayyacyautaAivazAita icaÔamapa‡apaM mae
śrī-rukmiṇy uvāca
śrutvā guṇān bhuvana-sundara śṛṇvatāṁ te
nirviśya karṇa-vivarair harato 'ṅga-tāpam
rūpaṁ dṛśāṁ dṛśimatām akhilārtha-lābhaṁ
tvayy acyutāviśati cittam apatrapaṁ me
śrī-rukmiṇī uvāca—Śrī Rukmiṇī said; śrutvā—hearing; guṇān—the qualities; bhuvana—of all the worlds; sundara—O beauty; śṛṇvatām—for those who hear; te—Your; nirviśya—having entered; karṇa—of the ears; vivaraiḥ—by the orifices; harataḥ—removing; aṅga—of their bodies; tāpam—the pain; rūpam—the beauty; dṛśām—of the sense of sight; dṛśi-matām—of those who have eyes; akhila—total; artha—of the fulfillment of desires; lābham—the obtaining; tvayi—in You; acyuta—O infallible Kṛṣṇa; āviśati—is entering; cittam—mind; apatrapam—shameless; me—my.
Śrī Rukmiṇī said [in her letter, as read by the brāhmaṇa]: O beauty of the worlds, having heard of Your qualities, which enter the ears of those who hear and remove their bodily distress, and having also heard of Your beauty, which fulfills all the visual desires of those who see, I have fixed my shameless mind upon You, O Kṛṣṇa.
Rukmiṇī was a king's daughter, courageous and bold, and furthermore she would rather die than lose Kṛṣṇa. Considering all this, she wrote a frank, explicit letter, begging Kṛṣṇa to come and take her away.
TEXT 38
k(A tvaA mauku(nd" mah"taI ku(lazAIlaṝ&pa-
ivaâAvayaAe‰"ivaNADaAmaiBar"Atmataulyama,
DaIr"A paitaM ku(lavataI na va{NAIta k(nyaA
k(Alae na{is$aMh" nar"laAek(manaAe'iBar"Amama,
kā tvā mukunda mahatī kula-śīla-rūpa-
vidyā-vayo-draviṇa-dhāmabhir ātma-tulyam
dhīrā patiṁ kulavatī na vṛṇīta kanyā
kāle nṛ-siṁha nara-loka-mano-'bhirāmam
kā—who; tvā—You; mukunda—O Kṛṣṇa; mahatī—aristocratic; kula—in terms of family background; śīla—character; rūpa—beauty; vidyā—knowledge; vayaḥ—youth; draviṇa—property; dhāmabhiḥ—and influence; ātma—to Yourself only; tulyam—equal; dhīrā—who is sober; patim—as her husband; kula-vatī—of a good family; na vṛṇīta—would not choose; kanyā—marriageable young lady; kāle—at such a time; nṛ—among men; siṁha—O lion; nara-loka—of human society; manaḥ—to the minds; abhirāmam—who give pleasure.
O Mukunda, You are equal only to Yourself in lineage, character, beauty, knowledge, youthfulness, wealth and influence. O lion among men, You delight the minds of all mankind. What aristocratic, sober-minded and marriageable girl of a good family would not choose You as her husband when the proper time has come?
TEXT 39
tanmae BavaAna, Kalau va{ta: paitar"Ṇḷ jaAyaAma,
@AtmaAipaRtaê BavataAe'‡a ivaBaAe ivaDaeih"
maA vaIr"BaAgAmaiBamazARtau caEâ @Ar"Aā,"
gAAemaAyauvanma{gApataebaRilamambaujaAºa
tan me bhavān khalu vṛtaḥ patir aṅga jāyām
ātmārpitaś ca bhavato 'tra vibho vidhehi
mā vīra-bhāgam abhimarśatu caidya ārād
gomāyu-van mṛga-pater balim ambujākṣa
tat—therefore; me—by me; bhavān—Your good self; khalu—indeed; vṛtaḥ—chosen; patiḥ—as husband; aṅga—dear Lord; jāyām—as wife; ātmā—myself; arpitaḥ—offered; ca—and; bhavataḥ—to You; atra—here; vibho—O omnipotent one; vidhehi—please accept; mā—never; vīra—of the hero; bhāgam—the portion; abhimarśatu—should touch; caidyaḥ—Śiśupāla, son of the king of Cedi; ārāt—swiftly; gomāyu-vat—like a jackal; mṛga-pateḥ—belonging to the king of animals, the lion; balim—the tribute; ambuja-akṣa—O lotus-eyed one.
Therefore, my dear Lord, I have chosen You as my husband, and I surrender myself to You. Please come swiftly, O almighty one, and make me Your wife. My dear lotus-eyed Lord, let Śiśupāla never touch the hero's portion like a jackal stealing the property of a lion.
TEXT 40
paUtaeRí"d"Ôainayama˜atade"vaiva‘a
gAuvaRcaRnaAid"iBar"laM BagAvaAna, pare"zA:
@Ar"AiDataAe yaid" gAd"Aƒaja Wtya paAiNAM
gA{õ"Atau mae na d"maGaAeSas$autaAd"yaAe'nyae
pūrteṣṭa-datta-niyama-vrata-deva-vipra
gurv-arcanādibhir alaṁ bhagavān pareśaḥ
ārādhito yadi gadāgraja etya pāṇiṁ
gṛhṇātu me na damaghoṣa-sutādayo 'nye
pūrta—by pious works (such as feeding brāhmaṇas, digging wells, etc.); iṣṭa—sacrificial performances; datta—charity; niyama—ritual observances (such as visiting holy places); vrata—vows of penance; deva—of the demigods; vipra—brāhmaṇas; guru—and spiritual masters; arcana—by worship; ādibhiḥ—and by other activities; alam—sufficiently; bhagavān—the Personality of Godhead; para—supreme; īśaḥ—controller; ārādhitaḥ—rendered devotional service; yadi—if; gada-agrajaḥ—Kṛṣṇa, the elder brother of Gada; etya—coming here; pāṇim—the hand; gṛhṇātu—may please take; me—my; na—not; damaghoṣa-suta—Śiśupāla, the son of Damaghoṣa; ādayaḥ—and so on; anye—others.
If I have sufficiently worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead by pious works, sacrifices, charity, rituals and vows, and also by worshiping the demigods, brāhmaṇas and gurus, then may Gadāgraja come and take my hand, and not Damaghoṣa's son or anyone else.
The ācāryas comment as follows on this verse: "Rukmiṇī felt that no one could obtain Lord Kṛṣṇa by the efforts of a single lifetime. Therefore she earnestly pointed out the pious activities she had performed in that life and previous lives, hoping to convince Śrī Kṛṣṇa to come."
TEXT 41
ṅAe BaAivaina tvamaijataAeã"h"nae ivad"BaARna,
gAuæa: s$amaetya pa{tanaApaitaiBa: par"Ita:
inamaRTya caEâmagADaen‰"balaM ‘as$a÷
maAM r"Aºas$aena ivaiDanaAeã"h" vaIyaRzAulk(Ama,
śvo bhāvini tvam ajitodvahane vidarbhān
guptaḥ sametya pṛtanā-patibhiḥ parītaḥ
nirmathya caidya-magadhendra-balaṁ prasahya
māṁ rākṣasena vidhinodvaha vīrya-śulkām
śvaḥ bhāvini—tomorrow; tvam—You; ajita—O unconquerable one; udvahane—at the time of the marriage ceremony; vidarbhān—to Vidarbha; guptaḥ—unseen; sametya—coming; pṛtanā—of Your army; patibhiḥ—by the leaders; parītaḥ—surrounded; nirmathya—crushing; caidya—of Caidya, Śiśupāla; magadha-indra—and the king of Magadha, Jarāsandha; balam—the military strength; prasahya—by force; mām—me; rākṣasena vidhinā—in the Rākṣasa style; udvaha—take in marriage; vīrya—Your prowess; śulkām—the payment for whom.
O unconquerable one, tomorrow when my marriage ceremony is about to begin, You should arrive unseen in Vidarbha and surround Yourself with the leaders of Your army. Then crush the forces of Caidya and Magadhendra and marry me in the Rākṣasa style, winning me with Your valor.
As Śrīla Prabhupāda points out in Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Rukmiṇī, being born of royal blood, certainly had a brilliant grasp of political affairs. She advised Śrī Kṛṣṇa to enter the city alone and unnoticed and then surround Himself with His military commanders so He could do what was needed. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī compares the coming fight to the Lord's churning of the ocean to extract the goddess Lakṣmī. Gorgeous Rukmiṇī, the goddess of fortune, would be gained in the coming turbulence.
TEXT 42
@nta:paur"Antar"car"Imainah"tya banDaUna,
tvaAmauã"he" k(Taimaita ‘avad"AmyaupaAyama,
paUvaeRâur"ista mah"taI ku(lade"vayaA‡aA
yasyaAM baih"naRvavaDaUigARir"jaAmaupaeyaAta,
antaḥ-purāntara-carīm anihatya bandhūn
tvām udvahe katham iti pravadāmy upāyam
pūrve-dyur asti mahatī kula-deva-yātrā
yasyāṁ bahir nava-vadhūr girijām upeyāt
antaḥ-pura—the women's quarters of the palace; antara—within; carīm—moving; anihatya—without killing; bandhūn—your relatives; tvām—you; udvahe—I shall carry away; katham—how; iti—saying such words; pravadāmi—I shall explain; upāyam—a means; pūrve-dyuḥ—on the day before; asti—there is; mahatī—large; kula—of the royal family; deva—for the presiding deity; yātrā—a ceremonial procession; yasyām—in which; bahiḥ—outside; nava—new; vadhūḥ—the bride; girijām—goddess Girijā (Ambikā); upeyāt—approaches.
Since I will be staying within the inner chambers of the palace, You may wonder, "How can I carry you away without killing some of your relatives?" But I shall tell You a way: On the day before the marriage there is a grand procession to honor the royal family's deity, and in this procession the new bride goes outside the city to visit Goddess Girijā.
Clever Rukmiṇī anticipated a possible objection on the part of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He certainly would not object to subduing rascals like Śiśupāla and Jarāsandha, but He might be reluctant to injure or kill Rukmiṇī's relatives, some of whom might block His way to the palace's inner sanctum, where the women were protected. The procession to or from the temple of Girijā (Durgā) would provide the perfect opportunity for Kṛṣṇa to kidnap Rukmiṇī without harming her relatives.
TEXT 43
yasyaAx.~i„apaÆḷjar"ja:µapanaM mah"AntaAe
vaAHC$ntyaumaApaitair"vaAtmatamaAe'pah"tyaE
ya÷RmbaujaAºa na laBaeya Bavat‘as$aAdM"
ja÷Amas$aUna, ˜atak{(zAAna, zAtajanmaiBa: syaAta,
yasyāṅghri-paṅkaja-rajaḥ-snapanaṁ mahānto
vāñchanty umā-patir ivātma-tamo-'pahatyai
yarhy ambujākṣa na labheya bhavat-prasādaṁ
jahyām asūn vrata-kṛśān śata-janmabhiḥ syāt
yasya—whose; aṅghri—of the feet; paṅkaja—lotus; rajaḥ—with the dust; snapanam—bathing; mahāntaḥ—great souls; vāñchanti—hanker after; umā-patiḥ—Lord Śiva, husband of Goddess Umā; iva—just as; ātma—their own; tamaḥ—of the ignorance; apahatyai—to vanquish; yarhi—when; ambuja-akṣa—O lotus-eyed one; na labheya—I cannot obtain; bhavat—Your; prasādam—mercy; jahyām—I should give up; asūn—my life airs; vrata—by austere penances; kṛśān—weakened; śata—hundreds; janmabhiḥ—after lifetimes; syāt—it may be.
O lotus-eyed one, great souls like Lord Śiva hanker to bathe in the dust of Your lotus feet and thereby destroy their ignorance. If I cannot obtain Your mercy, I shall simply give up my vital force, which will have become weak from the severe penances I will perform. Then, after hundreds of lifetimes of endeavor, I may obtain Your mercy.
The divine Rukmiṇī's extraordinary dedication to Śrī Kṛṣṇa is possible only on the spiritual platform, not in the fragile world of mundane affection.


Song Prayers by NBhumi Devi
TEXT 25
BaUimaś&vaAca
namastae de"vade"vaezA
zAÊḷca‚(gAd"ADar"
Ba·e(cC$AepaAÔaṝ&paAya
par"maAtmaªamaAe'stau tae
bhūmir uvāca
namas te deva-deveśa
śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-dhara
bhaktecchopātta-rūpāya
paramātman namo 'stu te
bhūmiḥ uvāca—the earth-goddess said; namaḥ—obeisances; te—unto You; deva-deva—of the lords of the demigods; īśa—O Lord; śaṅkha—of the conchshell; cakra—disc; gadā—and club; dhara—O holder; bhakta—of Your devotees; icchā—by the desire; upātta—who have assumed; rūpāya—Your forms; parama-ātman—O Supreme Soul; namaḥ—obeisances; astu—let there be; te—unto You.
Goddess Bhūmi said: Obeisances unto You, O Lord of the chief demigods, O holder of the conchshell, disc and club. O Supreme Soul within the heart, You assume Your various forms to fulfill Your devotees' desires. Obeisances unto You.
TEXT 26
nama: paÆḷjanaABaAya
nama: paÆḷjamaAilanae
nama: paÆḷjanae‡aAya
namastae paÆḷjaAx.~„ayae
namaḥ paṅkaja-nābhāya
namaḥ paṅkaja-māline
namaḥ paṅkaja-netrāya
namas te paṅkajāṅghraye
namaḥ—all respectful obeisances; paṅkaja-nābhāya—unto the Lord who has a specific depression resembling a lotus flower in the center of His abdomen; namaḥ—obeisances; paṅkaja-māline—one who is always decorated with a garland of lotus flowers; namaḥ—obeisances; paṅkaja-netrāya—one whose glance is as cooling as a lotus flower; namaḥ te—respectful obeisances unto You; paṅkaja-aṅghraye—unto You, the soles of whose feet are engraved with lotus flowers (and who are therefore said to possess lotus feet).
My respectful obeisances are unto You, O Lord, whose abdomen is marked with a depression like a lotus flower, who are always decorated with garlands of lotus flowers, whose glance is as cool as the lotus and whose feet are engraved with lotuses.
Queen Kuntī offered this same prayer, which is found in the First Canto of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Chapter 8, Text 22. The synonyms and translation given here are taken from Śrīla Prabhupāda's rendering of that text.
We may also note that although Kuntī's prayer occurs early in the Bhāgavatam, she offered it many years after the incident described here.
TEXT 27
namaAe BagAvatae tauByaM
vaAs$aude"vaAya ivaSNAvae
pauś&SaAyaAid"baIjaAya
paUNARbaAeDaAya tae nama:
namo bhagavate tubhyaṁ
vāsudevāya viṣṇave
puruṣāyādi-bījāya
pūrṇa-bodhāya te namaḥ
namaḥ—obeisances; bhagavate—to the Supreme Godhead; tubhyam—unto You; vāsudevāya—Lord Vāsudeva, the shelter of all created beings; viṣṇave—all-pervading Lord Viṣṇu; puruṣāya—the primeval person; ādi—original; bījāya—the seed; pūrṇa—full; bodhāya—knowledge; te—to You; namaḥ—obeisances.
Obeisances unto You, the Supreme Lord Vāsudeva, Viṣṇu, the primeval person, the original seed. Obeisances unto You, the omniscient one.
TEXT 28
@jaAya janaiya‡ae'sya
“aṭNAe'nantazA·(yae
par"Avar"Atmana, BaUtaAtmana,
par"maAtmaªamaAe'stau tae
ajāya janayitre 'sya
brahmaṇe 'nanta-śaktaye
parāvarātman bhūtātman
paramātman namo 'stu te
ajāya—to the unborn; janayitre—the progenitor; asya—of this (universe); brahmaṇe—the Absolute; ananta—unlimited; śaktaye—whose energies; para—of the superior; avara—and the inferior; ātman—O Soul; bhūta—of the material creation; ātman—O Soul; parama-ātman—O Supreme Soul, who are all-pervading; namaḥ—obeisances; astu—may there be; te—unto You.
Obeisances unto You of unlimited energies, the unborn progenitor of this universe, the Absolute. O Soul of the high and the low, O Soul of the created elements, O all-pervading Supreme Soul, obeisances unto You.
TEXT 29
tvaM vaE is$as$a{ºaur"ja otk(qM% ‘aBaAe
tamaAe inar"AeDaAya ibaBaSyaRs$aMva{ta:
sTaAnaAya s$aÔvaM jagAtaAe jagAtpatae
k(Ala: ‘aDaAnaM pauś&SaAe BavaAna, par":
tvaṁ vai sisṛkṣur aja utkaṭaṁ prabho
tamo nirodhāya bibharṣy asaṁvṛtaḥ
sthānāya sattvaṁ jagato jagat-pate
kālaḥ pradhānaṁ puruṣo bhavān paraḥ
tvam—You; vai—indeed; sisṛkṣuḥ—desiring to create; ajaḥ—unborn; utkaṭam—prominent; prabho—O master; tamaḥ—the mode of ignorance; nirodhāya—for annihilation; bibharṣi—You assume; asaṁvṛtaḥ—uncovered; sthānāya—for maintenance; sattvam—the mode of goodness; jagataḥ—of the universe; jagat-pate—O Lord of the universe; kālaḥ—time; pradhānam—material nature (in its original, undifferentiated state); puruṣaḥ—the creator (who interacts with material nature); bhavān—You; paraḥ—distinct.
Desiring to create, O unborn master, You increase and then assume the mode of passion. You do likewise with the mode of ignorance when You wish to annihilate the universe and with goodness when You wish to maintain it. Nonetheless, You remain uncovered by these modes. You are time, the pradhāna, and the puruṣa, O Lord of the universe, yet still You are separate and distinct.
The word jagataḥ in the third line of this verse indicates that the functions of creation, maintenance and annihilation are here mentioned in a cosmic context.
The word utkaṭam indicates that when a particular function is being carried out, whether universal creation, maintenance or annihilation, the particular material quality associated with that function becomes predominant.
TEXT 30
@hM" payaAe jyaAeitar"TaAinalaAe naBaAe
maA‡aAiNA de"vaA mana win‰"yaAiNA
k(taAR mah"AinatyaiKalaM car"AcarM"
tvayyaiã"taIyae BagAvanayaM ”ama:
ahaṁ payo jyotir athānilo nabho
mātrāṇi devā mana indriyāṇi
kartā mahān ity akhilaṁ carācaraṁ
tvayy advitīye bhagavan ayaṁ bhramaḥ
aham—myself (earth); payaḥ—water; jyotiḥ—fire; atha—and; anilaḥ—air; nabhaḥ—ether; mātrāṇi—the various sense objects (corresponding to each of the five gross elements); devāḥ—the demigods; manaḥ—the mind; indriyāṇi—the senses; kartā—"the doer," false ego; mahān—the total material energy (mahat-tattva); iti—thus; akhilam—everything; cara—moving; acaram—and nonmoving; tvayi—within You; advitīye—who has no second; bhagavan—O Lord; ayam—this; bhramaḥ—illusion.
This is illusion: that earth, water, fire, air, ether, sense objects, demigods, mind, the senses, false ego and the total material energy exist independent of You. In fact, they are all within You, my Lord, who are one without a second.
The earth-goddess, in her prayers, directly touches upon the subtleties of transcendental philosophy, clarifying that although the Supreme Lord is unique and distinct from His creation, His creation has no independent existence and always rests within Him. Thus the Lord and His creation are simultaneously one and different, as explained by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu five hundred years ago.
To say that everything is God, without any distinction, is meaningless, since nothing can act like God. Dogs, shoes and human beings are hardly omnipotent or omniscient, nor do they create the universe. On the other hand, there is a real sense in which all things are one, for everything is part of the same supreme, absolute reality. Lord Caitanya has given the very useful analogy of the sun and the sunrays. The sun and its sunshine are one reality, for the sun is the celestial body that shines. On the other hand, one can certainly distinguish between the sun globe and the sunrays. Thus God's simultaneous oneness with and difference from His creation is the final and satisfying explanation of reality. All that exists is the Lord's potency, and yet He endows the superior potency, the living beings, with free will so that they can become responsible for the moral and spiritual quality of their decisions and activities.
This entire transcendental science is clearly and rationally explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
TEXT 31
tasyaAtmajaAe'yaM tava paAd"paÆḷjaM
BaIta: ‘apaªaAitaRh"r"Aepas$aAid"ta:
tatpaAlayaEnaM ku(ś& h"stapaÆḷjaM
izAr"syamauSyaAiKalak(lmaSaApah"ma,
tasyātmajo 'yaṁ tava pāda-paṅkajaṁ
bhītaḥ prapannārti-haropasāditaḥ
tat pālayainaṁ kuru hasta-paṅkajaṁ
śirasy amuṣyākhila-kalmaṣāpaham
tasya—of him (Bhaumāsura); ātma-jaḥ—son; ayam—this; tava—Your; pāda—feet; paṅkajam—lotuslike; bhītaḥ—afraid; prapanna—of those who take shelter; ārti—the distress; hara—O You who remove; upasāditaḥ—has approached; tat—therefore; pālaya—please protect; enam—him; kuru—place; hasta-paṅkajam—Your lotus hand; śirasi—on the head; amuṣya—his; akhila—all; kalmaṣa—sins; apaham—which eradicates.
Here is the son of Bhaumāsura. Frightened, he is approaching Your lotus feet, since You remove the distress of all who seek refuge in You. Please protect him. Place Your lotus hand, which dispels all sins, upon his head.
Here the earth-goddess seeks protection for her grandson, who has been frightened by all the terribly violent events that just took place.



Song Rukmini Krta stava 
TEXT 34
™aIś&ifmaNyauvaAca
nanvaevamaetad"r"ivand"ivalaAecanaAh"
yaãE" BavaAna, BagAvataAe's$aā{"zAI ivaBaU°a:
¸( svae maih"mnyaiBar"taAe BagAvaAMs$‡yaDaIzA:
¸(AhM" gAuNA‘ak{(itar"ÁagA{h"ItapaAd"A
śrī-rukmiṇy uvāca
nanv evam etad aravinda-vilocanāha
yad vai bhavān bhagavato 'sadṛśī vibhūmnaḥ
kva sve mahimny abhirato bhagavāṁs try-adhīśaḥ
kvāhaṁ guṇa-prakṛtir ajña-gṛhīta-pādā
śrī-rukmiṇī uvāca—Śrī Rukmiṇī said; nanu—well; evam—so be it; etat—this; aravinda-vilocana—O lotus-eyed one; āha—said; yat—which; vai—indeed; bhavān—You; bhagavataḥ—to the Supreme Lord; asadṛśī—unequal; vibhūmnaḥ—to the Almighty; kva—where, in comparison; sve—in His own; mahimni—glory; abhirataḥ—taking pleasure; bhagavān—the Supreme Lord; tri—of the three (principal deities, namely Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva); adhīśaḥ—the controller; kva—and where; aham—myself; guṇa—of material qualities; prakṛtiḥ—whose character; ajña—by foolish persons; gṛhīta—taken hold of; pādā—whose feet.
Śrī Rukmiṇī said: Actually, what You have said is true, O lotus-eyed one. I am indeed unsuitable for the almighty Personality of Godhead. What comparison is there between that Supreme Lord, who is master of the three primal deities and who delights in His own glory, and myself, a woman of mundane qualities whose feet are grasped by fools?
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī lists the faults Lord Kṛṣṇa had described in Himself that He claimed disqualified Him from being Rukmiṇī's husband. These include incompatibility, fearfulness, taking shelter in the ocean, quarreling with the powerful, abandoning His kingdom, uncertainty as to His identity, acting against ordinary standards of behavior, having no good qualities, being praised falsely by beggars, aloofness, and lack of desire for family life. The Lord claimed that Rukmiṇī had failed to recognize these bad qualities in Him. Now she begins to respond to all the Lord's statements.
First she responds to Śrī Kṛṣṇa's statement in Text 11 of this chapter: kasmān no vavṛṣe 'samān. "Why did you select Us, who are not equal to you?" Here Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī-devī says that she and Kṛṣṇa are certainly not equal, for no one can be equal to the Supreme Lord. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī further points out that in her extreme humility Rukmiṇī is identifying herself with the Lord's external energy, which in fact is her expansion, Rukmiṇī being the goddess of fortune.
TEXT 35
s$atyaM BayaAid"va gAuNAeBya oś&‚(maAnta:
zAetae s$amau"‰" opalamBanamaA‡a @AtmaA
inatyaM k(id"in‰"yagANAE: k{(taivaƒah"stvaM
tvats$aevakE(na{RpapadM" ivaDautaM tamaAe'nDama,
satyaṁ bhayād iva guṇebhya urukramāntaḥ
śete samudra upalambhana-mātra ātmā
nityaṁ kad-indriya-gaṇaiḥ kṛta-vigrahas tvaṁ
tvat-sevakair nṛpa-padaṁ vidhutaṁ tamo 'ndham
satyam—true; bhayāt—out of fear; iva—as if; guṇebhyaḥ—of the material modes; urukrama—O You who perform transcendental feats; antaḥ—within; śete—You have lain down; samudre—in the ocean; upalambhana-mātraḥ—pure awareness; ātma—the Supreme Soul; nityam—always; kat—bad; indriya-gaṇaiḥ—against all the material senses; kṛta-vigrahaḥ—battling; tvam—You; tvat—Your; sevakaiḥ—by the servants; nṛpa—of a king; padam—the position; vidhutam—rejected; tamaḥ—darkness; andham—blind.
Yes, my Lord Urukrama, You lay down within the ocean as if afraid of the material modes, and thus in pure consciousness You appear within the heart as the Supersoul. You are always battling against the foolish material senses, and indeed even Your servants reject the privilege of royal dominion, which leads to the blindness of ignorance.
In Text 12 Lord Kṛṣṇa said, rājabhyo bibhyataḥ su-bhru samudram śaraṇaṁ gatān: "Out of fear of the kings, We took shelter in the ocean." Here Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī-devī points out that the actual rulers of this world are the guṇas, the material modes of nature, which impel all living beings to act. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī points out that because Lord Kṛṣṇa fears that His devotee will come under the influence of the modes of nature and become entangled in sense gratification, He enters the internal ocean of their hearts, where He remains as the omniscient Supersoul (upalambhana-mātra ātmā). Thus He protects His devotees. The word upalambhana-mātraḥ also indicates that the Lord is the object of meditation for His devotees.
In Text 12 Lord Kṛṣṇa also said, balavadbhiḥ kṛta-dveṣān: "We created enmity with the powerful." Here Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī-devī points out that it is the material senses which are actually powerful in this world. The Supreme Lord has taken up the battle against sense gratification on the part of His devotees, and thus He is constantly trying to help them in their struggle for spiritual purity. When the devotees become free of unwanted material habits, the Lord reveals Himself to them, and then the eternal loving relationship between the Lord and His devotees becomes an irrevocable fact.
In the same verse Kṛṣṇa stated, tyakta-nṛpāsanān: "We renounced the royal throne." But here Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī-devī points out that the position of political supremacy in this world usually implicates so-called powerful leaders in darkness and blindness. As the saying goes, "Power corrupts." Thus even the Lord's loving servants tend to shy away from political intrigue and power politics. The Lord Himself, being completely satisfied in His own spiritual bliss, would hardly be interested in occupying mundane political positions. Thus Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī-devī correctly interprets the Lord's actions as evidence of His supreme transcendental nature.
TEXT 36
tvatpaAd"paámak(r"nd"jauSaAM maunaInaAM
vatmaARs$Pu(qM% ŒpazAuiBanaRnau āu"ivaRBaAvyama,
yasmaAd"laAEik(k(imavaeih"tamaIṅr"sya
BaUmaMstavaeih"tamaTaAe @nau yae Bavantama,
tvat-pāda-padma-makaranda-juṣāṁ munīnāṁ
vartmāsphuṭaṁ nr-paśubhir nanu durvibhāvyam
yasmād alaukikam ivehitam īśvarasya
bhūmaṁs tavehitam atho anu ye bhavantam
tvat—Your; pāda—of the feet; padma—lotuslike; makaranda—the honey; juṣām—who relish; munīnām—for sages; vartma—(Your) path; asphuṭam—not apparent; nṛ—in human form; paśubhiḥ—by animals; nanu—certainly, then; durvibhāvyam—impossible to comprehend; yasmāt—because; alaukikam—supramundane; iva—as if; īhitam—the activities; īśvarasya—of the Supreme Lord; bhūman—O all-powerful one; tava—Your; īhitam—activities; atha u—therefore; anu—following; ye—who; bhavantam—You.
Your movements, inscrutable even for sages who relish the honey of Your lotus feet, are certainly incomprehensible for human beings who behave like animals. And just as Your activities are transcendental, O all-powerful Lord, so too are those of Your followers.
Here Queen Rukmiṇī replies to Lord Kṛṣṇa's statement in Text 13:
aspaṣṭa-vartmanāṁ puṁsām
aloka-patham īyuṣām
āsthitāḥ padavīṁ su-bhru
prāyaḥ sīdanti yoṣitaḥ
"O fine-browed lady, women are usually destined to suffer when they stay with men whose behavior is uncertain and who pursue a path not approved by society."
In the present verse Rukmiṇī is taking the term aloka-patham to mean "unworldly path." Those who are entangled in worldly behavior are trying to enjoy this world more or less like animals. Even if such people are "culturally advanced," they should simply be considered sophisticated or polished animals. Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī-devī points out that because the Lord's activities are always transcendental, they are aspaṣṭa, or "unclear," to ordinary people, and even the sages trying to know the Lord cannot perfectly understand these activities.
TEXT 37
inaiSk(ÂanaAe nanau BavaAªa yataAe'ista ik(iÂaā,"
yasmaE bailaM bailaBaujaAe'ipa h"r"ntyajaAâA:
na tvaA ivad"ntyas$auta{paAe'ntak(maAX#YataAnDaA:
‘aeñ"Ae BavaAna, bailaBaujaAmaipa tae'ipa tauByama,
niṣkiñcano nanu bhavān na yato 'sti kiñcid
yasmai baliṁ bali-bhujo 'pi haranty ajādyāḥ
na tvā vidanty asu-tṛpo 'ntakam āḍhyatāndhāḥ
preṣṭho bhavān bali-bhujām api te 'pi tubhyam
niṣkiñcanaḥ—without possessions; nanu—indeed; bhavān—You; na—not; yataḥ—beyond whom; asti—there is; kiñcit—anything; yasmai—to whom; balim—tribute; bali—of tribute; bhujaḥ—the enjoyers; api—even; haranti—carry; aja-ādyāḥ—headed by Brahmā; na—not; tvā—You; vidanti—know; asu-tṛpaḥ—persons satisfied in the body; antakam—as death; āḍhyatā—by their status of wealth; andhāḥ—blinded; preṣṭhaḥ—the most dear; bhavān—You; bali-bhujām—for the great enjoyers of tribute; api—even; te—they; api—also; tubhyam—(are dear) to You.
You possess nothing because there is nothing beyond You. Even the great enjoyers of tribute—Brahmā and other demigods—pay tribute to You. Those who are blinded by their wealth and absorbed in gratifying their senses do not recognize You in the form of death. But to the gods, the enjoyers of tribute, You are the most dear, as they are to You.
Here Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī-devī replies to Lord Kṛṣṇa's statement in Text 14:
niṣkiñcanā vayaṁ śaśvan
niṣkiñcana-jana-priyāḥ
tasmāt prāyeṇa na hy āḍhyā
māṁ bhajanti su-madhyame
"We have no material possessions, and We are dear to those who similarly have nothing. Therefore, O slender one, the wealthy hardly ever worship Me."
Queen Rukmiṇī begins her statement by saying niṣkiñcano nanu, "You are indeed niṣkiñcana." The word kiñcana means "something," and the prefix nir—or, as it appears here, niṣ—indicates negation. Thus in the ordinary sense niṣkiñcana means "one who does not have something," or, in other words, "one who has nothing."
But in the present verse Queen Rukmiṇī states that Lord Kṛṣṇa "possesses nothing" not because He is a pauper but because He Himself is everything. In other words, since Kṛṣṇa is the Absolute Truth, all that exists is within Him. There is no second thing, something outside the Lord's existence, for Him to possess. For example, a man may possess a house or a car or a child or money, but these things do not become the man: they exist outside of him. We say he possesses them merely in the sense that he has control over them. But the Lord does not merely control His creation: His creation actually exists within Him. Thus there is nothing outside of Him that He can possess in the way that we possess external objects.
The ācāryas explain niṣkiñcana in the following way: To state that a person possesses something implies that he does not possess everything. In other words, if we say that a man owns some property, we imply that he does not own all property but rather some specific property. A standard American dictionary defines the word some as "a certain indefinite or unspecified number, quantity, etc., as distinguished from the rest." The Sanskrit word kiñcana conveys this sense of a partial amount of the total. Thus Lord Kṛṣṇa is called niṣkiñcana to refute the idea that He possesses merely a certain amount of beauty, fame, wealth, intelligence and other opulences. Rather, He possesses infinite beauty, infinite intelligence, infinite wealth and so on. This is so because He is the Absolute Truth.
Śrīla Prabhupāda begins his introduction to the First Canto, Volume One, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam with the following statement, which is quite relevant to our present discussion: "The conception of God and the conception of the Absolute Truth are not on the same level. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam hits on the target of the Absolute Truth. The conception of God indicates the controller, whereas the conception of the Absolute Truth indicates the summum bonum, or the ultimate source of all energies." Here Śrīla Prabhupāda touches upon a fundamental philosophical point. God is commonly defined as "the supreme being," and the dictionary defines supreme as (1) highest in rank, power, authority, etc; (2) highest in quality, achievement, performance, etc; (3) highest in degree; and (4) final, ultimate. None of these definitions adequately indicates absolute existence.
For example, we may say that a particular American is supremely wealthy in the sense that he is wealthier than any other American, or we may speak of the Supreme Court as the highest court in the land, although it certainly does not have absolute authority in all political and social matters, since it shares authority in these fields with the legislature and the president. In other words, the word supreme indicates the best in a hierarchy, and thus the supreme being may merely be understood as the best or greatest of all beings but not as the very source of all other beings and, indeed, of everything that exists. Thus Śrīla Prabhupāda specifically points out that the concept of the Absolute Truth, Kṛṣṇa, is higher than the concept of a supreme being, and this point is essential to a clear understanding of Vaiṣṇava philosophy.
Lord Kṛṣṇa is not merely a supreme being: He is the absolute being, and that is exactly the point His wife is making. Thus the word niṣkiñcana indicates not that Kṛṣṇa possesses no opulence but rather all opulence. In that sense she accepts His definition of Himself as niṣkiñcana.
In Text 14 Lord Kṛṣṇa also stated, niṣkiñcana-jana-priyāḥ: "I am dear to those who have nothing." Here, however, Queen Rukmiṇī points out that the demigods, the wealthiest souls in the universe, regularly make offerings to the Supreme Lord. We may assume that the demigods, being the Lord's appointed representatives, know that everything belongs to Him in the sense that everything is part of Him, as explained above. Therefore the statement niṣkiñcana-jana-priyāḥ is correct in the sense that since nothing exists except the Lord and His potencies, no matter how wealthy the Lord's worshipers appear to be they are in fact offering Him nothing but His own energy as a loving act. The same idea is exemplified when one worships the Ganges River by offering Ganges water, or when a child gets money from his father on the father's birthday and buys him a gift. The father is paying for his own present, but what he is really interested in is his child's love. Similarly, the Supreme Lord manifests the cosmos, and then the conditioned souls collect various items of the Lord's creation. Pious souls offer some of the best items from their collection back to the Lord as a sacrifice and thus purify themselves. Since the whole cosmos and everything in it is simply the Lord's energy, we may say that those who worship the Lord possess nothing.
In more conventional terms, people who are proud of their great wealth do not bow down to God. Queen Rukmiṇī also mentions these fools. Satisfied with their temporary bodies, they do not understand the divine power of death, which stalks them. The demigods, however, who are by far the wealthiest living beings, regularly offer sacrifice to the Supreme Lord, and thus the Lord is most dear to them, as stated here.
TEXT 38
tvaM vaE s$amastapauś&SaATaRmaya: P(laAtmaA
yaã"AHC$yaA s$aumatayaAe ivas$a{jainta k{(tµama,
taeSaAM ivaBaAe s$amauicataAe Bavata: s$amaAja:
pauMs$a: iṣyaAê r"tayaAe: s$auKaāu":iKanaAenaR
tvaṁ vai samasta-puruṣārtha-mayaḥ phalātmā
yad-vāñchayā su-matayo visṛjanti kṛtsnam
teṣāṁ vibho samucito bhavataḥ samājaḥ
puṁsaḥ striyāś ca ratayoḥ sukha-duḥkhinor na
tvam—You; vai—indeed; samasta—all; puruṣa—of human life; artha—of the goals; mayaḥ—comprising; phala—of the ultimate goal; ātmā—the very Self; yat—for whom; vāñchayā—out of desire; su-matayaḥ—intelligent persons; visṛjanti—discard; kṛtsnam—everything; teṣām—for them; vibho—O omnipotent one; samucitaḥ—appropriate; bhavataḥ—Your; samājaḥ—association; puṁsaḥ—of a man; striyāḥ—and a woman; ca—and; ratayoḥ—who are attracted to each other in mutual lust; sukha-duḥkhinoḥ—who experience material happiness and distress; na—not.
You are the embodiment of all human goals and are Yourself the final aim of life. Desiring to attain You, O all-powerful Lord, intelligent persons abandon everything else. It is they who are worthy of Your association, not men and women absorbed in the pleasure and grief resulting from their mutual lust.
Here Queen Rukmiṇī refutes Lord Kṛṣṇa's statement in Text 15:
yayor ātma-samaṁ vittaṁ
janmaiśvaryākṛtir bhavaḥ
tayor vivāho maitrī ca
nottamādhamayoḥ kvacit
"Marriage and friendship are proper between two people who are equal in terms of their wealth, birth, influence, physical appearance and capacity for good progeny, but never between a superior and an inferior." In fact, only those who have given up all such material conceptions of sense gratification and have taken exclusively to the Lord's loving service can understand who their real friend and companion is—Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself.
TEXT 39
tvaM nyastad"Nx"mauinaiBagARid"taAnauBaAva
@AtmaAtmad"ê jagAtaAimaita mae va{taAe'is$a
ih"tvaA Bavaā,"”auva od"Iir"tak(AlavaegA-
DvastaAizASaAe'bjaBavanaAk(pataIna, ku(taAe'nyae
tvaṁ nyasta-daṇḍa-munibhir gaditānubhāva
ātmātma-daś ca jagatām iti me vṛto 'si
hitvā bhavad-bhruva udīrita-kāla-vega-
dhvastāśiṣo 'bja-bhava-nāka-patīn kuto 'nye
tvam—You; nyasta—who have renounced; daṇḍa—the sannyāsī's staff; munibhiḥ—by sages; gadita—spoken of; anubhāvaḥ—whose prowess; ātmā—the Supreme Soul; ātmā—Your own self; daḥ—who give away; ca—also; jagatām—of all the worlds; iti—thus; me—by me; vṛtaḥ—chosen; asi—You have been; hitvā—rejecting; bhavat—Your; bhruvaḥ—from the eyebrows; udīrita—generated; kāla—of time; vega—by the impulses; dhvasta—destroyed; āśiṣaḥ—whose hopes; abja—lotus-born (Lord Brahmā); bhava—Lord Śiva; nāka—of heaven; patīn—the masters; kutaḥ—what then of; anye-others.
Knowing that great sages who have renounced the sannyāsī's daṇḍa proclaim Your glories, that You are the Supreme Soul of all the worlds, and that You are so gracious that You give away even Your own self, I chose You as my husband, rejecting Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and the rulers of heaven, whose aspirations are all frustrated by the force of time, which is born from Your eyebrows. What interest, then, could I have in any other suitors?
This is Queen Rukmiṇī's refutation of Lord Kṛṣṇa's statement in Text 16. There Lord Kṛṣṇa said, bhikṣubhiḥ ślāghitā mudhā: "I am glorified by beggars." But Queen Rukmiṇī points out that those so-called beggars are actually sages in the paramahaṁsa stage of life—sannyāsīs who have reached the highest level of spiritual advancement and thus given up the sannyāsī rod. Lord Kṛṣṇa also made two specific accusations against His wife in Text 16. He said, vaidarbhy etad avijñāya—"My dear Vaidarbhī, you were not aware of the situation"—and tvayādīrgha-samīkṣayā—"because you lack foresight." In the present verse, Rukmiṇī's statement iti me vṛto 'si indicates "I chose You as my husband because You possess the above-mentioned qualities. It was not a blind choice at all." Rukmiṇī further mentions that she passed over lesser personalities like Brahmā, Śiva and the rulers of heaven because she saw that even though, materially speaking, they are great personalities, they are frustrated by the powerful waves of time, which emanate from the eyebrows of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, far from lacking foresight, Rukmiṇī chose Lord Kṛṣṇa after an exhaustive appraisal of the entire cosmic situation. Thus she lovingly rebukes her husband here.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī interprets Rukmiṇī's mood as follows: "My dear husband, Your accusation that I lack foresight indicates that You did know of my deep insight into the situation. Actually, I chose You because I knew of Your true glories."
TEXT 40
jaAx"YaM vacastava gAd"Aƒaja yastau BaUpaAna,
iva‰"Avya zAAṆRḷinanade"na jah"TaR maAM tvama,
is$aMh"Ae yaTaA svabailamaIzA pazAUna, svaBaAgAM
taeByaAe BayaAâāu"d"iDaM zAr"NAM ‘apaªa:
jāḍyaṁ vacas tava gadāgraja yas tu bhūpān
vidrāvya śārṅga-ninadena jahartha māṁ tvam
siṁho yathā sva-balim īśa paśūn sva-bhāgaṁ
tebhyo bhayād yad udadhiṁ śaraṇaṁ prapannaḥ
jāḍyam—foolishness; vacaḥ—words; tava—Your; gadāgraja—O Gadāgraja; yaḥ—who; tu—even; bhū-pān—the kings; vidrāvya—driving away; śārṅga—of Śārṅga, Your bow; ninadena—by the resounding; jahartha—took away; mām—me; tvam—You; siṁhaḥ—a lion; yathā—as; sva—Your own; balim—tribute; īśa—O Lord; paśūn—animals; sva-bhāgam—his own share; tebhyaḥ—of them; bhayāt—out of fear; yat—that; udadhim—of the ocean; śaraṇaṁ-prapannaḥ—took shelter.
My Lord, as a lion drives away lesser animals to claim his proper tribute, You drove off the assembled kings with the resounding twang of Your Śārṅga bow and then claimed me, Your fair share. Thus it is sheer foolishness, my dear Gadāgraja, for You to say You took shelter in the ocean out of fear of those kings.
In Text 12 of this chapter Lord Kṛṣṇa said, rājabhyo bibhyataḥ su-bhru samudraṁ śaranaṁ gatān: "Terrified of those kings, We went to the ocean for shelter." According to the ācāryas, Lord Kṛṣṇa finally provoked Rukmiṇī's anger by glorifying other men who might have been her husband, and thus in an agitated mood she here tells Him that she is not ignorant but rather that He has spoken foolishly. She states, "Like a lion You abducted me in the presence of those kings and drove them away with Your Śārṅga bow, so it is simply foolishness to say that out of fear of those same kings You went to the ocean." According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, as Queen Rukmiṇī spoke these words she frowned and cast angry sidelong glances at the Lord.
TEXT 41
yaã"AHC$yaA na{paizAKaAmaNAyaAe'ngAvaEnya-
jaAyantanaAḍ"SagAyaAd"ya Wefyapatyama,
r"AjyaM ivas$a{jya ivaivazAuvaRnamambaujaAºa
s$aId"inta tae'naupad"vaI%M ta wh"AisTataA: ik(ma,
yad-vāñchayā nṛpa-śikhāmaṇayo 'nga-vainya-
jāyanta-nāhuṣa-gayādaya aikya-patyam
rājyaṁ visṛjya viviśur vanam ambujākṣa
sīdanti te 'nupadavīṁ ta ihāsthitāḥ kim
yat—for whom; vāñchayā—out of desire; nṛpa—of kings; śikhāmaṇayaḥ—the crown jewels; aṅga-vainya-jāyanta-nāhuṣa-gaya-ādayaḥ—Aṅga (the father of Vena), Vainya (Pṛthu, the son of Vena), Jāyanta (Bharata), Nāhuṣa (Yayāti), Gaya and others; aikya—exclusive; patyam—having sovereignty; rājyam—their kingdoms; visṛjya—abandoning; viviśuḥ—entered; vanam—the forest; ambuja-akṣa—O lotus-eyed one; sīdanti—suffer frustration; te—Your; anupadavīm—on the path; te—they; iha—in this world; āsthitāḥ—fixed; kim—whether.
Wanting Your association, the best of kings—Aṅga, Vainya, Jāyanta, Nāhuṣa, Gaya and others—abandoned their absolute sovereignty and entered the forest to seek You out. How could those kings suffer frustration in this world, O lotus-eyed one?
Here Queen Rukmiṇī refutes the ideas put forth by Lord Kṛṣṇa in Text 13. In fact Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī-devī repeats Lord Kṛṣṇa's own words. The Lord said, āsthitāḥ padavīṁ su-bhru prāyaḥ sīdanti yoṣitaḥ: "Women who follow My path generally suffer." Here Rukmiṇī-devī says, sīdanti te 'nupadavīṁ ta ihāsthitāḥ kim: "Why should those fixed on Your path suffer in this world?" She gives the example of many great kings who renounced their powerful sovereignty to enter the forest, where they performed austerities and worshiped the Lord, intensely desiring His transcendental association. Thus, according to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī-devī here intends to tell Śrī Kṛṣṇa, "You have said that I, a king's daughter, am unintelligent and frustrated because I married You. But how can You accuse all these great enlightened kings of being unintelligent? They were the wisest of men, yet they gave up everything to follow You and were certainly not frustrated by the result. Indeed, they achieved the perfection of Your association."
TEXT 42
k(AnyaM ™ayaeta tava paAd"s$ar"AejagAnDama,
@A„aAya s$anmauKair"taM janataApavagARma,
laºmyaAlayaM tvaivagANAyya gAuNAAlayasya
matyaAR s$ad"Aeś&BayamaTaRivaiva·(ā{"ií":
kānyaṁ śrayeta tava pāda-saroja-gandham
āghrāya san-mukharitaṁ janatāpavargam
lakṣmy-ālayaṁ tv avigaṇayya guṇālayasya
martyā sadoru-bhayam artha-vivikta-dṛṣṭiḥ
ka—what woman; anyam—another man; śrayeta—would take shelter of; tava—Your; pāda—of the feet; saroja—of the lotus; gandham—the aroma; āghrāya—having smelled; sat—by great saints; mukharitam—described; janatā—for all people; apavargam—bestowing liberation; lakṣmī—of the goddess of fortune; ālayam—the place of residence; tu—but; avigaṇayya—not taking seriously; guṇa—of all transcendental qualities; ālayasya—of the abode; martyā—mortal; sadā—always; uru—great; bhayam—one who has fear; artha—her best interest; vivikta—ascertaining; dṛṣṭiḥ—whose insight.
The aroma of Your lotus feet, which is glorified by great saints, awards people liberation and is the abode of Goddess Lakṣmī. What woman would take shelter of any other man after savoring that aroma? Since You are the abode of transcendental qualities, what mortal woman with the insight to distinguish her own true interest would disregard that fragrance and depend instead on someone who is always subject to terrible fear?
In Text 16 Lord Kṛṣṇa claimed that He was guṇair hīnāḥ, "bereft of all good qualities." To refute this claim, the devoted Rukmiṇī here states that the Lord is guṇālaya, "the abode of all good qualities." In a single moment the so-called powerful men of this world can be reduced to utter helplessness and confusion. Indeed, destruction is the inevitable fate of all powerful masculine bodies. The Lord, however, has an eternal, spiritual body that is omnipotent and infinitely beautiful, and thus, as Queen Rukmiṇī argues here, how could any sane, enlightened woman take shelter of anyone but the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa?
TEXT 43
taM tvaAnauṝ&pamaBajaM jagAtaAmaDaIzAma,
@AtmaAnama‡a ca par"‡a ca k(AmapaUr"ma,
syaAnmae tavaAx.~i„ar"r"NAM s$a{itaiBa”aRmantyaA
yaAe vaE BajantamaupayaAtyana{taApavagAR:
taṁ tvānurūpam abhajaṁ jagatām adhīśam
ātmānam atra ca paratra ca kāma-pūram
syān me tavāṅghrir araṇaṁ sṛtibhir bhramantyā
yo vai bhajantam upayāty anṛtāpavargaḥ
tam—Him; tvā—Yourself; anurūpam—suitable; abhajam—I have chosen; jagatām—of all the worlds; adhīśam—the ultimate master; ātmānam—the Supreme Soul; atra—in this life; ca—and; paratra—in the next life; ca—also; kāma—of desires; pūram—the fulfiller; syāt—may they be; me—for me; tava—Your; aṅghriḥ—feet; araṇam—shelter; sṛtibhiḥ—by the various movements (from one species of life to another); bhramantyāḥ—who has been wandering; yaḥ—which (feet); vai—indeed; bhajantam—their worshiper; upayāti—approach; anṛta—from untruth; apavargaḥ—freedom.
Because You are suitable for me, I have chosen You, the master and Supreme Soul of all the worlds, who fulfill our desires in this life and the next. May Your feet, which give freedom from illusion by approaching their worshiper, give shelter to me, who have been wandering from one material situation to another.
An alternate reading for the word sṛtibhiḥ is śrutibhiḥ, in which case the idea Rukmiṇī expresses is this: "I have been bewildered by hearing from various religious scriptures about numerous rituals and ceremonies with their promises of fruitive results." Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī gives this explanation, while Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī give an additional idea Rukmiṇī might express with the word śrutibhiḥ: "My dear Lord Kṛṣṇa, I was bewildered by hearing about Your various incarnations. I heard that when You descended as Rāma You abandoned Your wife, Sītā, and that in this life You abandoned the gopīs. Thus I was bewildered."
It is understood that Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī-devī is the eternally liberated consort of Lord Kṛṣṇa, but in these verses she humbly plays the part of a mortal woman taking shelter of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 44
tasyaA: syaur"cyauta na{paA BavataAepaid"í"A:
ṣINAAM gA{he"Sau Kar"gAAeṅivax"AlaBa{tyaA:
yatk(NARmaUlamair"k(SaRNA naAepayaAyaAā,"
yauSmatk(TaA ma{x"ivair"Âas$aBaAs$au gAItaA
tasyāḥ syur acyuta nṛpā bhavatopadiṣṭāḥ
strīṇāṁ gṛheṣu khara-go-śva-viḍāla-bhṛtyāḥ
yat-karṇa-mūlam ari-karṣaṇa nopayāyād
yuṣmat-kathā mṛḍa-viriñca-sabhāsu gītā
tasyāḥ—of her; syuḥ—let them become (the husbands); acyuta—O infallible Kṛṣṇa; nṛpāḥ—kings; bhavatā—by You; upadiṣṭāḥ—mentioned; strīṇām—of women; gṛheṣu—in the homes; khara—as asses; go—oxen; śva—dogs; viḍāla—cats; bhṛtyāḥ—and slaves; yat—whose; karṇa—of the ear; mūlam—the core; ari—Your enemies; karṣaṇa—O You who vex; na—never; upayāyāt—come near; yuṣmat—concerning You; kathā—discussions; mṛḍa—of Lord Śiva; viriñca—and Lord Brahmā; sabhāsu—in the scholarly assemblies; gītā—sung.
O infallible Kṛṣṇa, let each of the kings You named become the husband of a woman whose ears have never heard Your glories, which are sung in the assemblies of Śiva and Brahmā. After all, in the households of such women these kings live like asses, oxen, dogs, cats and slaves.
According to Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī, these fiery words of Queen Rukmiṇī's are a response to Lord Kṛṣṇa's opening statement, found in Text 10 of the chapter. The Supreme Lord had said, "My dear princess, You were sought after by many kings as powerful as the rulers of planets. They were all abundantly endowed with political influence, wealth, beauty, generosity and physical strength." According to Śrīdhara Svāmī, Queen Rukmiṇī here speaks with anger, pointing her index finger at the Lord. She compares the so-called great princes to asses because they carry many material burdens, to oxen because they are always distressed while performing their occupational duties, to dogs because their wives disrespect them, to cats because they are selfish and cruel, and to slaves because they are servile in family affairs. Such kings may appear desirable to a foolish woman who has not heard or understood the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī adds that such kings are like asses because their wives sometimes kick them, like dogs because they behave inimically toward outsiders in order to protect their homes, and like cats because they eat the remnants left by their wives.
TEXT 45
tvafzma™aur"AemanaKake(zAipanaŪ"mantar,"
maAMs$aAisTar"·(k{(imaivaq%.k(P(ipaÔavaAtama,
jaIvacC$vaM Bajaita k(AntamaitaivaRmaUX#A
yaA tae pad"Abjamak(r"nd"maija„ataI ṣI
tvak-śmaśru-roma-nakha-keśa-pinaddham antar
māṁsāsthi-rakta-kṛmi-viṭ-kapha-pitta-vātam
jīvac-chavaṁ bhajati kānta-matir vimūḍhā
yā te padābja-makarandam ajighratī strī
tvak—with skin; śmaśru—whiskers; roma—bodily hair; nakha—nails; keśa—and hair on the head; pinaddham—covered; antaḥ—inside; māṁsa—flesh; asthi—bones; rakta—blood; kṛmi—worms; viṭ—stool; kapha-mucus; pitta—bile; vātam—and air; jīvat—living; śavam—a corpse; bhajati—worships; kānta—as husband or lover; matiḥ—whose idea; vimūḍhā—totally bewildered; yā—who; te—Your; pada-abja—of the lotus feet; makarandam—the honey; ajighratī—not smelling; strī—woman.
A woman who fails to relish the fragrance of the honey of Your lotus feet becomes totally befooled, and thus she accepts as her husband or lover a living corpse covered with skin, whiskers, nails, head-hair and body-hair and filled with flesh, bones, blood, parasites, feces, mucus, bile and air.
Here Lord Kṛṣṇa's chaste wife makes a quite unequivocal statement about material sense gratification based on the physical body. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī comments as follows on this verse: On the authority of the statement sa vai patiḥ syād akuto-bhayaḥ svayam [SB 5.18.20]—"He indeed should become one's husband who can remove all fear"—Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the real husband for all women at all times. Thus a woman who worships someone else as her husband simply worships a dead body.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī comments further: Rukmiṇī thus considered that although the sweetness of Lord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet is well known, and although He possesses an eternal body full of knowledge and bliss, foolish women reject Him. An ordinary husband's body is covered on the outside by skin and hair; otherwise, being filled with blood, feces, flesh, bile and so on, it would be overwhelmed with flies and other vermin attracted by its bad smell and other offensive qualities.
Those who have no practical experience of the beauty and purity of Kṛṣṇa or of Kṛṣṇa consciousness may be confused by such uncompromising denunciations of material, bodily gratification. But those who are enlightened in Kṛṣṇa consciousness will be enlivened and enthused by such absolutely truthful statements.
TEXT 46
@stvambaujaAºa mama tae car"NAAnaur"AgA
@Atmana, r"tasya maiya caAnaitair"·(ā{"íe":
ya÷Rsya va{Ū"ya opaAÔar"jaAe'itamaA‡aAe
maAmaIºas$ae taāu" h" na: par"maAnauk(mpaA
astv ambujākṣa mama te caraṇānurāga
ātman ratasya mayi cānatirikta-dṛṣṭeḥ
yarhy asya vṛddhaya upātta-rajo-'ti-mātro
mām īkṣase tad u ha naḥ paramānukampā
astu—may there be; ambuja-akṣa—O lotus-eyed one; mama—my; te—Your; caraṇa—for the feet; anurāgaḥ—steady attraction; ātman—in Yourself; ratasya—who take Your pleasure; mayi—toward me; ca—and; anatirikta—not much; dṛṣṭeḥ—whose glance; yarhi—when; asya—of this universe; vṛddhaye—for the increase; upātta—assuming; rajaḥ—of the mode of passion; ati-mātraḥ—an abundance; mām—at me; īkṣase—You look; tat—that; u ha—indeed; naḥ—for us; parama—the greatest; anukampā—show of mercy.
O lotus-eyed one, though You are satisfied within Yourself and thus rarely turn Your attention toward me, please bless me with steady love for Your feet. It is when You assume a predominance of passion in order to manifest the universe that You glance upon me, showing me what is indeed Your greatest mercy.
In Text 20 of this chapter Lord Kṛṣṇa stated, "Always satisfied within Ourselves, We care nothing for wives, children and wealth." Here Rukmiṇī-devī humbly replies, "Yes, You take pleasure within Yourself and therefore rarely look at me."
In this regard Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī points out that Lord Kṛṣṇa had already declared His love for Rukmiṇī (SB 10.53.2): tathāham api tac-citto nidrāṁ ca na labhe niśi. "I am also thinking about her—so much so that I cannot sleep at night." Lord Kṛṣṇa is satisfied within Himself, and if we remember that Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī-devī is His internal potency, we can understand that His loving affairs with her are expressions of His pure spiritual happiness.
Here, however, Queen Rukmiṇī humbly identifies herself with the Lord's external energy, which is her expansion. Therefore she says, "Though You do not often look at me, when You are ready to manifest the material universe and thus begin to work through the material quality of passion, which is Your potency, You glance at me. In this way You show me Your greatest mercy." Thus Ācārya Viśvanātha explains that Goddess Rukmiṇī's statement can be understood in two ways. And of course the Vaiṣṇavas, after thoroughly understanding the philosophy of Kṛṣṇa from the bona fide ācāryas, simply relish these loving affairs between the Lord and His exalted devotees.


Song Prayers by  Siva jvara
TEXT 25
jvar" ovaAca
namaAima tvaAnantazAi·M( pare"zAma,
s$avaARtmaAnaM ke(valaM ÁaiæamaA‡ama,
ivaṅAetpaiÔasTaAnas$aMr"AeDahe"tauM
yaÔaā," “aṭ “aṭilaṆḷm‘azAAntama,
jvara uvāca
namāmi tvānanta-śaktiṁ pareśam
sarvātmānaṁ kevalaṁ jñapti-mātram
viśvotpatti-sthāna-saṁrodha-hetuṁ
yat tad brahma brahma-liṅgam praśāntam
jvaraḥ uvāca—the fever weapon (of Lord Śiva) said; namāmi—I bow down; tvā—to You; ananta—unlimited; śaktim—whose potencies; para—Supreme; īśam—the Lord; sarva—of all; ātmānam—the Soul; kevalam—pure; jñapti—of consciousness; mātram—the totality; viśva—of the universe; utpatti—of the creation; sthāna—maintenance; saṁrodha—and dissolution; hetum—the cause; yat—which; tat—that; brahma—Absolute Truth; brahma—by the Vedas; liṅgam—indirect reference to whom; praśāntam—perfectly peaceful.
The Śiva-jvara said: I bow down to You of unlimited potencies, the Supreme Lord, the Supersoul of all beings. You possess pure and complete consciousness and are the cause of cosmic creation, maintenance and dissolution. Perfectly peaceful, You are the Absolute Truth to whom the Vedas indirectly refer.
Previously the Śiva-jvara felt himself to be unlimitedly powerful and thus attempted to burn Śrī Kṛṣṇa. But now he himself has been burned, and understanding that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, he humbly approaches to bow down and offer praise to the Absolute Truth.
According to the ācāryas, the word sarvātmānam indicates that Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supersoul, the giver of consciousness to all living beings. Kṛṣṇa confirms this in the Bhagavad-gītā (15.15): mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca. "From Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness.''
In his commentary Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī emphasizes that the Śiva-jvara has realized in many ways Lord Kṛṣṇa's supremacy over his own master, Lord Śiva. Thus the Śiva-jvara addresses Kṛṣṇa as ananta-śakti, "possessor of unlimited potency"; pareśa, "the supreme controller"; and sarvātmā, "the Supersoul of all beings ''—even of Lord Śiva.
The words kevalaṁ jñapti-mātram indicate that Lord Kṛṣṇa possesses pure omniscience. According to our limited understanding, we act in this world, but Lord Kṛṣṇa, with His unlimited understanding, performs infinite works of creation, maintenance and annihilation. As Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī points out, even the functions of the gross elements, such as air, depend on Him. The Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.8.1) confirms this: bhīṣāsmād vātaḥ-pavate. "Out of fear of Him, the wind blows." Thus Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate object of worship for all living beings.

TEXT 26
k(AlaAe dE"vaM k(maR jaIva: svaBaAvaAe
‰"vyaM ºae‡aM ‘aANA @AtmaA ivak(Ar":
tats$aÎḷAtaAe baIjar"Aeh"‘avaAh"s$a,
tvanmaAyaESaA taiªaSaeDaM ‘apaâe
kālo daivaṁ karma jīvaḥ svabhāvo
dravyaṁ kṣetraṁ prāṇa ātmā vikāraḥ
tat-saṅghāto bīja-roha-pravāhas
tvan-māyaiṣā tan-niṣedhaṁ prapadye
kālaḥ—time; daivam—destiny; karma—the reactions of material work; jīvaḥ—the individual living entity; svabhāvaḥ—his propensities; dravyam—the subtle forms of matter; kṣetram—the body; prāṇaḥ—the life air; ātmā—the false ego; vikāraḥ—the transformations (of the eleven senses); tat—of all this; saṅghāṭaḥ—the aggregate (as the subtle body); bīja—of seed; roha—and sprout; pravāhaḥ—the constant flow; tvat—Your; māyā—material illusory energy; eṣā—this; tat—of it; niṣedham—the negation (You); prapadye—I am approaching for shelter.
Time; fate; karma; the jīva and his propensities; the subtle material elements; the material body; the life air; false ego; the various senses; and the totality of these as reflected in the living being's subtle body—all these constitute Your material illusory energy, māyā, an endless cycle like that of seed and plant. I take shelter of You, the negation of this māyā.
The word bīja-roha-pravāha is explained as follows: The conditioned soul accepts a material body, with which he attempts to enjoy the material world. That body is the seed (bīja) of future material existence because when a person acts with that body he creates further reactions (karma), which grow (roha) into the obligation to accept another material body. In other words, material life is a chain of actions and reactions. The simple decision to surrender to the Supreme Lord releases the conditioned soul from this futile repetition of material growth and reaction.
According to Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī, the words tan-niṣedhaṁ prapadye indicate that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa, is niṣedhāvadhi-bhūtam, "the limit of negation." In other words, after all illusion is negated, the Absolute Truth remains.
The process of education may be succinctly described as a way of eradicating ignorance through the attainment of knowledge. Through inductive, deductive and intuitive means, we attempt to refute the specious, the illusory and the imperfect and elevate ourselves to a platform of full knowledge. Ultimately, when all illusion is negated, that which remains firmly in place is the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In the previous text, the Śiva-jvara described the Supreme Lord as sarvātmānaṁ kevalaṁ jñapti-mātram, "pure, concentrated spiritual consciousness." Now the Śiva-jvara concludes his philosophical description of the Lord by saying in this text that the various aspects of material existence are also potencies of the Supreme Lord.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī explains that although the jīva is different from māyā, here it is included among the constituents of māyā because it is controlled by māyā. Viśvanātha Cakravartī also mentions that the Supreme Lord's own body and senses, as implied here by the word tan-niṣedhaṁ, are nondifferent from the Lord's pure spiritual existence. The Lord's body and senses are not external to Him, nor do they cover Him, but rather the Lord is identical with His spiritual form and senses. The full Absolute Truth, unlimited in fascinating diversity, is Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT 27
naAnaABaAvaElaI=layaEvaAepapaªaEr,"
de"vaAna, s$aADaUnlaAek(s$aetaUna, ibaBaiSaR
hM"syaunmaAgAARna, ihM"s$ayaA vataRmaAnaAna,
janmaEtaÔae BaAr"h"Ar"Aya BaUmae:
nānā-bhāvair līlayaivopapannair
devān sādhūn loka-setūn bibharṣi
haṁsy unmārgān hiṁsayā vartamānān
janmaitat te bhāra-hārāya bhūmeḥ
nānā—various; bhāvaiḥ—with intentions; līlayā—as pastimes; eva—indeed; upapannaiḥ—assumed; devān—the demigods; sādhūn—the saintly sages; loka—of the world; setūn—the codes of religion; bibharṣi—You maintain; haṁsi—You kill; ut-mārgān—those who stray beyond the path; hiṁsayā—by violence; vartamānān—living; janma—birth; etat—this; te—Your; bhāra—the burden; hārāya—to relieve; bhūmeḥ—of the earth.
With various intentions, You perform pastimes to maintain the demigods, the saintly persons and the codes of religion for this world. By these pastimes You also kill those who stray from the right path and live by violence. Indeed, your present incarnation is meant to relieve the earth's burden.
As Lord Kṛṣṇa states in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.29),
samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu
na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ
ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā
mayi te teṣu cāpy aham
"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend—is in Me—and I am also a friend to him."
The demigods and sages (devān sādhūn) are dedicated to executing the will of the Supreme Lord. The demigods act as cosmic administrators, and the sages, by their teachings and their good example, illumine the path of self-realization and holiness. But those who transgress the natural law, the law of God, and live by committing violence against others are vanquished by the Supreme Lord in His various pastime incarnations. As the Lord states in the Bhagavad-gītā (4.11), ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham. He is impartial, but He responds appropriately to the actions of the living beings.
TEXT 28
taæaAe'h"mtae taejas$aA āu":s$ahe"na
zAAntaAeƒaeNAAtyaulbaNAena jvare"NA
taAvaÔaApaAe de"ih"naAM tae'in„amaUlaM
naAe s$aevaer"na, yaAvad"AzAAnaubaŪ"A:
tapto 'ham te tejasā duḥsahena
śāntogreṇāty-ulbaṇena jvareṇa
tāvat tāpo dehināṁ te 'nghri-mūlaṁ
no severan yāvad āśānubaddhāḥ
taptaḥ—burned; aham—I; te—Your; tejasā—by the power; duḥsahena—insufferable; śānta—cold; ugreṇa—yet burning; ati—extremely; ulbaṇena—terrible; jvareṇa—fever; tāvat—for so long; tāpaḥ—the burning torment; dehinām—of embodied souls; te—Your; aṅghri—of the feet; mūlam—the sole; na—do not; u—indeed; severan—serve; yāvat—as long as; āśā—in material desires; anubaddhāḥ—continuously bound.
I am tortured by the fierce power of Your terrible fever weapon, which is cold yet burning. All embodied souls must suffer as long as they remain bound to material ambitions and thus averse to serving Your feet.
In the previous verse, the Śiva-jvara stated that those who live by violence will suffer similar violence at the hands of the Lord. But here he further states that those who do not surrender to the Supreme Lord are especially liable to punishment. Although the Śiva-jvara himself had acted violently up till now, since he has surrendered to the Lord and rectified himself, he hopes to receive the Lord's mercy. In other words, he has now become the Lord's devotee.




Song Prayers by Lord Siva to Krsna
TEXT 34
™aIś&‰" ovaAca
tvaM ih" “aṭ parM" jyaAeitar,"
gAUXM# “aṭiNA vaAx.~mayae
yaM pazyantyamalaAtmaAna
@Ak(AzAimava ke(valama,
śrī-rudra uvāca
tvaṁ hi brahma paraṁ jyotir
gūḍhaṁ brahmaṇi vāṅ-maye
yaṁ paśyanty amalātmāna
ākāśam iva kevalam
śrī-rudraḥ uvāca—Lord Śiva said; tvam—You; hi—alone; brahma—the Absolute Truth; param—supreme; jyotiḥ—light; gūḍham—hidden; brahmaṇi—in the Absolute; vāk-maye—in its form of language (the Vedas); yam—whom; paśyanti—they see; amala—spotless; ātmānaḥ—whose hearts; ākāśam—the sky; iva—like; kevalam—pure.
Śrī Rudra said: You alone are the Absolute Truth, the supreme light, the mystery hidden within the verbal manifestation of the Absolute. Those whose hearts are spotless can see You, for You are uncontaminated, like the sky.
The Absolute Truth is the source of all light and is therefore the supreme light, self-luminous. This Absolute Truth is explained confidentially in the Vedas and is therefore difficult for an ordinary reader to understand. The following statements quoted by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī from the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad show how the Vedic sounds occasionally reveal the Absolute: Te hocur upāsanam etasya parātmano govindasyākhilādhāriṇo brūhi (Pūrva-khaṇḍa 17): "They [the four Kumāras] said [to Brahmā], 'Please tell us how to worship Govinda, the Supreme Soul and the foundation of all that exists.' " Cetanaś cetanānām (Pūrva-khaṇḍa 21): "He is the chief of all living beings." And taṁ ha devam ātma-vṛtti-prakāśam (Pūrva-khaṇḍa 23): "One realizes that Supreme Godhead by first realizing one's own self." The great ācārya Jīva Gosvāmī also quotes a verse from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.10.48)—gūḍhaṁ paraṁ brahma manuṣya-liṅgam—which refers to "the Supreme Truth concealed in a humanlike form."
Since the Lord is pure, why do some people perceive Kṛṣṇa's form and activities as impure? Ācārya Jīva explains that those whose own hearts are impure cannot understand the pure Lord. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī further quotes the Lord's own instruction to Arjuna in Śrī Hari-vaṁśa:
tat-paraṁ paramaṁ brahma
sarvaṁ vibhajate jagat
mamaiva tad ghanaṁ tejo
jñātum arhasi bhārata
"Superior to that [total material nature] is the Supreme Brahman, from which this entire creation expands. O descendant of Bharata, you should know that the Supreme Brahman consists of My concentrated effulgence."
Thus, to save his devotee, Śiva now glorifies the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, his eternal worshipable master. The Lord's bewildering potency induced Śiva to fight with Lord Kṛṣṇa, but now the fight is over, and to save his devotee Lord Śiva offers these beautiful prayers.
TEXTS 35-36
naAiBanaRBaAe'i¢amauRKamambau re"taAe
âAE: zAISaRmaAzAA: ™auitar"x.~i„aś&vaI=
can‰"Ae manaAe yasya ā{"gAkR( @AtmaA
@hM" s$amau"‰"Ae jaQ&rM" Baujaen‰":
r"AemaAiNA yasyaAESaDayaAe'mbauvaAh"A:
ke(zAA ivair"ÂaAe iDaSaNAA ivas$agAR:
‘ajaApaitaôR$d"yaM yasya DamaR:
s$a vaE BavaAna, pauś&SaAe laAek(k(lpa:
nābhir nabho 'gnir mukham ambu reto
dyauḥ śīrṣam āśāḥ śrutir aṅghrir urvī
candro mano yasya dṛg arka ātmā
ahaṁ samudro jaṭharaṁ bhujendraḥ
romāṇi yasyauṣadhayo 'mbu-vāhāḥ
keśā viriñco dhiṣaṇā visargaḥ
prajā-patir hṛdayaṁ yasya dharmaḥ
sa vai bhavān puruṣo loka-kalpaḥ
nābhiḥ—the navel; nabhaḥ—the sky; agniḥ—fire; mukham—the face; ambu—water; retaḥ—the semen; dyauḥ—heaven; śīrṣam—the head; āśāḥ—the directions; śrutiḥ—the sense of hearing; aṅghriḥ—the foot; urvī—the earth; candraḥ—the moon; manaḥ—the mind; yasya—whose; dṛk—sight; arkaḥ—the sun; ātmā—self-awareness; aham—I (Śiva); samudraḥ—the ocean; jaṭharam—the abdomen; bhuja—the arm; indraḥ—Indra; romāṇi—the hairs on the body; yasya—whose; oṣadhayaḥ—herbal plants; ambu-vāhāḥ—water-bearing clouds; keśāḥ—the hairs on the head; viriñcaḥ—Lord Brahmā; dhiṣaṇā—the discriminating intelligence; visargaḥ—the genitals; prajā-patiḥ—the progenitor of mankind; hṛdayam—the heart; yasya—whose; dharmaḥ—religion; saḥ—He; vai—indeed; bhavān—Your good self; puruṣaḥ—the primeval creator; loka—the worlds; kalpaḥ—produced from whom.
The sky is Your navel, fire Your face, water Your semen, and heaven Your head. The cardinal directions are Your sense of hearing, herbal plants the hairs on Your body, and water-bearing clouds the hair on Your head. The earth is Your foot, the moon Your mind, and the sun Your vision, while I am Your ego. The ocean is Your abdomen, Indra Your arm, Lord Brahmā Your intelligence, the progenitor of mankind Your genitals, and religion Your heart. You are indeed the original puruṣa, creator of the worlds.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī explains that just as the tiny bugs living inside a fruit cannot comprehend the fruit, so we tiny living beings cannot understand the Supreme Absolute Truth, in whom we exist. It is difficult to understand the cosmic manifestation of the Lord, what to speak of His transcendental form as Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we should surrender in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and the Lord Himself will help us understand.
TEXT 37
tavaAvataAr"Ae'yamaku(NQ&DaAmana,
DamaRsya gAuptyaE jagAtaAe ih"taAya
vayaM ca s$avaeR BavataAnauBaAivataA
ivaBaAvayaAmaAe BauvanaAina s$aæa
tavāvatāro 'yam akuṇṭha-dhāman
dharmasya guptyai jagato hitāya
vayaṁ ca sarve bhavatānubhāvitā
vibhāvayāmo bhuvanāni sapta
tava—Your; avatāraḥ—descent; ayam—this; akuṇṭha—unrestricted; dhāman—O You whose power; dharmasya—of justice; guptyai—for the protection; jagataḥ—of the universe; hitāya—for the benefit; vayam—we; ca—also; sarve—all; bhavatā—by You; anubhāvitāḥ—enlightened and authorized; vibhāvayāmaḥ—we manifest and develop; bhuvanāni—the worlds; sapta—seven.
Your current descent into the material realm, O Lord of unrestricted power, is meant for upholding the principles of justice and benefiting the entire universe. We demigods, each depending on Your grace and authority, develop the seven planetary systems.
As Lord Śiva glorifies Lord Kṛṣṇa doubt may arise, since, apparently, Lord Kṛṣṇa is standing before Lord Śiva as a historical personality with a humanlike body. However, it is out of the Lord's causeless mercy that He appears to us in a form visible to our mundane eyes. If we want to understand the Absolute Truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, we must hear from recognized authorities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, such as Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā, or from Lord Śiva, a recognized Vaiṣṇava authority, who here glorifies the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 38
tvamaek( @Aâ: pauś&SaAe'iã"taIyas$a,
tauyaR: svaā{"gDaetaur"he"taur"IzA:
‘ataIyas$ae'TaAipa yaTaAivak(ArM"
svamaAyayaA s$avaRgAuNA‘ais$aŪ"YaE
tvam eka ādyaḥ puruṣo 'dvitīyas
turyaḥ sva-dṛg dhetur ahetur īśaḥ
pratīyase 'thāpi yathā-vikāraṁ
sva-māyayā sarva-guṇa-prasiddhyai
tvam—You; ekaḥ—one; ādyaḥ—original; puruṣaḥ—Supreme Person; advitīyaḥ—without a second; turyaḥ—transcendental; sva-dṛk—self-manifesting; hetuḥ—the cause; ahetuḥ—having no cause; īśaḥ—the supreme controller; pratīyase—You are perceived; atha api—nonetheless; yathā—according to; vikāram—various transformations; sva—by Your own; māyayā—illusory potency; sarva—of all; guṇa—material qualities; prasiddhyai—for the complete manifestation.
You are the original person, one without a second, transcendental and self-manifesting. Uncaused, You are the cause of all, and You are the ultimate controller. You are nonetheless perceived in terms of the transformations of matter effected by Your illusory energy—transformations You sanction so that the various material qualities can become fully manifest.
The ācāryas comment as follows on this verse: Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī explains that the term ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ, "the original puruṣa," indicates that Lord Kṛṣṇa expands Himself as Mahā-Viṣṇu, the first of the three puruṣas who take charge of cosmic manifestation. The Lord is eka advitīyaḥ, "one without a second," because there is no one equal to the Lord or different from Him. No one is completely equal to the Supreme Godhead, and yet because all the living beings are expansions of the potency of the Godhead, no one is qualitatively different from Him. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu nicely explains this inconceivable situation by stating that the Absolute Truth and the living beings are qualitatively one but quantitatively different. The Absolute possesses infinite spiritual consciousness, whereas the living beings possess infinitesimal consciousness, which is subject to being covered by illusion.
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, commenting on the term ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ, quotes from the Sātvata-tantra: viṣṇos tu trīṇi rūpāṇi. "There are three forms of Viṣṇu [for cosmic manifestation, etc.]." Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī also quotes a statement of the Lord's from śruti: pūrvam evāham ihāsam. "In the beginning I alone existed in this world." This statement describes the form of the Lord called the puruṣa-avatāra, who exists before the cosmic manifestation. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī also quotes the following śruti-mantra: tat-puruṣasya puruṣatvam, which means "Such constitutes the Lord's status as puruṣa." Actually, Lord Kṛṣṇa is the essence of the puruṣa incarnation because He is turīya, as described in the present verse. Jīva Gosvāmī explains the term turīya (literally "the fourth") by quoting Śrīdhara Svāmī's commentary to the Bhāgavatam verse 11.15.16:
virāṭ hiraṇyagarbhaś ca
kāraṇaṁ cety upādhayaḥ
īśasya yat tribhir hīnaṁ
turīyaṁ tad vidur budhāḥ
"The Lord's universal form, His Hiraṇyagarbha form and the primeval causal manifestation of material nature are all relative conceptions, but because the Lord Himself is not covered by these three, intelligent authorities call Him 'the fourth.' "
According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, the word turīya indicates that the Lord is the fourth member of the quadruple expansion of Godhead called the Catur-vyūha. In other words, Lord Kṛṣṇa is Vāsudeva.
Lord Kṛṣṇa is sva-dṛk—that is, He alone can perceive Himself perfectly—because He is infinite spiritual existence, infinitely pure. He is hetu, the cause of everything, and yet He is ahetu, without cause. Therefore He is īśa, the supreme controller.
The last two lines of this verse are of special philosophical significance. Why is the Lord perceived differently by different persons, although He is one? A partial explanation is given here. By the agency of Māyā, the Lord's external potency, material nature is in a constant state of transformation, vikāra. In one sense, then, material nature is "unreal," asat. But because God is the supreme reality, and because He is present within all things and all things are His potency, material objects and energies possess a degree of reality. Therefore some people see one aspect of material energy and think, "This is reality," while other people see a different aspect of material energy and think, "No, that is reality." Being conditioned souls, we are covered by different configurations of material nature, and thus we describe the Supreme Truth or the Supreme Lord in terms of our corrupted vision. Yet even the covering qualities of material nature, such as our conditioned intelligence, mind and senses, are real (being the potency of the Supreme Lord), and therefore through all things we can perceive, in a more or less subjective way, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is why the present verse states, pratīyase: "You are perceived." Furthermore, without the manifestation of material nature's covering qualities, the creation could not fulfill its purpose—namely, to allow the conditioned souls to make their best attempt to enjoy without God so that they will finally understand the futility of such an illusory notion.
TEXT 39
yaTaEva s$aUyaR: ipaih"tazC$AyayaA svayaA
C$AyaAM ca ṝ&paAiNA ca s$aÂak(Aista
WvaM gAuNAenaAipaih"taAe gAuNAAMstvama,
@Atma‘ad"IpaAe gAuiNAnaê BaUmana,
yathaiva sūryaḥ pihitaś chāyayā svayā
chāyāṁ ca rūpāṇi ca sañcakāsti
evaṁ guṇenāpihito guṇāṁs tvam
ātma-pradīpo guṇinaś ca bhūman
yathā eva—just as; sūryaḥ—the sun; pihitaḥ—covered; chāyayā—by the shade; svayā—its own; chāyām—the shade; ca—and; rūpāṇi—visible forms; ca—also; sañcakāsti—illuminates; evam—similarly; guṇena—by the material quality (of false ego); apihitaḥ—covered; guṇān—the qualities of matter; tvam—You; ātma-pradīpaḥ—self-luminous; guṇinaḥ—the possessors of these qualities (the living entities); ca—and; bhūman—O almighty one.
O almighty one, just as the sun, though hidden by a cloud, illuminates the cloud and all other visible forms as well, so You, although hidden by the material qualities, remain self-luminous and thus reveal all those qualities, along with the living entities who possess them.
Here Lord Śiva further clarifies the idea expressed in the final two lines of the previous verse. The analogy of the clouds and the sun is appropriate. With its energy the sun creates clouds, which cover our vision of the sun. Yet it is the sun that allows us to see the clouds and all other things as well. Similarly, the Lord expands His illusory potency and thus prevents us from directly seeing Him. Yet it is God alone who reveals to us His covering potency—namely, the material world—and thus the Lord is ātma-pradīpa, "self-luminous." It is the reality of His existence that makes all things visible.
TEXT 40
yanmaAyaAmaAeih"taiDaya:
pau‡ad"Ar"gA{h"Aid"Sau
onmaṀainta inamaṀainta
‘as$a·(A va{ijanaANAR"vae
yan-māyā-mohita-dhiyaḥ
putra-dāra-gṛhādiṣu
unmajjanti nimajjanti
prasaktā vṛjinārṇave
yat—of whom; māyā—by the illusory energy; mohita—bewildered; dhiyaḥ—their intelligence; putra—with regard to children; dāra—wife; gṛha—home; ādiṣu—and so on; unmajjanti—they rise to the surface; nimajjanti—they become submerged; prasaktāḥ—fully entangled; vṛjina—of misery; arṇave—in the ocean.
Their intelligence bewildered by Your māyā, fully attached to children, wife, home and so on, persons immersed in the ocean of material misery sometimes rise to the surface and sometimes sink down.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī explains that "rising in the ocean of misery" indicates elevation to higher species, such as demigods, and that "being submerged" refers to degradation to lower species—even to immobile forms of life such as trees. As stated in the Vāyu Purāṇa, viparyayaś ca bhavati brahmatva-sthāvaratvayoḥ: "The living being rotates between the position of Brahmā and that of an unmoving creature."
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī points out that Śiva, having glorified the Lord, now pursues his original intention of securing the Lord's grace for Bāṇāsura. Thus in this and the following four verses, Lord Śiva instructs Bāṇa on his actual position in relation to the Lord. Śiva's appeal to the Lord for compassion toward Bāṇa appears in Text 45.
TEXT 41
de"vad"ÔaimamaM labDvaA
na{laAek(maijataein‰"ya:
yaAe naAi‰"yaeta tvatpaAd"AE
s$a zAAecyaAe ÷AtmavaÂak(:
deva-dattam imaṁ labdhvā
nṛ-lokam ajitendriyaḥ
yo nādriyeta tvat-pādau
sa śocyo hy ātma-vañcakaḥ
deva—by the Supreme Lord; dattam—given; imam—this; labdhvā—attaining; nṛ—of human beings; lokam—the world; ajita—uncontrolled; indriyaḥ—his senses; yaḥ—who; na ādriyeta—will not honor; tvat—Your; pādau—feet; saḥ—he; śocyaḥ—pitiable; hi—indeed; ātma—of himself; vañcakaḥ—a cheater.
One who has attained this human form of life as a gift from God, yet who fails to control his senses and honor Your feet, is surely to be pitied, for he is only cheating himself.
Lord Śiva here condemns those who refuse to engage in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 42
yastvaAM ivas$a{jatae matyaR
@AtmaAnaM i‘ayamaIṅr"ma,
ivapayaRyaein‰"yaATaARTa<
ivaSamaÔyama{taM tyajana,
yas tvāṁ visṛjate martya
ātmānaṁ priyam īśvaram
viparyayendriyārthārthaṁ
viṣam atty amṛtaṁ tyajan
yaḥ—who; tvām—You; visṛjate—rejects; martyaḥ—mortal man; ātmānam—his true Self; priyam—dearmost; īśvaram—Lord; viparyaya—which are just the opposite; indriya-artha—of sense objects; artham—for the sake; viṣam—poison; atti—he eats; amṛtam—nectar; tyajan—avoiding.
That mortal who rejects You—his true Self, dearmost friend, and Lord—for the sake of sense objects, whose nature is just the opposite, refuses nectar and instead consumes poison.
The person described above is pitiable because he rejects that which is actually dear, the Lord, and accepts that which is not dear and is ungodly: temporary sense gratification, which leads to suffering and bewilderment.
TEXT 43
@hM" “aṭATa ivabauDaA
maunayaêAmalaAzAyaA:
s$avaARtmanaA ‘apaªaAstvaAma,
@AtmaAnaM ‘aeñ"maIṅr"ma,
ahaṁ brahmātha vibudhā
munayaś cāmalāśayāḥ
sarvātmanā prapannās tvām
ātmānaṁ preṣṭham īśvaram
aham—I; brahmā—Brahmā; atha—and also; vibudhāḥ—the demigods; munayaḥ—the sages; ca—and; amala—pure; āśayāḥ—whose consciousness; sarva-ātmanā—wholeheartedly; prapannāḥ—surrendered; tvām—unto You; ātmānam—the Self; preṣṭham—the dearmost; īśvaram—the Lord.
I, Lord Brahmā, the other demigods and the pure-minded sages have all surrendered wholeheartedly unto You, our dearmost Self and Lord.
TEXT 44
taM tvaA jagAitsTatyaud"yaAntahe"tauM
s$amaM ‘azAAntaM s$auô$d"AtmadE"vama,
@nanyamaekM( jagAd"Atmake(taM
BavaApavagAARya BajaAma de"vama,
taṁ tvā jagat-sthity-udayānta-hetuṁ
samaṁ praśāntaṁ suhṛd-ātma-daivam
ananyam ekaṁ jagad-ātma-ketaṁ
bhavāpavargāya bhajāma devam
tam—Him; tvā—You; jagat—of the universe; sthiti—of the maintenance; udaya—the rise; anta—and the demise; hetum—the cause; samam—equipoised; praśāntam—perfectly at peace; suhṛt—the friend; ātma—Self; daivam—and worshipable Lord; ananyam—without a second; ekam—unique; jagat—of all the worlds; ātma—and all souls; ketam—the shelter; bhava—of material life; apavargāya—for the cessation; bhajāma—let us worship; devam—the Supreme Lord.
Let us worship You, the Supreme Lord, to be freed from material life. You are the maintainer of the universe and the cause of its creation and demise. Equipoised and perfectly at peace, You are the true friend, Self and worshipable Lord. You are one without a second, the shelter of all the worlds and all souls.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī states that the Lord is a true friend because He sets one's proper intelligence into motion if one desires to know the truth about God and the soul. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī both emphasize that the term bhavāpavargāya indicates the highest liberation of pure love of Godhead, characterized by unalloyed devotional service unto the Lord.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī also explains that the Supreme Lord is samam, "perfectly objective and balanced," whereas other living beings, having an incomplete grasp of reality, cannot be perfectly objective. Those who surrender unto the Lord also become fully objective by taking shelter of His supreme consciousness.
TEXT 45
@yaM mamaeí"Ae d"iyataAe'nauvataI=
mayaABayaM d"ÔamamauSya de"va
s$ampaAâtaAM taṁ"vata: ‘as$aAd"Ae
yaTaA ih" tae dE"tyapataAE ‘as$aAd":
ayaṁ mameṣṭo dayito 'nuvartī
mayābhayaṁ dattam amuṣya deva
sampādyatāṁ tad bhavataḥ prasādo
yathā hi te daitya-patau prasādaḥ
ayam—this; mama—my; iṣṭaḥ—favored; dayitaḥ—very dear; anuvartī—follower; mayā—by me; abhayam—fearlessness; dattam—given; amuṣya—his; deva—O Lord; sampādyatām—please let it be granted; tat—therefore; bhavataḥ—Your; prasādaḥ—grace; yathā—as; hi—indeed; te—Your; daitya—of the demons; patau—for the chief (Prahlāda); prasādaḥ—grace.
This Bāṇāsura is my dear and faithful follower, and I have awarded him freedom from fear. Therefore, my Lord, please grant him Your mercy, just as You showed mercy to Prahlāda, the lord of the demons.
Lord Śiva feels inclined to help Bāṇāsura because the demon showed great devotion to Lord Śiva when he provided musical accompaniment for Śiva's tāṇḍava dance. Another reason Bāṇa is an object of Lord Śiva's favor is that he is a descendant of the great devotees Prahlāda and Bali.



Song Prayers by King Nrga
TEXT 26
s$a tvaM k(TaM mama ivaBaAe'iºapaTa: par"AtmaA
yaAegAeṅr": ™auitaā{"zAAmalaô$iã"BaAvya:
s$aAºaAd"DaAeºaja oś&vyas$anaAnDabauŪe":
syaAnmae'nauā{"zya wh" yasya BavaApavagAR:
sa tvaṁ kathaṁ mama vibho 'kṣi-pathaḥ parātmā
yogeśvaraḥ śruti-dṛśāmala-hṛd-vibhāvyaḥ
sākṣād adhokṣaja uru-vyasanāndha-buddheḥ
syān me 'nudṛśya iha yasya bhavāpavargaḥ
saḥ—He; tvam—Yourself; katham—how; mama—to me; vibho—O almighty one; akṣi-pathaḥ—visible; para-ātmā—the Supreme Soul; yoga—of mystic yoga; īśvaraiḥ—by masters; śruti—of the scriptures; dṛśā—by the eye; amala—spotless; hṛt—within their hearts; vibhāvyaḥ—to be meditated upon; sākṣāt—directly visible; adhokṣaja—O transcendental Lord, who cannot be seen by material senses; uru—severe; vyasana—by troubles; andha—blinded; buddheḥ—whose intelligence; syāt—it may be; me—for me; anudṛśyaḥ—to be perceived; iha—in this world; yasya—whose; bhava—of material life; apavargaḥ—cessation.
O almighty one, how is it that my eyes see You here before me? You are the Supreme Soul, whom the greatest masters of mystic yoga can meditate upon within their pure hearts only by employing the spiritual eye of the Vedas. Then how, O transcendental Lord, are You directly visible to me, since my intelligence has been blinded by the severe tribulations of material life? Only one who has finished his material entanglement in this world should be able to see You.
Even in the body of a lizard, King Nṛga could remember his previous life. And now that he had the opportunity to see the Lord, he could understand that he had received special mercy from the Personality of Godhead.
TEXTS 27-28
de"vade"va jagAªaATa
gAAeivand" pauś&SaAeÔama
naAr"AyaNA ô$SaIke(zA
pauNyaṇAek(AcyautaAvyaya
@naujaAnaIih" maAM k{(SNA
yaAntaM de"vagAitaM ‘aBaAe
ya‡a ¸(Aipa s$ataêetaAe
BaUyaAnmae tvatpad"As$pad"ma,
deva-deva jagan-nātha
govinda puruṣottama
nārāyaṇa hṛṣīkeśa
puṇya-ślokācyutāvyaya
anujānīhi māṁ kṛṣṇa
yāntaṁ deva-gatiṁ prabho
yatra kvāpi sataś ceto
bhūyān me tvat-padāspadam
deva-deva—O Lord of lords; jagat—of the universe; nātha—O master; go-vinda—O Lord of the cows; puruṣa-uttama—O Supreme Personality; nārāyaṇa—O foundation of all living beings; hṛṣīkeśa—O master of the senses; puṇya-śloka—O You who are glorified in transcendental poetry; acyuta—O infallible one; avyaya—O undiminishing one; anujānīhi—please give leave; mām—to me; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; yāntam—who am going; deva-gatim—to the world of the demigods; prabho—O master; yatra kva api—wherever; sataḥ—residing; cetaḥ—the mind; bhūyāt—may it be; me—my; tvat—Your; pada—of the feet; āspadam—whose shelter.
O Devadeva, Jagannātha, Govinda, Puruṣottama, Nārāyaṇa, Hṛṣīkeśa, Puṇyaśloka, Acyuta, Avyaya! O Kṛṣṇa, please permit me to depart for the world of the demigods. Wherever I live, O master, may my mind always take shelter of Your feet.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī comments as follows on this verse: His faith emboldened upon receiving the Lord's mercy and thus attaining the status of servitude, King Nṛga properly glorifies the Lord by chanting His names and then asks the Lord's permission to take his leave. The spirit of his prayer is as follows: "You are Devadeva, God even of the gods, and Jagannātha, the master of the universe, so please be my master. O Govinda, please make me Your property with the same merciful glance You use to enchant the cows. You can do this because You are Puruṣottama, the supreme form of Godhead. O Nārāyaṇa, since You are the foundation of the living entities, please be my support, even though I am a bad living entity. O Hṛṣīkeśa, please make my senses Your own. O Puṇyaśloka, now You have become famous as the deliverer of Nṛga. O Acyuta, please never be lost to my mind. O Avyaya, You will never diminish in my mind." Thus the great Bhāgavatam commentator Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī explains the purport of these verses.
TEXT 29
namastae s$avaRBaAvaAya
“aṭNAe'nantazA·(yae
k{(SNAAya vaAs$aude"vaAya
yaAegAAnaAM patayae nama:
namas te sarva-bhāvāya
brahmaṇe 'nanta-śaktaye
kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya
yogānāṁ pataye namaḥ
namaḥ—obeisances; te—to You; sarva-bhāvāya—the source of all beings; brahmaṇe—the Supreme Absolute Truth; ananta—unlimited; śaktaye—the possessor of potencies; kṛṣṇāya—to Kṛṣṇa; vāsudevāya—the son of Vasudeva; yogānām—of all processes of yoga; pataye—to the Lord; namaḥ—obeisances.
I offer my repeated obeisances unto You, Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva. You are the source of all beings, the Supreme Absolute Truth, the possessor of unlimited potencies, the master of all spiritual disciplines.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī comments that King Nṛga here offers his obeisances to Brahman—that is, the Absolute Truth—who is unchanged in spite of performing activities. Since ancient times, Western philosophers have puzzled over the question of how God can be unchanging and yet perform activities. Śrīdhara Svāmī states that this doubt is answered here by the term ananta-śaktaye, which describes the Lord as "the possessor of unlimited potency." Thus through the Lord's infinite potencies He can perform innumerable activities without changing His essential nature.
The king further offers his obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the possessor of the form of eternal bliss and the supreme goal of life. The holy name of Kṛṣṇa is analyzed in a verse from the Mahābhārata (Udyoga-parva 71.4), which Śrīla Prabhupāda quotes in his Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 9.30, purport):
kṛṣir bhū-vācakaḥ śabdo
ṇaś ca nirvṛti-vācakaḥ
tayor aikyaṁ paraṁ brahma
kṛṣṇa ity abhidhīyate
"The word kṛṣ is the attractive feature of the Lord's existence, and na means 'spiritual pleasure.' When the verb kṛṣ is added to na, it becomes kṛṣṇa, which indicates the Absolute Truth."
King Nṛga offers the above prayers as he is about to leave the personal association of the Supreme Lord.


Song Players by Yamuna Devi to Lord Balarama
TEXT 28
r"Ama r"Ama mah"AbaAh"Ae
na jaAnae tava iva‚(mama,
yasyaEk(AMzAena ivaDa{taA
jagAtaI jagAta: patae
rāma rāma mahā-bāho
na jāne tava vikramam
yasyaikāṁśena vidhṛtā
jagatī jagataḥ pate
rāma rāma—O Rāma, Rāma; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; na jāne—I do not appreciate; tava—Your; vikramam—prowess; yasya—whose; eka—one; aṁśena—by a portion; vidhṛtā—is sustained; jagatī—the earth; jagataḥ—of the universe; pate—O master.
[Goddess Yamunā said:] Rāma, Rāma, O mighty-armed one! I know nothing of Your prowess. With a single portion of Yourself You hold up the earth, O Lord of the universe.
The phrase ekāṁśena ("with a single portion") refers to the Lord's expansion as Śeṣa. This is confirmed by the ācāryas.
TEXT 29
parM" BaAvaM BagAvataAe
BagAvanmaAmajaAnataIma,
maAe·u(mahR"is$a ivaṅAtmana,
‘apaªaAM Ba·(vats$ala
paraṁ bhāvaṁ bhagavato
bhagavan mām ajānatīm
moktum arhasi viśvātman
prapannāṁ bhakta-vatsala
param—supreme; bhāvam—the status; bhagavataḥ—of the Personality of Godhead; bhagavan—O Supreme Lord; mām—me; ajānatīm—not knowing; moktum arhasi—please release; viśva—of the universe; ātman—O soul; prapannām—surrendered; bhakta—to Your devotees; vatsala—O You who are compassionate.
My Lord, please release me. O soul of the universe, I didn't understand Your position as the Supreme Godhead, but now I have surrendered unto You, and You are always kind to Your devotees.



Song Players by Narada Muni
TEXT 17
™aInaAr"d" ovaAca
naEvaAṁu"taM tvaiya ivaBaAe'iKalalaAek(naATae
maE‡aI janaeSau s$ak(laeSau d"ma: KalaAnaAma,
ina:™aeyas$aAya ih" jagAitsTaitar"ºaNAAByaAM
svaEr"AvataAr" oś&gAAya ivad"Ama s$auñ]"
śrī-nārada uvāca
naivādbhutaṁ tvayi vibho 'khila-loka-nāthe
maitrī janeṣu sakaleṣu damaḥ khalānām
niḥśreyasāya hi jagat-sthiti-rakṣaṇābhyāṁ
svairāvatāra urugāya vidāma suṣṭhu
śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca—Śrī Nārada said; na—not; eva—at all; adbhutam—surprising; tvayi—for You; vibho—O almighty one; akhila—of all; loka—worlds; nāthe—for the ruler; maitrī—friendship; janeṣu—toward people; sakaleṣu—all; damaḥ—the subduing; khalānām—of the envious; niḥśreyasāya—for the highest benefit; hi—indeed; jagat—of the universe; sthiti—by maintenance; rakṣaṇābhyām—and protection; svaira—freely chosen; avatāraḥ—descent; uru-gāya—O You who are praised universally; vidāma—we know; suṣṭhu—well.
Śrī Nārada said: O almighty Lord, it is no surprise that You, the ruler of all worlds, show friendship for all people and yet subdue the envious. As we well know, You descend by Your sweet will in order to bestow the highest good on this universe by maintaining and protecting it. Thus Your glories are widely sung.
As pointed out by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, all living beings are in fact servants of the Lord. The ācārya quotes the following verse from the Padma Purāṇa to elucidate:
a-kāreṇocyate viṣṇuḥ
śrīr u-kāreṇa kathyate
ma-kāras tu tayor dāsaḥ
pañca-viṁśaḥ prakīrtitaḥ
"[In the mantra om] the letter a signifies Lord Viṣṇu, the letter u signifies the goddess Śrī, and the letter m refers to their servant, who is the twenty-fifth element." The twenty-fifth element is the jīva, the living being. Every living being is a servant of the Lord, and the Lord is the true friend of every living being. Thus even when the Lord chastises envious persons like Jarāsandha, such punishment amounts to real friendship, since both the Lord's chastisement and His blessing are for the benefit of the living being.
TEXT 18
ā{"íM" tavaAx.~i„ayaugAlaM janataApavagA<
“aṭAid"iBaôR$id" ivaicantyamagAADabaAeDaE: 
s$aMs$aAr"kU(papaitataAeÔar"NAAvalambaM
DyaAyaMêr"AmyanaugA{h"ANA yaTaA sma{ita: syaAta,
dṛṣṭaṁ tavāṅghri-yugalaṁ janatāpavargaṁ
brahmādibhir hṛdi vicintyam agādha-bodhaiḥ 
saṁsāra-kūpa-patitottaraṇāvalambaṁ
dhyāyaṁś carāmy anugṛhāṇa yathā smṛtiḥ syāt
dṛṣṭam—seen; tava—Your; aṅghri—of feet; yugalam—pair; janatā—for Your devotees; apavargam—the source of liberation; brahma-ādibhiḥ—by persons such as Lord Brahmā; hṛdi—within the heart; vicintyam—meditated upon; agādha—unfathomable; bodhaiḥ—whose intelligence; saṁsāra—of material life; kūpa—in the well; patita—of those who are fallen; uttaraṇa—for deliverance; avalambam—the shelter; dhyāyan—constantly thinking; carāmi—I may travel; anugṛhāṇa—please bless me; yathā—so that; smṛtiḥ—remembrance; syāt—may be.
Now I have seen Your feet, which grant liberation to Your devotees, which even Lord Brahmā and other great personalities of unfathomable intelligence can only meditate upon within their hearts, and which those who have fallen into the well of material existence resort to for deliverance. Please favor me so that I may constantly think of You as I travel about. Please grant Me the power to remember You.
Lord Kṛṣṇa had asked Nārada Muni, "What can We do for you?" and here Nārada answers. Nārada Muni is a pure devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and thus his request is sublime.


Song Players by Narada Muni
TEXT 38
ivad"Ama yaAegAmaAyaAstae
āu"dR"zAAR @ipa maAiyanaAma,
yaAegAeṅr"AtmaiªaBaARtaA
BavatpaAd"inaSaevayaA
vidāma yoga-māyās te
durdarśā api māyinām
yogeśvarātman nirbhātā
bhavat-pāda-niṣevayā
vidāma—we know; yoga-māyāḥ—the mystic potencies; te—Your; durdarśāḥ—impossible to see; api—even; māyinām—for great mystics; yoga-īśvara—O Lord of all mystic power; ātman—O Supreme Soul; nirbhātāḥ—perceived; bhavat—Your; pāda—to the feet; niṣevayā—by service.
[Nārada said:] Now we understand Your mystic potencies, which are difficult to comprehend, even for great mystics, O Supreme Soul, master of all mystic power. Only by serving Your feet have I been able to perceive Your powers.
According to the ācāryas, this verse indicates that even great mystics like Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva cannot fully comprehend the mystic power of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 39
@naujaAnaIih" maAM de"va
laAek(AMstae yazAs$aAplautaAna,
payaRq%Aima tavaAeÕ"Ayana,
laIlaA BauvanapaAvanaI:
anujānīhi māṁ deva
lokāṁs te yaśasāplutān
paryaṭāmi tavodgāyan
līlā bhuvana-pāvanīḥ
anujānīhi—please give leave; mām—to me; deva—O Lord; lokān—the worlds; te—Your; yaśasā—with the fame; āplutān—flooded; paryaṭāmi—I will wander; tava—Your; udgāyan—loudly singing; līlāḥ—the pastimes; bhuvana—all the planetary systems; pāvanīḥ—which purify.
O Lord, please give me Your leave. I will wander about the worlds, which are flooded with Your fame, loudly singing about Your pastimes, which purify the universe.
Even Nārada Muni was bewildered to see Lord Kṛṣṇa's amazing pastimes as a human being. Therefore, with the words anujānīhi māṁ deva he requests permission to return to his normal service of traveling and preaching. Inspired by what he has seen, he wants to preach widely the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.


Song Players by Jailed Kings to Krsna
TEXT 25
r"AjaAna Ocau:
k{(SNA k{(SNAA‘amaeyaAtmana,
‘apaªaBayaBaÃana
vayaM tvaAM zAr"NAM yaAmaAe
BavaBaItaA: pa{TaigDaya:
rājāna ūcuḥ
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇāprameyātman
prapanna-bhaya-bhañjana
vayaṁ tvāṁ śaraṇaṁ yāmo
bhava-bhītāḥ pṛthag-dhiyaḥ
rājānaḥ—the kings; ūcuḥ—said; kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa; aprameya-ātman—O immeasurable Soul; prapanna—of those who are surrendered; bhaya—the fear; bhañjana—O You who destroy; vayam—we; tvām—to You; śaraṇam—for shelter; yāmaḥ—have come; bhava—of material existence; bhītāḥ—afraid; pṛthak—separate; dhiyaḥ—whose mentality.
The kings said [as related through their messenger]: O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, O immeasurable Soul, destroyer of fear for those surrendered to You ! Despite our separatist attitude, we have come to You for shelter out of fear of material existence.
Śrīdhara Svāmī explains that the kings present their entreaty in this and the following five verses. In this verse they take shelter of the Lord, in the next three verses they describe their fear, and in the last two verses they make their prayerful request.
TEXT 26
laAek(Ae ivak(maRinar"ta: ku(zAlae ‘amaÔa:
k(maRNyayaM tvaāu"id"tae Bavad"caR"nae svae
yastaAvad"sya balavaAinah" jaIivataAzAAM
s$aâizC$naÔyainaimaSaAya namaAe'stau tasmaE
loko vikarma-nirataḥ kuśale pramattaḥ
karmaṇy ayaṁ tvad-udite bhavad-arcane sve
yas tāvad asya balavān iha jīvitāśāṁ
sadyaś chinatty animiṣāya namo 'stu tasmai
lokaḥ—the whole world; vikarma—to sinful activities; nirataḥ—always attached; kuśale—which are for their benefit; pramattaḥ—bewildered; karmaṇi—about duties; ayam—this (world); tvat—by You; udite—spoken; bhavat—of You; arcane—the worship; sve—their own (beneficial engagement); yaḥ—who; tāvat—inasmuch; asya—of this (world); bala-vān—powerful; iha—in this life; jīvita—for longevity; āśām—hope; sadyaḥ—suddenly; chinatti—cuts off; animiṣāya—to "unblinking" time; namaḥ—obeisances; astu—may there be; tasmai—to Him.
People in this world are always engaged in sinful activities and are thus bewildered about their real duty, which is to worship You according to Your commandments. This activity would truly bring them good fortune. Let us offer our obeisances unto the all-powerful Lord, who appears as time and suddenly cuts down one's stubborn hope for a long life in this world.
Lord Kṛṣṇa states in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.27),
yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi
yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam
"Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer or give away, and whatever austerities you perform—do that, O son of Kuntī, as an offering to Me."
This is the Supreme Lord's commandment, but people in general are bewildered and neglect this auspicious activity, preferring instead to perform sinful activities that lead them to terrible suffering. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is working to enlighten the world about this most essential activity of loving service to the Lord.
TEXT 27
laAeke( BavaAÃagAid"na: k(layaAvataINAR:
s$a‰"ºaNAAya Kalainaƒah"NAAya caAnya:
k(iêÔvad"IyamaitayaAita inade"zAmaIzA
ikM( vaA jana: svak{(tama{cC$ita taªa ivaá:
loke bhavāñ jagad-inaḥ kalayāvatīrṇaḥ
sad-rakṣaṇāya khala-nigrahaṇāya cānyaḥ
kaścit tvadīyam atiyāti nideśam īśa
kiṁ vā janaḥ sva-kṛtam ṛcchati tan na vidmaḥ
loke—into this world; bhavān—You; jagat—of the universe; inaḥ—the predominator; kalayā—with Your expansion Baladeva, or with Your time potency; avatīrṇaḥ—having descended; sat—the saintly; rakṣaṇāya—to protect; khala—the wicked; nigrahaṇāya—to subdue; ca—and; anyaḥ—other; kaścit—someone; tvadīyam—Your; atiyāti—transgresses; nideśam—the law; īśa—O Lord; kim vā—or else; janaḥ—a person; sva—by himself; kṛtam—created; ṛcchati—obtains; tat—that; na vidmaḥ—we do not understand.
You are the predominating Lord of the universe and have descended into this world with Your personal power to protect the saintly and suppress the wicked. We cannot understand, O Lord, how anyone can transgress Your law and still continue to enjoy the fruits of his work.
Śrīdhara Svāmī explains that the kings were bewildered by the suffering that had come upon them. They state here that since the Lord has descended to this world to protect the pious and punish the wicked, how is it that Jarāsandha, who brazenly transgressed the order of the Lord, continued to perform his wicked activities, whereas the kings were put into a miserable condition? Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura similarly states that the kings could not understand how Jarāsandha, who harassed the saintly devotees and nourished the envious, could continue to prosper, whereas the kings were being tormented by the wicked Jarāsandha. Similarly Śrīla Prabhupāda quotes the kings as follows in Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead: "Dear Lord, You are the proprietor of all the worlds, and You have incarnated Yourself along with Your plenary expansion Lord Balarāma. It is said that Your appearance in this incarnation is for the purpose of protecting the faithful and destroying the miscreants. Under the circumstances, how is it possible that miscreants like Jarāsandha can put us into such deplorable conditions of life against Your authority? We are puzzled at the situation and cannot understand how it is possible. It may be that Jarāsandha has been deputed to give us such trouble because of our past misdeeds, but we have heard from revealed scriptures that anyone who surrenders unto Your lotus feet is immediately immune to the reactions of sinful life. We therefore offer ourselves wholeheartedly unto Your shelter, and we hope that Your Lordship will now give us full protection."
TEXT 28
sva«aAiyataM na{pas$auKaM par"tan‡amaIzA
zAṅṁ"yaena ma{take(na DaurM" vah"Ama:
ih"tvaA tad"Atmaina s$auKaM tvad"naIh"laByaM
iflazyaAmahe"'itak{(paNAAstava maAyayaeh"
svapnāyitaṁ nṛpa-sukhaṁ para-tantram īśa
śaśvad-bhayena mṛtakena dhuraṁ vahāmaḥ
hitvā tad ātmani sukhaṁ tvad-anīha-labhyaṁ
kliśyāmahe 'ti-kṛpaṇās tava māyayeha
svapnāyitam—like a dream; nṛpa—of kings; sukham—the happiness; para-tantram—conditional; īśa—O Lord; śaśvat—perpetually; bhayena—full of fear; mṛtakena—with this corpse; dhuram—burden; vahāmaḥ—we carry; hitvā—rejecting; tat—that; ātmani—within the self; sukham—happiness; tvat—done for You; anīha—by selfless works; labhyam—to be obtained; kliśyāmahe—we suffer; ati—extremely; kṛpaṇāḥ—wretched; tava—Your; māyayā—with the illusory energy; iha—in this world.
O Lord, with this corpselike body, always full of fear, we bear the burden of the relative happiness of kings, which is just like a dream. Thus we have rejected the real happiness of the soul, which comes by rendering selfless service to You. Being so very wretched, we simply suffer in this life under the spell of Your illusory energy.
After expressing their doubts in the previous verse, the kings herein admit that actually they are suffering because of their own foolishness, having given up the eternal happiness of the soul in exchange for the temporary, conditional happiness of a so-called kingly position. Most people make a similar mistake, desiring wealth, power, prestige, aristocratic family and so on, in exchange for their own soul. The kings admit that they have fallen under the spell of the Lord's illusory energy and have mistaken the tremendous anxiety of political leadership for happiness.
TEXT 29
taªaAe BavaAna, ‘aNAtazAAek(h"r"Ax.~i„ayaugmaAe
baŪ"Ana, ivayaux.~ºva magADaAḥ"yak(maRpaAzAAta,
yaAe BaUBaujaAe'yautamataṆḷjavaIyaRmaek(Ae
iba”aṛu"r"AeDa Bavanae ma{gAr"Aix"vaAvaI:
tan no bhavān praṇata-śoka-harāṅghri-yugmo
baddhān viyuṅkṣva magadhāhvaya-karma-pāśāt
yo bhū-bhujo 'yuta-mataṅgaja-vīryam eko
bibhrad rurodha bhavane mṛga-rāḍ ivāvīḥ
tat—therefore; naḥ—us; bhavān—Your good self; praṇata—of those who have surrendered; śoka—the sorrow; hara—which remove; aṅghri—of feet; yugmaḥ—whose pair; baddhān—bound; viyuṅkṣva—please release; magadha-āhvaya—going by the name Magadha (Jarāsandha); karma—of fruitive work; pāśāt—from the fetters; yaḥ—who; bhū-bhujaḥ—kings; ayuta—ten thousand; matam—maddened; gaja—of elephants; vīryam—the prowess; ekaḥ—alone; bibhrat—wielding; rurodha—imprisoned; bhavane—in His residence; mṛga-rāṭ—the lion, king of the animals; iva—just as; avīḥ—sheep.
Therefore, since Your feet relieve the sorrow of those who surrender to them, please release us prisoners from the shackles of karma, manifest as the king of Magadha. Wielding alone the prowess of ten thousand maddened elephants, he has locked us up in his house just as a lion captures sheep.
The kings here pray for the Lord to release them from the bondage of karma created by the Lord's material potency. The kings make it clear that Jarāsandha is so powerful that there is no hope for them to escape by their own power.
TEXT 30
yaAe vaE tvayaA iã"navak{(tva od"AÔaca‚(
Ba¢aAe ma{Dae Kalau BavantamanantavaIyaRma,
ijatvaA na{laAek(inar"taM s$ak{(āU"X#d"paAeR
yauSmat‘ajaA ś&jaita naAe'ijata taiã"Daeih"
yo vai tvayā dvi-nava-kṛtva udātta-cakra
bhagno mṛdhe khalu bhavantam ananta-vīryam
jitvā nṛ-loka-nirataṁ sakṛd ūḍha-darpo
yuṣmat-prajā rujati no 'jita tad vidhehi
yaḥ—who; vai—indeed; tvayā—by You; dvi—twice; nava—nine; kṛtvaḥ—times; udātta—upraised; cakra—O You whose disc weapon; bhagnaḥ—crushed; mṛdhe—in battle; khalu—surely; bhavantam—You; ananta—unlimited; vīryam—whose power; jitvā—defeating; nr-loka—in human affairs; niratam—absorbed; sakṛt—only once; ūḍha—inflated; darpaḥ—whose pride; yuṣmat—Your; prajāḥ—subjects; rujati—torments; naḥ—us; ajita—O unconquerable one; tat—that; vidhehi—please rectify.
O wielder of the disc! Your strength is unlimited, and thus seventeen times You crushed Jarāsandha in battle. But then, absorbed in human affairs, You allowed him to defeat You once. Now he is so filled with pride that he dares to torment us, Your subjects. O unconquerable one, please rectify this situation.
The word nṛ-loka-niratam indicates that the Lord was absorbed in playing within the world of human beings. Thus, while acting like a human king He allowed Jarāsandha to be victorious in a single battle after the Lord had crushed him seventeen times. The kings here imply that Jarāsandha is especially harassing them because they are souls surrendered to Lord Kṛṣṇa. Therefore they beg the Lord, "O You who hold the cakra weapon high, please make the proper arrangement."
Śrīla Prabhupāda expresses the kings' feelings as follows: "My dear Lord, You have already fought with Jarāsandha eighteen times consecutively, out of which You have defeated him seventeen times by surpassing his extraordinary powerful position. But in Your eighteenth fight You exhibited Your human behavior, and thus it appeared that You were defeated. My dear Lord, we know very well that Jarāsandha cannot defeat You at any time, because Your power, strength, resources and authority are all unlimited. No one can equal You or surpass You. The appearance of defeat by Jarāsandha in the eighteenth engagement is nothing but an exhibition of human behavior. Unfortunately, foolish Jarāsandha could not understand Your tricks, and he has since then become puffed up over his material power and prestige. Specifically, he has arrested us and imprisoned us, knowing fully that as Your devotees, we are subordinate to Your sovereignty."


Song Prayers by Kings after their Release
TEXT 8
r"AjaAna Ocau:
namastae de"vade"vaezA
‘apaªaAitaRh"r"Avyaya
‘apaªaAna, paAih" na: k{(SNA
inaivaRNNAAna, GaAer"s$aMs$a{tae:
rājāna ūcuḥ
namas te deva-deveśa
prapannārti-harāvyaya
prapannān pāhi naḥ kṛṣṇa
nirviṇṇān ghora-saṁsṛteḥ
rājānaḥ ūcuḥ—the kings said; namaḥ—obeisances; te—to You; deva—of the demigods; deva—of the lords; īśa—O Supreme Lord; prapanna—of those who are surrendered; ārti—of the distress; hara—O remover; avyaya—O inexhaustible one; prapannān—surrendered; pāhi—please save; naḥ—us; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; nirviṇṇān—despondent; ghora—terrible; saṁsṛteḥ—from material existence.
The kings said: Obeisances to You, O Lord of the ruling demigods, O destroyer of Your surrendered devotees' distress. Since we have surrendered to You, O inexhaustible Kṛṣṇa, please save us from this terrible material life, which has made us so despondent.
TEXT 9
naEnaM naATaAnaus$aUyaAmaAe
maAgADaM maDaus$aUd"na
@nauƒah"Ae yaṁ"vataAe
r"AÁaAM r"AjyacyauitaivaRBaAe
nainaṁ nāthānusūyāmo
māgadhaṁ madhusūdana
anugraho yad bhavato
rājñāṁ rājya-cyutir vibho
na—not; enam—with this; nātha—O master; anusūyāmaḥ—do we find fault; māgadham—the king of Magadha; madhusūdana—O Kṛṣṇa; anugrahaḥ—mercy; yat—since; bhavataḥ—Your; rājñām—of kings; rājya—from their dominion; cyutiḥ—the falling; vibho—O almighty one.
O master, Madhusūdana, we do not blame this King of Magadha, since it is actually by Your mercy that kings fall from their royal position, O almighty Lord.
It is significant that upon seeing Lord Kṛṣṇa and thus becoming purified of their sins, the kings did not feel any mundane hatred or bitterness toward Jarāsandha, who had imprisoned them. Simply by seeing Lord Kṛṣṇa, the kings came to the position of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and spoke these verses, which show deep spiritual wisdom.
TEXT 10
r"AjyaEṅyaRmad"AeªaŪ"Ae
na ™aeyaAe ivand"tae na{pa:
tvanmaAyaAmaAeih"taAe'inatyaA
manyatae s$ampad"Ae'calaA:
rājyaiśvarya-madonnaddho
na śreyo vindate nṛpaḥ
tvan-māyā-mohito 'nityā
manyate sampado 'calāḥ
rājya—with sovereignty; aiśvarya—and opulence; mada—by the intoxication; unnaddhaḥ—becoming unrestrained; na—does not; śreyaḥ—real benefit; vindate—obtain; nṛpaḥ—a king; tvat—Your; māyā—by the potency of illusion; mohitaḥ—deluded; anityāḥ—temporary; manyate—he thinks; sampadaḥ—assets; acalāḥ—permanent.
Infatuated with his opulence and ruling power, a king loses all self-restraint and cannot obtain his true welfare. Thus bewildered by Your illusory energy, he imagines his temporary assets to be permanent.
The word unnaddha indicates that one who is intoxicated by false pride goes beyond the boundaries of proper behavior. Human life is meant to be governed by dharma, spiritual principles for gradual advancement to the perfection of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Blinded by wealth and power, however, a foolish person does not hesitate to act whimsically, against the laws of nature and God. Unfortunately, this is now the situation in the prosperous Western countries.
TEXT 11
ma{gAta{SNAAM yaTaA baAlaA
manyanta od"k(AzAyama,
WvaM vaEk(Air"k(LM maAyaAma,
@yau·(A vastau caºatae
mṛga-tṛṣṇāṁ yathā bālā
manyanta udakāśayam
evaṁ vaikārikīṁ māyām
ayuktā vastu cakṣate
mṛga-tṛṣṇām—a mirage; yathā—as; bālāḥ—men of childish intelligence; manyante—consider; udaka—of water; āśayam—a reservoir; evam—in the same way; vaikārikīm—subject to transformations; māyām—the material illusion; ayuktāḥ—those who lack discrimination; vastu—substance; cakṣate—see as.
Just as men of childish intelligence consider a mirage in the desert to be a pond of water, so those who are irrational look upon the illusory transformations of Māyā as substantial.
TEXTS 12-13
vayaM paur"A ™aImad"naí"ā{"í"yaAe
ijagAISayaAsyaA wtare"tar"s$pa{Da:
£anta: ‘ajaA: svaA @itainaGa{RNAA: ‘aBaAe
ma{tyauM paur"stvaAivagANAyya āu"maRd"A:
ta Wva k{(SNAAâ gABaIr"rM"h"s$aA
āu"r"ntaevaIyaeRNA ivacaAilataA: i™aya:
k(Alaena tanvaA BavataAe'nauk(mpayaA
ivanaí"d"paARêr"NAAE smar"Ama tae
vayaṁ purā śrī-mada-naṣṭa-dṛṣṭayo
jigīṣayāsyā itaretara-spṛdhaḥ
ghnantaḥ prajāḥ svā ati-nirghṛṇāḥ prabho
mṛtyuṁ puras tvāvigaṇayya durmadāḥ
ta eva kṛṣṇādya gabhīra-raṁhasā
durante-vīryeṇa vicālitāḥ śriyaḥ
kālena tanvā bhavato 'nukampayā
vinaṣṭa-darpāś caraṇau smarāma te
vayam—we; purā—previously; śrī—of opulence; mada—by the intoxication; naṣṭa—lost; dṛṣṭayaḥ—whose sight; jigīṣayā—with the desire of conquering; asyāḥ—this (earth); itara-itara—with one another; spṛdhaḥ—quarreling; ghnantaḥ—attacking; prajāḥ—citizens; svāḥ—our own; ati—extremely; nirghṛṇāḥ—cruel; prabho—O Lord; mṛtyum—death; puraḥ—in front; tvā—You; avigaṇayya—disregarding; durmadāḥ—arrogant; te—they (ourselves); eva—indeed; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; adya—now; gabhīra—mysterious; raṁhasā—whose movement; duranta—irresistible; vīryeṇa—whose power; vicālitāḥ—forced to depart; śriyaḥ—from our opulence; kālena—by time; tanvā—Your personal form; bhavataḥ—Your; anukampayā—by the mercy; vinaṣṭa—destroyed; darpāḥ—whose pride; caraṇau—the two feet; smarāma—may we remember; te—Your.
Previously, blinded by the intoxication of riches, we wanted to conquer this earth, and thus we fought one another to achieve victory, mercilessly harassing our own subjects. We arrogantly disregarded You, O Lord, who stood before us as death. But now, O Kṛṣṇa, that powerful form of Yours called time, moving mysteriously and irresistibly, has deprived us of our opulences. Now that You have mercifully destroyed our pride, we beg simply to remember Your lotus feet.
TEXT 14
@TaAe na r"Ajyamma{gAta{iSNAṝ&ipataM
de"he"na zAṅtpatataA ś&jaAM BauvaA
opaAis$atavyaM s$pa{h"yaAmahe" ivaBaAe
i‚(yaAP(laM ‘aetya ca k(NARr"Aecanama,
atho na rājyam mṛga-tṛṣṇi-rūpitaṁ
dehena śaśvat patatā rujāṁ bhuvā
upāsitavyaṁ spṛhayāmahe vibho
kriyā-phalaṁ pretya ca karṇa-rocanam
atha u—henceforward; na—not; rājyam—kingdom; mṛga-tṛṣṇi—like a mirage; rūpitam—which appears; dehena—by the material body; śaśvat—perpetually; patatā—subject to demise; rujām—of diseases; bhuvā—the birthplace; upāsitavyam—to be served; spṛhayāmahe—do we hanker for; vibho—O almighty Lord; kriyā—of pious work; phalam—the fruit; pretya—having passed to the next life; ca—and; karṇa—for the ears; rocanam—enticement.
Never again will we hanker for a miragelike kingdom—a kingdom that must be slavishly served by this mortal body, which is simply a source of disease and suffering and which is declining at every moment. Nor, O almighty Lord, will we hanker to enjoy the heavenly fruits of pious work in the next life, since the promise of such rewards is simply an empty enticement for the ears.
One must work very hard to maintain a kingdom or political sovereignty. And yet the body, which works so hard to maintain one's political power, is itself doomed. At every moment the mortal body moves toward death, and all along the way the body is subject to many painful diseases. The whole affair of mundane power is thus a waste of time for the pure soul, who needs to revive his dormant Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
The Vedic scriptures and other religious scriptures contain many promises of prosperity and heavenly enjoyment in the next life for one who acts piously in this life. Such promises are pleasing to the ears, but they are nothing more than that. Material enjoyment, whether in heaven or in hell, is a type of illusion for the pure soul. By the personal association of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the fortunate kings have now realized the higher spiritual reality beyond the phantasmagoria of the material creation.
TEXT 15
taM na: s$amaAid"zAAepaAyaM
yaena tae car"NAAbjayaAe:
sma{itayaRTaA na ivar"maeā,"
@ipa s$aMs$ar"taAimah"
taṁ naḥ samādiśopāyaṁ
yena te caraṇābjayoḥ
smṛtir yathā na viramed
api saṁsaratām iha
tam—that; naḥ—to us; samādiśa—please instruct; upāyam—the means; yena—by which; te—Your; caraṇa—of the feet; abjayoḥ—lotuslike; smṛtiḥ—remembrance; yathā—as; na viramet—may not cease; api—even; saṁsaratām—for those traveling through the cycle of birth and death; iha—in this world.
Please tell us how we may constantly remember Your lotus feet, though we continue in the cycle of birth and death in this world.
One can constantly remember the Lord only by His mercy. Such remembrance is the easy method to obtain supreme liberation, as explained in the Bhagavad-gītā (8.14):
ananya-cetāḥ satataṁ
yo māṁ smarati nityaśaḥ
tasyāhaṁ sulabhaḥ pārtha
nitya-yuktasya yoginaḥ
"For one who always remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O son of Pṛthā, because of his constant engagement in devotional service."
The words api saṁsaratām iha indicate that the kings were approaching Lord Kṛṣṇa not merely for liberation but rather for the boon of always being able to remember His lotus feet. Such constant remembrance is a symptom of love, and love of Godhead is the actual goal of life.
TEXT 16
k{(SNAAya vaAs$aude"vaAya
h"r"yae par"maAtmanae
‘aNAtaflaezAnaAzAAya
gAAeivand"Aya namaAe nama:
kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya
haraye paramātmane
praṇata-kleśa-nāśāya
govindāya namo namaḥ
kṛṣṇāya—to Kṛṣṇa; vāsudevāya—the son of Vasudeva; haraye—the Supreme Lord, Hari; parama-ātmane—the Supersoul; praṇata—of those who have surrendered; kleśa—of the distress; nāśāya—to the destroyer; govindāya—to Govinda; namaḥ namaḥ—repeated obeisances.


Song Prayers by Yudhisthira Maharaja to Krsna
TEXT 2
™aIyauiDaiñ"r" ovaAca
yae syauṣElaAefyagAur"va:
s$avaeR laAek(A mahe"ṅr"A:
vah"inta āu"laRBaM labã"A
izAr"s$aEvaAnauzAAs$anama,
śrī-yudhiṣṭhira uvāca
ye syus trai-lokya-guravaḥ
sarve lokā maheśvarāḥ
vahanti durlabhaṁ labdvā
śirasaivānuśāsanam
śrī-yudhiṣṭhiraḥ uvāca—Śrī Yudhiṣṭhira said; ye—who; syuḥ—there are; trai-lokya—of the three worlds; guravaḥ—spiritual masters; sarve—all; lokāḥ—(the inhabitants of) the planets; mahā-īśvarāḥ—and the great controlling demigods; vahanti—they carry; durlabham—rarely obtained; labdhvā—having obtained; śirasā—on their heads; eva—indeed; anuśāsanam—(Your) command.
Śrī Yudhiṣṭhira said: All the exalted spiritual masters of the three worlds, together with the inhabitants and rulers of the various planets, carry on their heads Your command, which is rarely obtained.
Śrīla Prabhupāda renders Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's statement as follows: "My dear Kṛṣṇa, O eternal form of bliss and knowledge, all the exalted directors of the affairs of this material world, including Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and King Indra, are always eager to receive and carry out orders from You, and whenever they are fortunate enough to receive such orders, they immediately take them and keep them on their heads."
TEXT 3
s$a BavaAnar"ivand"AºaAe
d"InaAnaAmaIzAmaAinanaAma,
DaÔae'nauzAAs$anaM BaUmaMs$a,
tad"tyantaivax"mbanama,
sa bhavān aravindākṣo
dīnānām īśa-māninām
dhatte 'nuśāsanaṁ bhūmaṁs
tad atyanta-viḍambanam
saḥ—He; bhavān—Yourself; aravinda-akṣaḥ—the lotus-eyed Lord; dīnānām—of those who are wretched; īśa—rulers; māninām—who presume themselves; dhatte—takes upon Himself; anuśāsanam—the order; bhūman—O all-pervading one; tat—that; atyanta—extreme; viḍambanam—pretense.
That You, the lotus-eyed Supreme Lord, accept the orders of wretched fools who presume themselves rulers is a great pretense on Your part, O all-pervading one.
Śrīla Prabhupāda writes, "[Yudhiṣṭhira said,] 'O Kṛṣṇa, You are unlimited, and although we sometimes think of ourselves as royal kings and rulers of the world and become puffed up over our paltry positions, we are very poor in heart. Actually, we are fit to be punished by You, but the wonder is that instead of punishing us You so kindly and mercifully accept our orders and carry them out properly. We are all very much surprised that Your Lordship can play the part of an ordinary human being, but we can understand that You are performing these activities just like a dramatic artist.' "
TEXT 4
na ÷ek(syaAiã"taIyasya
“aṭNA: par"maAtmana:
k(maRiBavaRDaRtae taejaAe
œ"s$atae ca yaTaA r"vae:
na hy ekasyādvitīyasya
brahmaṇaḥ paramātmanaḥ
karmabhir vardhate tejo
hrasate ca yathā raveḥ
na—not; hi—indeed; ekasya—of the one; advitīyasya—without a second; brahmaṇaḥ—the Absolute Truth; parama-ātmanaḥ—the Supreme Soul; karmabhiḥ—by activities; vardhate—increases; tejaḥ—the power; hrasate—diminishes; ca—and; yathā—as; raveḥ—of the sun.
But of course the power of the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Soul, the primeval one without a second, is neither increased nor diminished by His activities, any more than the sun's power is by its movements.
Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in Kṛṣṇa: "[King Yudhiṣṭhira said,] 'Your real position is always exalted, exactly like that of the sun, which always remains at the same temperature during both the time of its rising and the time of its setting. Although we feel the difference in temperature between the rising and the setting sun, the temperature of the sun never changes. You are always transcendentally equipoised, neither pleased nor disturbed by any condition of material affairs. You are the Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead, and for You there are no relativities.' "
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī quotes a similar statement from the Vedic mantras: na karmaṇā vardhate no kanīyān (Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 14.7.2.28, Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa 3.12.9.7 and Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.4.23). "He is not increased by His activities, nor does He become lesser." As explained here by King Yudhiṣṭhira, the Lord is one without a second. There is no other entity in His supreme category, and thus it is simply by His causeless mercy that He agrees to carry out the orders of His pure devotees, like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. There is certainly no loss of status for the Supreme Personality of Godhead when He thus extends His causeless mercy to His surrendered devotees.
TEXT 5
na vaE tae'ijata Ba·(AnaAM
mamaAh"imaita maADava
tvaM tavaeita ca naAnaADaI:
pazAUnaAimava vaEk{(taI
na vai te 'jita bhaktānāṁ
mamāham iti mādhava
tvaṁ taveti ca nānā-dhīḥ
paśūnām iva vaikṛtī
na—not; vai—indeed; te—Your; ajita—O unconquerable one; bhaktānām—of the devotees; mama aham iti—"mine" and "I"; mādhava—O Kṛṣṇa; tvam tava iti—"you" and "yours"; ca—and; nānā—of differences; dhīḥ—mentality; paśūnām—of animals; iva—as if; vaikṛtī—perverted.
O unconquerable Mādhava, even Your devotees make no distinctions of "I" and "mine," "you" and "yours," for this is the perverted mentality of animals.
An ordinary person thinks, "I am so attractive, intelligent and wealthy that people should simply serve me and do what I want. Why should I obey anyone else?" This proud, separatist mentality is also found in animals who battle one another for supremacy. Such a mentality is conspicuously absent in the mind of an advanced devotee, and it is certainly absent in the sublime, omniscient mind of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



Song Glorification of Krsna by Sages at Kuruksetra
TEXT 16
™aImaunaya Ocau:
yanmaAyayaA taÔvaivaāu"ÔamaA vayaM
ivamaAeih"taA ivaṅs$a{jaAmaDaIṅr"A:
yad"IizAtavyaAyaita gAUX# wRh"yaA
@h"Ae ivaica‡amBagAvaiã"caeií"tama,
śrī-munaya ūcuḥ
yan-māyayā tattva-vid-uttamā vayaṁ
vimohitā viśva-sṛjām adhīśvarāḥ
yad īśitavyāyati gūḍha īhayā
aho vicitram bhagavad-viceṣṭitam
śrī-munayaḥ ūcuḥ—the great sages said; yat—whose; māyayā—by the power of illusion; tattva—of the truth; vit—knowers; uttamāḥ—best; vayam—we; vimohitāḥ—confused; viśva—of the universe; sṛjām—of creators; adhīśvarāḥ—chief; yat—the fact that; īśitavyāyati—(the Supreme Lord) pretends to be subject to higher control; gūḍhaḥ—hidden; īhayā—by His activities; aho—ah; vicitram—amazing; bhagavat—of the Supreme Lord; viceṣṭitam—the activity.
The great sages said: Your power of illusion has totally bewildered us, the most exalted knowers of the truth and leaders among the universal creators. Ah, how amazing is the behavior of the Supreme Lord! He covers Himself with His humanlike activities and pretends to be subject to superior control.
The sages have characterized the Lord's statements as inscrutable (duranvayam). How this is so is stated here: His words and activities bewilder even the most learned when He plays at subordinating Himself to His own servants.
TEXT 17
@naIh" WtaḶ""ḍ"DaEk( @AtmanaA
s$a{jatyavatyaiÔa na baDyatae yaTaA
BaAEmaEihR" BaUimabaRḍ"naAmaṝ&ipaNAI
@h"Ae ivaBaU°aêir"taM ivax"mbanama,
anīha etad bahudhaika ātmanā
sṛjaty avaty atti na badhyate yathā
bhaumair hi bhūmir bahu-nāma-rūpiṇī
aho vibhūmnaś caritaṁ viḍambanam
anīhaḥ—exerting no endeavor; etat—this (universe); bahudhā—manifold; ekaḥ—alone; ātmanā—by Himself; sṛjati—He creates; avati—maintains; atti—annihilates; na badhyate—is not bound up; yathā—as; bhaumaiḥ—by the transformations of earth; hi—indeed; bhūmiḥ—earth; bahu—many; nāma-rūpiṇī—having names and forms; aho—ah; vibhūmnaḥ—of the almighty Lord; caritam—the activities; viḍambanam—a pretense.
Indeed, the humanlike pastimes of the Almighty are simply a pretense! Effortlessly, He alone sends forth from His Self this variegated creation, maintains it and then swallows it up again, all without becoming entangled, just as the element earth takes on many names and forms in its various transformations.
The one Supreme expands Himself as many without diminishing His completeness. He does this effortlessly, without depending on anyone or anything else. This mystic process of the Lord's self-expansion is incomprehensible to all but Himself, but the example of the substance earth and its manifold products bears enough resemblance to provide some idea. The same example is also presented in an often—cited passage of the Chāndogya Upaniṣad (6.1.4), vācārambhaṇaṁ vikāro nāmadheyaṁ mṛttikety eva satyam: "Earth's transformations are merely verbal creations of the process of naming; the substance earth itself is alone real."
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī suggests that this verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam answers a possible objection on the part of Lord Kṛṣṇa: "How can I create, maintain and destroy the universe if I am Vasudeva's son?" The answer is given by the words aho vibhūmnaś caritaṁ viḍambanam: "You are the perfectly complete whole, and Your birth and pastimes are only an imitation of ordinary persons' activities in the material world. You simply pretend to be under higher control."
TEXT 18
@TaAipa k(Alae svajanaAiBagAuæayae
ibaBaiSaR s$aÔvaM Kalainaƒah"Aya ca
svalaIlayaA vaed"paTaM s$anaAtanaM
vaNAAR™amaAtmaA pauś&Sa: par"Ae BavaAna,
athāpi kāle sva-janābhiguptaye
bibharṣi sattvaṁ khala-nigrahāya ca
sva-līlayā veda-pathaṁ sanātanaṁ
varṇāśramātmā puruṣaḥ paro bhavān
atha api—nonetheless; kāle—at the correct time; sva-jana—of Your devotees; abhiguptaye—for the protection; bibharṣi—You assume; sattvam-the mode of goodness; khala—of the wicked; nigrahāya—for the punishment; ca—and; sva—Your; līlayā—by the pastimes; veda-patham—the path of the Vedas; sanātanam—eternal; varṇa-āśrama—of the divine system of occupational and spiritual divisions of society; ātmā—the Soul; puruṣaḥ—the Personality of Godhead; paraḥ—Supreme; bhavān—Your good self.
Nonetheless, at suitable times You assume the pure mode of goodness to protect Your devotees and punish the wicked. Thus You, the Soul of the varṇāśrama social order, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, maintain the eternal path of the Vedas by enjoying Your pleasure pastimes.
This verse describes the Lord's enlightening people in general (jana-saṅgraha) and His imitation of worldly behavior. Because the Personality of Godhead remains always perfect, the body He manifests when He comes to this world is not touched by material goodness; rather, it is a manifestation of the pure goodness known as viśuddha-sattva, the same spiritual substance that constitutes His original form.
TEXT 19
“aṭ tae ô$d"yaM zAuflaM
tapa:svaADyaAyas$aMyamaE:
ya‡aAepalabDaM s$aã"Ya·(ma,
@vya·M( ca tata: par"ma,
brahma te hṛdayaṁ śuklaṁ
tapaḥ-svādhyāya-saṁyamaiḥ
yatropalabdhaṁ sad vyaktam
avyaktaṁ ca tataḥ param
brahma—the Vedas; te—Your; hṛdayam—heart; śuklam—pure; tapaḥ—by austerities; svādhyāya—study; saṁyamaiḥ—and self-control; yatra—in which; upalabdham—perceived; sat—pure spiritual existence; vyaktam—the manifest (products of material creation); avyaktam—the unmanifest (subtle causes of creation), ca-and; tataḥ-to that; param—transcendental.
The Vedas are Your spotless heart, and through them one can perceive—by means of austerity, study and self-control—the manifest, the unmanifest and the pure existence transcendental to both.
Vyakta, "the manifest," consists of the visible things of this world, and avyakta consists of the subtle, underlying causes of cosmic creation. The Vedas point toward the transcendental realm of Brahman, which lies beyond all material cause and effect.
TEXT 20
tasmaAā," “aṭku(laM “aṭna,
zAAṣyaAenaestvamaAtmana:
s$aBaAjayais$a s$aŪ"Ama
taā," “aṭNyaAƒaNAIBaRvaAna,
tasmād brahma-kulaṁ brahman
śāstra-yones tvam ātmanaḥ
sabhājayasi sad dhāma
tad brahmaṇyāgraṇīr bhavān
tasmāt—therefore; brahma—of brāhmaṇas; kulam—to the community; brahman—O Absolute Truth; śāstra—the revealed scriptures; yoneḥ—whose means of realization; tvam—You; ātmanaḥ—of Yourself; sabhājayasi-show honor; sat—perfect; dhāma—the abode; tat—consequently; brahmaṇya—of those who respect brahminical culture; agranīḥ—the leader; bhavān—You.
Therefore, O Supreme Brahman, You honor the members of the brahminical community, for they are the perfect agents by which one can realize You through the evidence of the Vedas. For that very reason You are the foremost worshiper of the brāhmaṇas.
TEXT 21
@â naAe janmas$aAP(lyaM
ivaâAyaAstapas$aAe ā{"zA:
tvayaA s$aṆḷmya s$aÕ"tyaA
yad"nta: ™aeyas$aAM par":
adya no janma-sāphalyaṁ
vidyāyās tapaso dṛśaḥ
tvayā saṅgamya sad-gatyā
yad antaḥ śreyasāṁ paraḥ
adya—today; naḥ—our; janma—of the birth; sāphalyam—fruition; vidyāyāḥ—of the education; tapasaḥ—of the austerities; dṛśaḥ—of the power of sight; tvayā—with You; saṅgamya—obtaining association; sat—of saintly persons; gatyā—who are the goal; yat—because; antaḥ—the limit; śreyasām—of benefits; paraḥ—ultimate.
Today our birth, education, austerity and vision have all become perfect because we have been able to associate with You, the goal of all saintly persons. Indeed, You Yourself are the ultimate, supreme blessing.
The sages here contrast their respect for the Lord with His reciprocal worship of them. Lord Kṛṣṇa honors brāhmaṇas as a means of instructing less intelligent men, whereas He is in fact absolutely independent. The brāhmaṇas who worship Him, on the other hand, benefit themselves more than they can imagine.
TEXT 22
namastasmaE BagAvatae
k{(SNAAyaAku(NQ&maeDas$ae
svayaAegAmaAyayaAcC$ªa-
maih"°ae par"maAtmanae
namas tasmai bhagavate
kṛṣṇāyākuṇṭha-medhase
sva-yogamāyayācchanna-
mahimne paramātmane
namaḥ—obeisances; tasmai—to Him; bhagavate—the Supreme Lord; kṛṣṇāya—Kṛṣṇa; akuṇṭha—unrestricted; medhase—whose wisdom; sva—His own; yoga-māyayā—by the internal illusory potency; ācchanna—covered; mahimne—whose glories; parama-ātmane—the Supersoul.
Let us offer obeisances unto that Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa, the infinitely intelligent Supersoul, who has disguised His greatness through His mystic Yogamāyā.
Apart from any future profit to be obtained from worshiping the Supreme Lord, it is every person's most essential obligation to bow down to Him as an acknowledgement of one's dependence and servitude. Lord Kṛṣṇa recommends,
man-manā bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru
mām evaiṣyasi yuktvaivam
ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ
"Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, become My devotee, offer obeisances to Me and worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will come to Me." (Bg. 9.34)
TEXT 23
na yaM ivad"ntyamaI BaUpaA
Wk(Ar"AmaAê va{SNAya:
maAyaAjavainak(AcC$ªama,
@AtmaAnaM k(AlamaIṅr"ma,
na yaṁ vidanty amī bhū-pā
ekārāmāś ca vṛṣṇayaḥ
māyā-javanikācchannam
ātmānaṁ kālam īśvaram
na—not; yam—whom; vidanti—know; amī—these; bhū-pāḥ—kings; eka—together; ārāmāḥ—who enjoy; ca—and; vṛṣṇayaḥ—the Vṛṣṇis; māyā—of the divine power of illusion; javanikā—by the curtain; ācchannam—covered; ātmānam—the Supreme Soul; kālam—time; īśvaram-the supreme controller.
Neither these kings nor even the Vṛṣṇis, who enjoy Your intimate association, know You as the Soul of all existence, the force of time and the supreme controller. For them You are covered by the curtain of Māyā.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī explains that Lord Kṛṣṇa's family, the Vṛṣṇis, were too familiar with Him to realize that He is the Supersoul residing in the heart of every created being. And those kings at Kurukṣetra who were not devotees of Kṛṣṇa could not recognize Him as time, the annihilator of everything. Devotees and nondevotees are both covered by Māyā, but in different ways. For the materialists Māyā is illusion, but for the Vaiṣṇavas she acts as Yogamāyā, the internal potency who covers their awareness of the Supreme Lord's majesty and engages them in His eternal pleasure pastimes.
TEXTS 24-25
yaTaA zAyaAna: pauś&Sa
@AtmaAnaM gAuNAtaÔvaā{"k,(
naAmamaA‡aein‰"yaABaAtaM
na vaed" r"ih"taM par"ma,
WvaM tvaA naAmamaA‡aeSau
ivaSayaeiSvain‰"yaeh"yaA
maAyayaA iva”amai»aÔaAe
na vaed" sma{tyaupaplavaAta,
yathā śayānaḥ puruṣa
ātmānaṁ guṇa-tattva-dṛk
nāma-mātrendriyābhātaṁ
na veda rahitaṁ param
evaṁ tvā nāma-mātreṣu
viṣayeṣv indriyehayā
māyayā vibhramac-citto
na veda smṛty-upaplavāt
yathā—as; śayānaḥ—sleeping; puruṣaḥ—a person; ātmānam—himself; guṇa—secondary; tattva—of reality; dṛk—whose vision; nāma—with names; mātra—and forms; indriya—through his mind; ābhātam—manifest; na veda—he does not know; rahitam—separate; param—rather; evam—similarly; tvā—You; nāma-mātreṣu—having names and forms; viṣayeṣu—in objects of material perception; indriya—of the senses; īhayā—by the activity; māyayā—because of the influence of Your illusory energy; vibhramat—becoming bewildered; cittaḥ—whose consciousness; na veda—one does not know; smṛti—of his memory; upaplavāt—due to the disruption.
A sleeping person imagines an alternative reality for himself and, seeing himself as having various names and forms, forgets his waking identity, which is distinct from the dream. Similarly, the senses of one whose consciousness is bewildered by illusion perceive only the names and forms of material objects. Thus such a person loses his memory and cannot know You.
Just as a person's dream is a secondary reality created from the stock of his memories and desires, so this universe exists as the inferior creation of the Supreme Lord, in no real way separate from Him. And just as the person who awakens from sleep experiences the higher reality of his waking life, so the Supreme Lord also has His distinct, higher reality beyond everything we know of this world. In His own words,
mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ
jagad avyakta-mūrtinā
mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni
na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ
na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni
paśya me yogam aiśvaram
bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho
mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am not in them. And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities and although I am everything, I am not part of this cosmic manifestation, for My Self is the very source of creation." (Bg. 9.4-5)
TEXT 26
tasyaAâ tae d"ā{"izAmaAx.~i„amaGaAEGamaSaR-
taITaARs$padM" ô$id" k{(taM s$auivapa¸(yaAegAE:
oits$a·(Baftyaupah"taAzAya jaIvak(AezAA
@ApauBaRvaÕ"itamaTaAnaugA{h"Ana Ba·(Ana,
tasyādya te dadṛśimāṅghrim aghaugha-marṣa-
tīrthāspadaṁ hṛdi kṛtaṁ su-vipakva-yogaiḥ
utsikta-bhakty-upahatāśaya jīva-kośā
āpur bhavad-gatim athānugṛhāna bhaktān
tasya—His; adya—today; te—Your; dadṛśima—we have seen; aṅghrim—the feet; agha—of sins; ogha—floods; marṣa—which undo; tīrtha—of the holy pilgrimage site (the Ganges); āspadam—the source; hṛdi—in the heart; kṛtam—placed; su—well; vipakva—matured; yogaiḥ—by those whose practice of yoga; utsikta—fully developed; bhakti—by devotional service; upahata—destroyed; āśaya—the material mentality; jīva—of the individual soul; kośāḥ—whose external covering; āpuḥ—they attained; bhavat—Your; gatim—destination; atha—therefore; anugṛhāṇa—please show mercy; bhaktān—to Your devotees.
Today we have directly seen Your feet, the source of the holy Ganges, which washes away volumes of sins. Perfected yogīs can at best meditate upon Your feet within their hearts. But only those who render You wholehearted devotional service and in this way vanquish the soul's covering—the material mind—attain You as their final destination. Therefore kindly show mercy to us, Your devotees.
The holy river Ganges has the power to destroy all sorts of sinful reactions because she originates at the Lord's lotus feet and thus contains the dust of His feet. Explaining this verse, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī says, "If the Lord might advise the sages that they need not concern themselves with devotional practices because they are already far advanced in spiritual knowledge and austerity, they hereby respectfully decline such a suggestion, pointing out that only those yogīs who have destroyed their material mind and ego by surrendering to Kṛṣṇa in pure devotional service can attain full perfection. They conclude by praying to the Lord that He favor them in the most merciful way by making them His devotees."


Song Glorification of Krsna and Balarama by Vasudeva
TEXT 3
k{(SNA k{(SNA mah"AyaAeigAna,
 s$aÆḷSaRNA s$anaAtana
jaAnae vaAmasya yats$aAºaAta,
‘aDaAnapauś&SaAE par"AE
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa mahā-yogin
 saṅkarṣaṇa sanātana
jāne vām asya yat sākṣāt
pradhāna-puruṣau parau
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa; mahā-yogin—O greatest yogī; saṅkarṣaṇa—O Balarāma; sanātana—eternal; jāne—I know; vām—You two; asya—of this (universe); yat—which; sākṣāt—directly; pradhāna—the creative principle of nature; puruṣau—and the creating Personality of Godhead; parau—supreme.
[Vasudeva said:] O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, best of yogīs, O eternal Saṅkarṣaṇa! I know that You two are personally the source of universal creation and the ingredients of creation as well.
As taught in the Sāṅkhya doctrine of Lord Kapiladeva, pradhāna is the creative energy of the puruṣa, the Supreme Person. Thus, of these two principles, the pradhāna is the predominated energy, female, incapable of independent action, while the puruṣa is the absolutely independent, primeval creator and enjoyer. Neither Kṛṣṇa nor His brother Balarāma belong to the category of subordinate energy; rather, both of Them together are the original puruṣa, who is always joined by His manifold potencies of pleasure, knowledge and creative emanation.
TEXT 4
ya‡a yaena yataAe yasya
yasmaE yaââTaA yad"A
syaAid"dM" BagAvaAna, s$aAºaAta,
‘aDaAnapauś&Saeṅr":
yatra yena yato yasya
yasmai yad yad yathā yadā
syād idaṁ bhagavān sākṣāt
pradhāna-puruṣeśvaraḥ
yatra—in which; yena—by which; yataḥ—from which; yasya—of which; yasmai—unto which; yat yat—whatever; yathā—however; yadā—whenever; syāt—comes into existence; idam—this (creation); bhagavān—the Supreme Lord; sākṣāt—in His personal presence; pradhāna-puruṣa—of nature and its creator (Mahā-Viṣṇu); īśvaraḥ—the predominator.
You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who manifest as the Lord of both nature and the creator of nature [Mahā-Viṣṇu]. Everything that comes into existence, however and whenever it does so, is created within You, by You, from You, for You and in relation to You.
To casual observers the known world appears to be produced by many different agents. A good indication of this conception is language itself, which traditional Sanskrit grammarians explain as reflecting the visible diversity of nature. In the standard Sanskrit grammar taught by the sage Pāṇini, the verb, expressing action, is taken to be the essential core of a sentence, and all the other words function in relation to it. Nouns, for example, are put into any of several cases to show their particular relationship to the verb in a sentence. These relationships of noun to verb are called kārakas, namely the relations of subject (kartā, "who does"), object (karma, "what is done"), instrument (karaṇa, "by which"), recipient (sampradāna, "for or toward which"), source (apādāna, "from or because of which") and location (adhikaraṇa, "in which"). Apart from these kārakas, nouns may also sometimes point to other nouns in a possessive sense, and there are also various kinds of adverbs of time, place and manner. But although language thus seems to indicate the activity of many separate agents in the manifest creation, the deeper truth is that all grammatical forms refer first of all to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this verse Vasudeva makes this point by glorifying his two exalted sons in terms of the different grammatical forms.
TEXT 5
WtaªaAnaAivaDaM ivaṅma,
@Atmas$a{í"maDaAeºaja
@AtmanaAnau‘aivazyaAtmana,
‘aANAAe jaIvaAe ibaBaSyaRja
etan nānā-vidhaṁ viśvam
ātma-sṛṣṭam adhokṣaja
ātmanānupraviśyātman
prāṇo jīvo bibharṣy aja
etat—this; nānā-vidham—variegated; viśvam—universe; ātma—from Yourself; sṛṣṭam—created; adhokṣaja—O transcendental Lord; ātmanā—in Your manifestation (as the Paramātmā); anupraviśya—entering within; ātman—O Supreme Soul; prāṇaḥ—the principle of vitality; jīvaḥ—and the principle of consciousness; bibharṣi—You maintain; aja—O unborn one.
O transcendental Lord, from Yourself You created this entire variegated universe, and then You entered within it in Your personal form as the Supersoul. In this way, O unborn Supreme Soul, as the life force and consciousness of everyone, You maintain the creation.
When creating the material universe, the Lord expands Himself as the Paramātmā, or Supersoul, and accepts the creation as His universal body. No material body has any reason for existing without some jīva soul desiring it for his enjoyment, and no jīva can independently maintain a body without the Paramātmā accompanying him there for guidance. The Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, in their commentaries on the Second Canto of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, explain that even before Brahmā is born from the lotus navel of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, he first accepts the whole material energy, the mahat-tattva, as his body. Thus Brahmā is the jīva embodied by the universe, and Viṣṇu is the Paramātmā who joins him. Brahmā must organize the specific manifestations of creation, but he cannot begin to do so until Lord Viṣṇu expands Himself again into the subtle energy of action—which is the sūtra-tattva, or original vital air—and also into the creative energy of consciousness, buddhi-tattva.
TEXT 6
‘aANAAd"InaAM ivaṅs$a{jaAM
zA·(yaAe yaA: par"sya taA:
paAr"tan‡yaAãE"s$aAā{"SyaAā,"
ã"yaAeêeíE"va caeí"taAma,
prāṇādīnāṁ viśva-sṛjāṁ
śaktayo yāḥ parasya tāḥ
pāratantryād vaisādṛṣyād
dvayoś ceṣṭaiva ceṣṭatām
prāṇa—of the life air; ādīnām—and so on; viśva—of the universe; sṛjām—the creative factors; śaktayaḥ—potencies; yāḥ—which; parasya—belonging to the Supreme; tāḥ—they; pāratantryāt—because of being dependent; vaisādṛśyāt—because of being different; dvayoḥ—of both (living and nonliving manifestations in the material world); ceṣṭā—the activity; eva—merely; ceṣṭatām—of those entities (namely, prāṇa and so on) that are active.
Whatever potencies the life air and other elements of universal creation exhibit are actually all personal energies of the Supreme Lord, for both life and matter are subordinate to Him and dependent on Him, and also different from one another. Thus everything active in the material world is set into motion by the Supreme Lord.
Prāṇa is the vital air of life, a more subtle element than the ordinary air we can touch. And because prāṇa is so subtle—finer than the tangible manifestations of creation—it is sometimes considered the ultimate source of everything. But even subtle energies such as prāṇa depend for their functional capacity on the supremely subtle Paramātmā. That is the idea Vasudeva expresses here by the word pāratantryāt, "because of dependence." Just as the velocity of an arrow is derived from the strength of the bowman who shoots it, so all subordinate energies depend on the power of the Supreme Lord.
Furthermore, even when various subtle causes have been empowered with their capacity to act, they cannot act in concert without the Supersoul's coordinating direction. As Lord Brahmā states in his description of creation in the Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
yadaite 'saṅgatā bhāvā
bhūtendriya-mano-guṇāḥ
yadāyatana-nirmāṇe
na śekur brahma-vittama
tadā saṁhatya cānyonyaṁ
bhagavac-chakti-coditāḥ
sad-asattvam upādāya
cobhayaṁ sasṛjur hy adaḥ
"O Nārada, best of the transcendentalists, the forms of the body cannot manifest as long as these created parts, namely the elements, senses, mind and modes of nature, are not assembled. Thus when all these became assembled by the force of the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this universe certainly came into being by accepting both the primary and secondary causes of creation." (SB 2.5.32-33)
TEXT 7
k(Aintastaeja: ‘aBaA s$aÔaA
can‰"AgnyakR(ºaRivaâutaAma,
yatsTaEya< BaUBa{taAM BaUmaer,"
va{iÔagARnDaAe'TaRtaAe BavaAna,
kāntis tejaḥ prabhā sattā
candrāgny-arkarkṣa-vidyutām
yat sthairyaṁ bhū-bhṛtāṁ bhūmer
vṛttir gandho 'rthato bhavān
kāntiḥ—the attractive glow; tejaḥ—brilliance; prabhā—luminosity; sattā—and particular existence; candra—of the moon; agni—fire; arka—the sun; ṛkṣa—the stars; vidyutām—and lightning; yat—which; sthairyam—permanence; bhū-bhṛtām—of mountains; bhūmeḥ—of the earth; vṛttiḥ—the quality of sustaining; gandhaḥ—fragrance; arthataḥ—in truth; bhavān—Yourself.
The glow of the moon, the brilliance of fire, the radiance of the sun, the twinkling of the stars, the flash of lightning, the permanence of mountains and the aroma and sustaining power of the earth—all these are actually You.
Śrī Vasudeva, in telling Kṛṣṇa that He is the essence of the sun, moon, stars, lightning and fire, is only reiterating the opinion of scripture, both śruti and smṛti. The Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.14), for example, states,
na tatra sūryo bhāti na candra-tārakaṁ
nemā vidyuto bhānti kuto 'yam agniḥ
tam eva bhāntam anu bhāti sarvaṁ
tasya bhāsā sarvam idaṁ vibhāti
"There [in the spiritual sky] the sun does not shine, nor does the moon, the stars or lightning as we know them, what to speak of ordinary fire. It is by the reflection of the spiritual sky's effulgence that everything else gives light, and thus through its radiance this entire universe becomes luminous." And in Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (15.12), the Supreme Lord says,
yad āditya-gataṁ tejo
jagad bhāsayate 'khilam
yac candramasi yac cāgnau
tat tejo viddhi māmakam
"The splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole world, comes from Me. And the splendor of the moon and the splendor of fire also come from Me."
TEXT 8
tapaRNAM ‘aANAnamapaAM
de"va tvaM taAê ta‰"s$a:
@Aeja: s$ah"Ae balaM caeí"A
gAitavaARyaAestavaeṅr"
tarpaṇaṁ prāṇanam apāṁ
deva tvaṁ tāś ca tad-rasaḥ
ojaḥ saho balaṁ ceṣṭā
gatir vāyos taveśvara
tarpaṇam—the capacity to generate satisfaction; prāṇanam—the giving of life; apām—of water; deva—O Lord; tvam—You; tāḥ—(water) itself; ca—and; tat—of it (water); rasaḥ—the taste; ojaḥ—bodily warmth and vitality, due to strength of the vital air; sahaḥ—mental strength; balam—and physical strength; ceṣṭā—endeavor; gatiḥ—and movement; vāyoḥ—of air; tava—Your; īśvara—O supreme controller.
My Lord, You are water, and also its taste and and its capacities to quench thirst and sustain life. You exhibit Your potencies through the manifestations of the air as bodily warmth, vitality, mental power, physical strength, endeavor and movement.
TEXT 9
id"zAAM tvamavak(AzAAe'is$a
id"zA: KaM s$P(Aeq% @A™aya:
naAd"Ae vaNARstvamaAe"Mk(Ar"
@Ak{(taInaAM pa{Tafk{(ita:
diśāṁ tvam avakāśo 'si
diśaḥ khaṁ sphoṭa āśrayaḥ
nādo varṇas tvam oṁ-kāra
ākṛtīnāṁ pṛthak-kṛtiḥ
diśām—of the directions; tvam—You; avakāśaḥ—the power to accommodate; asi—are; diśaḥ—the directions; kham—the ether; sphoṭaḥ—elemental sound; āśrayaḥ—having (ether) as its basis; nādaḥ—sound in its form of unmanifest vibration; varṇaḥ—the primeval syllable; tvam—You; oṁ-kāraḥ—oṁ; ākṛtīnām—of particular forms; pṛthak-kṛtiḥ—the cause of differentiation (namely, manifest language).
You are the directions and their accommodating capacity, the all-pervading ether and the elemental sound residing within it. You are the primeval, unmanifested form of sound; the first syllable, oṁ; and audible speech, by which sound, as words, acquires particular references.
In accordance with the general process of creation, speech always becomes audible in stages, which proceed from subtle inner impulse to outward expression. These stages are mentioned in the mantras of the Ṛg Veda (1.164.45):
catvāri vāk-parimitā padāni
tāni vidur brāhmaṇā ye manīṣiṇaḥ
guhāyāṁ trīṇi nihitāni neṅgayanti
turīyaṁ vāco manuṣyā vadanti
"Discriminating brāhmaṇas know of four progressive stages of language. Three of these remain hidden within the heart as imperceptible vibrations, while the fourth stage is what people ordinarily understand as speech."
TEXT 10
win‰"yaM itvain‰"yaANAAM tvaM
de"vaAê tad"nauƒah":
@vabaAeDaAe BavaAna, bauŪe"r,"
jaIvasyaAnausma{ita: s$ataI
indriyaṁ tv indriyāṇāṁ tvaṁ
devāś ca tad-anugrahaḥ
avabodho bhavān buddher
jīvasyānusmṛtiḥ satī
indriyam—the power to illuminate their objects; tu—and; indriyāṇām—of the senses; tvam—You; devāḥ—the demigods (who regulate the various senses); ca—and; tat—of them (the demigods); anugrahaḥ—the mercy (by which one's senses can act); avabodhaḥ—the power of decision; bhavān—You; buddheḥ—of intelligence; jīvasya—of the living entity; anusmṛtiḥ—the power of recollection; satī—correct.
You are the power of the senses to reveal their objects, the senses' presiding demigods, and the sanction these demigods give for sensory activity. You are the capacity of the intelligence for decision-making, and the living being's ability to remember things accurately.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī points out that whenever one of the material senses is involved with its object, the presiding demigod of that particular sense organ must give his sanction. Ācārya Viśvanātha Cakravartī explains the word anusmṛti in this verse in its higher sense, as one's recognition of himself as an eternal spirit soul.
TEXT 11
BaUtaAnaAmais$a BaUtaAid"r,"
win‰"yaANAAM ca taEjas$a:
vaEk(Air"k(Ae ivak(lpaAnaAM
‘aDaAnamanauzAAiyanama,
bhūtānām asi bhūtādir
indriyāṇāṁ ca taijasaḥ
vaikāriko vikalpānāṁ
pradhānam anuśāyinam
bhūtānām—of the physical elements; asi—You are; bhūta-ādiḥ—their source, false ego in the mode of ignorance; indriyāṇām—of the senses; ca—and; taijasaḥ—false ego in the mode of passion; vaikārikaḥ—false ego in the mode of goodness; vikalpānām—of the creative demigods; pradhānam—the unmanifest, total material energy; anuśāyinam—underlying.
You are false ego in the mode of ignorance, which is the source of the physical elements; false ego in the mode of passion, which is the source of the bodily senses; false ego in the mode of goodness, which is the source of the demigods; and the unmanifest, total material energy, which underlies everything.
TEXT 12
naṅre"iSvah" BaAvaeSau
tad"is$a tvamanaṅr"ma,
yaTaA ‰"vyaivak(Are"Sau
‰"vyamaA‡aM inaṝ&ipatama,
naśvareṣv iha bhāveṣu
tad asi tvam anaśvaram
yathā dravya-vikāreṣu
dravya-mātraṁ nirūpitam
naśvareṣu—subject to destruction; iha—in this world; bhāveṣu—among entities; tat—that; asi—are; tvam—You; anaśvaram—the indestructible; yathā—just as; dravya—of a substance; vikāreṣu—among the transformations; dravya-mātram—the substance itself; nirūpitam—ascertained.
You are the one indestructible entity among all the destructible things of this world, like the underlying substance that is seen to remain unchanged while the things made from it undergo transformations.
TEXT 13
s$aÔva•ajastama wita
gAuNAAstaā,"va{Ôayaê yaA:
tvayyaŪ"A “aṭiNA pare"
k(ilpataA yaAegAmaAyayaA
sattvam rajas tama iti
guṇās tad-vṛttayaś ca yāḥ
tvayy addhā brahmaṇi pare
kalpitā yoga-māyayā
sattvam rajaḥ tamaḥ iti—known as goodness, passion and ignorance; guṇāḥ—the modes of material nature; tat—their; vṛttayaḥ—functions; ca—and; yāḥ—which; tvayi—within You; addhāḥ—manifestly; brahmaṇi—within the Absolute Truth; pare—supreme; kalpitāḥ—arranged; yoga-māyayā—by Yogamāyā (the internal potency of the Supreme Lord that facilitates His pastimes).
The modes of material nature—namely goodness, passion and ignorance—together with all their functions, become directly manifest within You, the Supreme Absolute Truth, by the arrangement of Your Yogamāyā.
Vasudeva's description of how the Supreme Lord expands Himself into the products of the three material modes may possibly be misunderstood to imply that He is touched by the modes, or even that He is subject to destruction. To negate these misunderstandings, Vasudeva states here that the three modes and their products function by the arrangement of the Lord's creative energy, Yogamāyā, who is always completely under His control. Thus the Lord is never tainted in the least by any material contact.
TEXT 14
tasmaAªa s$antyamaI BaAvaA
yaihR" tvaiya ivak(ilpataA:
tvaM caAmaISau ivak(Are"Sau
÷nyad"AvyaAvah"Air"k(:
tasmān na santy amī bhāvā
yarhi tvayi vikalpitāḥ
tvaṁ cāmīṣu vikāreṣu
hy anyadāvyāvahārikaḥ
tasmāt—therefore; na—not; santi—exist; amī—these; bhāvāḥ—entities; yarhi—when; tvayi—within You; vikalpitāḥ—arranged; tvam—You; ca—also; amīṣu—within these; vikāreṣu—products of creation; hi—indeed; anyadā—at any other time; avyāvahārikaḥ—nonmaterial.
Thus these created entities, transformations of material nature, do not exist except when material nature manifests them within You, at which time You also manifest within them. But aside from such periods of creation, You stand alone as the transcendental reality.
When the universe is wound up at the time of its periodic annihilation, all the inert objects and bodies of living beings that hitherto were manifested by the Lord's Māyā become disconnected from His sight. Then, since He maintains no association with them during the period of universal dissolution, they in fact no longer exist. In other words, material manifestations have real, functioning existence only when the Lord turns His attention to the creation and maintenance of the material cosmos. The Lord is never "within" these objects in any material sense, but He does mercifully pervade them all as the impersonal Brahman, and as the Paramātmā He enters within every atom and also accompanies the jīva souls in their individual embodiments. As the Lord describes in His own words in the verses of Bhagavad-gītā (9.4-5):
mayā tataṁ idaṁ sarvaṁ
jagad avyakta-mūrtinā
mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni
na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ
na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni
paśya me yogam aiśvaram
bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho
mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ
"By Me, in My unmanifest form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am not in them. And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities and although I am everywhere, I am not part of this cosmic manifestation, for My Self is the very source of creation."
TEXT 15
gAuNA‘avaAh" Wtaismaªa,
@bauDaAstvaiKalaAtmana:
gAitaM s$aUºmaAmabaAeDaena
s$aMs$ar"ntaIh" k(maRiBa:
guṇa-pravāha etasminn
abudhās tv akhilātmanaḥ
gatiṁ sūkṣmām abodhena
saṁsarantīha karmabhiḥ
guṇa—of the material modes; pravāhe—in the flow; etasmin—this; abudhāḥ—those who are ignorant; tu—but; akhila—of everything; ātmanaḥ—of the Soul; gatim—the destination; sūkṣmām—sublime; abodhena—because of their lack of understanding; saṁsaranti—they move through the cycle of birth and death; iha—in this world; karmabhiḥ—forced by their material activities.
They are truly ignorant who, while imprisoned within the ceaseless flow of this world's material qualities, fail to know You, the Supreme Soul of all that be, as their ultimate, sublime destination. Because of their ignorance, the entanglement of material work forces such souls to wander in the cycle of birth and death.
A soul who forgets his true identity as a servant of God is sent to this world to be imprisoned in a succession of material bodies. Wrongly identifying himself with these bodies, such a conditioned soul suffers the consequent distress of karmic action and reaction. Vasudeva, as a compassionate Vaiṣṇava, laments for the suffering conditioned souls, whose unhappiness, the result of ignorance, can be remedied by knowledge of the principles of devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT 16
yaā{"cC$yaA na{taAM ‘aApya
s$auk(lpaAimah" āu"laRBaAma,
svaATaeR ‘amaÔasya vayaAe
gAtaM tvanmaAyayaeṅr"
yadṛcchayā nṛtāṁ prāpya
su-kalpām iha durlabhām
svārthe pramattasya vayo
gataṁ tvan-māyayeśvara
yadṛcchayā—somehow or other; nṛtām—human status; prāpya—obtaining; su-kalpām—fit; iha—in this life; durlabhām—difficult to achieve; sva—his own; arthe—about the welfare; pramattasya—of one who is confused; vayaḥ—the span of life; gatam—spent; tvat—Your; māyayā—by the illusory energy; īśvara—O Lord.
By good fortune a soul may obtain a healthy human life—an opportunity rarely achieved. But if he is nonetheless deluded about what is best for him, O Lord, Your illusory Māyā will cause him to waste his entire life.
TEXT 17
@s$aAvah"mmamaEvaEtae
de"he" caAsyaAnvayaAid"Sau
µaeh"paAzAEinaRba©aAita
BavaAna, s$avaRimadM" jagAta,
asāv aham mamaivaite
dehe cāsyānvayādiṣu
sneha-pāśair nibadhnāti
bhavān sarvam idaṁ jagat
asau—this; aham—I; mama—mine; eva—indeed; ete—these; dehe—in connection with one's body; ca—and; asya—of it; anvaya-ādiṣu—and in connection with progeny and other related things; sneha—of affection; pāśaiḥ—with the ropes; nibadhnāti—tie up; bhavān—You; sarvam—all; idam—this; jagat—world.
You keep this whole world bound up by the ropes of affection, and thus when people consider their material bodies, they think, "This is me," and when they consider their progeny and other relations, they think, "These are mine."
TEXT 18
yauvaAM na na: s$autaAE s$aAºaAta,
‘aDaAnapauś&Saeṅr"AE
BaUBaAr"ºa‡aºapaNA
@vataINAAE= taTaAtTa h"
yuvāṁ na naḥ sutau sākṣāt
pradhāna-puruṣeśvarau
bhū-bhāra-kṣatra-kṣapaṇa
avatīrṇau tathāttha ha
yuvām—You two; na—not; naḥ—our; sutau—sons; sākṣāt—directly; pradhāna-puruṣa—of nature and its creator (Mahā-Viṣṇu); īśvarau—the supreme controllers; bhū—of the earth; bhāra—the burden; kṣatra—royalty; kṣapaṇe—for eradicating; avatīrṇau—descended; tathā—so; āttha—You have said; ha—indeed.
You are not our sons but the very Lords of both material nature and its creator [Mahā-Viṣṇu]. As You Yourself have told us, You have descended to rid the earth of the rulers who are a heavy burden upon her.
According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, in this verse Vasudeva offers himself and his wife as excellent examples of those who are materially deluded. Although at the time of His birth in Kaṁsa's prison Lord Kṛṣṇa told Vasudeva and Devakī that His mission was to rid the earth of unwanted kṣatriyas, still His two parents could not avoid thinking of Him as their helpless son who needed protection from King Kaṁsa. In reality, of course, both Vasudeva and Devakī were participating in the divine pastime of the Lord's birth under the perfect direction of His internal energy; only out of transcendental humility does Vasudeva criticize himself in this way.
TEXT 19
taÔae gAtaAe'smyar"NAmaâ pad"Ar"ivand"ma,
@Apaªas$aMs$a{itaBayaApah"maAtaRbanDaAe
WtaAvataAlamalaimain‰"yalaAlas$aena
matyaARtmaā{"ftvaiya pare" yad"patyabauiŪ":
tat te gato 'smy araṇam adya padāravindam
āpanna-saṁsṛti-bhayāpaham ārta-bandho
etāvatālam alam indriya-lālasena
martyātma-dṛk tvayi pare yad apatya-buddhiḥ
tat—therefore; te—Your; gataḥ—come; asmi—I am; araṇam—for shelter; adya—today; pāda-aravindam—to the lotus feet; āpanna—for those who have surrendered; saṁsṛti—of material entanglement; bhaya—the fear; apaham—which remove; ārta—of the distressed; bandho—O friend; etāvatā—this much; alam alam—enough, enough; indriya—for sense enjoyment; lālasena—with hankering; martya—as mortal (the material body); ātma—myself; dṛk—whose seeing; tvayi—toward You; pare—the Supreme; yat—because of which (hankering); apatya—(of Your being my) child; buddhiḥ—the mentality.
Therefore, O friend of the distressed, I now approach Your lotus feet for shelter—the same lotus feet that dispel all fear of worldly existence for those who have surrendered to them. Enough! Enough with hankering for sense enjoyment, which makes me identify with this mortal body and think of You, the Supreme, as my child.
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī suggests that Vasudeva condemns himself here for thinking of trying to gain special opulences because he is the father of the Supreme Lord. Thus Vasudeva contrasts himself with Nanda, the king of Vraja, who was satisfied with pure love of God and nothing else.
TEXT 20
s$aUtaIgA{he" nanau jagAAd" BavaAnajaAe naAE
s$aÃaÁa wtyanauyaugAM inajaDamaRgAuptyaE
naAnaAtanaUgARgAnavaiã"d"DaṀah"Ais$a
k(Ae vaed" BaU°a oś&gAAya ivaBaUitamaAyaAma,
sūtī-gṛhe nanu jagāda bhavān ajo nau
sañjajña ity anu-yugaṁ nija-dharma-guptyai
nānā-tanūr gagana-vad vidadhaj jahāsi
ko veda bhūmna uru-gāya vibhūti-māyām
sūtī-gṛhe—in the maternity room; nanu—indeed; jagāda—said; bhavān—You; ajaḥ—the unborn Lord; nau—to us; sañjajñe—You have taken birth; iti—thus; anu-yugam—in one age after another; nija—Your own; dharma—the principles of religion; guptyai—to protect; nānā—various; tanūḥ—divine bodies; gagana-vat—like a cloud; vidadhat—assuming; jahāsi—You make unmanifest; kaḥ—who; veda—can understand; bhūmnaḥ—of the all-pervading Supreme Lord; uru-gāya—O You who are greatly glorified; vibhūti—of the opulent expansions; māyām—the mystic, deluding potency.
Indeed, while still in the maternity room You told us that You, the unborn Lord, had already been born several times as our son in previous ages. After manifesting each of these transcendental bodies to protect Your own principles of religion, You then made them unmanifest, thus appearing and disappearing like a cloud. O supremely glorified, all-pervading Lord, who can understand the mystic, deluding potency of Your opulent expansions?
Lord Kṛṣṇa was first born to Vasudeva and Devakī in their previous lives as Sutapā and Pṛśni. Later they again became His parents as Kaśyapa and Aditi. This, then, was the third time He had appeared as their son.



Song Players of Devaki to Krsna and Balarama 
TEXT 29
™aIde"vafyauvaAca
r"Ama r"AmaA‘amaeyaAtmana,
k{(SNA yaAegAeṅre"ṅr"
vaed"AhM" vaAM ivaṅs$a{jaAma,
wRṅr"AvaAid"paUś&SaAE
śrī-devaky uvāca
rāma rāmāprameyātman
kṛṣṇa yogeśvareśvara
vedāhaṁ vāṁ viśva-sṛjām
īśvarāv ādi-pūruṣau
śrī-devakī uvāca—Śrī Devakī said; rāma rāma—O Rāma, Rāma; aprameya-ātman—O immeasurable Supersoul; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; yoga-īśvara—of the masters of mystic yoga; īśvara—O master; veda—know; aham—I; vām—You both; viśva—of the universe; sṛjām—of the creators; īśvarau—the Lords; ādi—original; pūruṣau—the two Personalities of Godhead.
Śrī Devakī said: O Rāma, Rāma, immeasurable Supreme Soul! O Kṛṣṇa, Lord of all masters of yoga! I know that You are the ultimate rulers of all universal creators, the primeval Personalities of Godhead.
TEXT 30
k(laivaDvastas$aÔvaAnaAM
r"AÁaAmaucC$AṣvaitaRnaAma,
BaUmaeBaARr"AyamaANAAnaAma,
@vataINAAE= ik(laAâ mae
kala-vidhvasta-sattvānāṁ
rājñām ucchāstra-vartinām
bhūmer bhārāyamāṇānām
avatīrṇau kilādya me
kāla—by time; vidhvasta—destroyed; sattvānām—whose good qualities; rājñām—for (killing) the kings; ut-śāstra—outside the scope of scriptural rules; vartinām—who act; bhūmeḥ—for the earth; bhārāyamāṇānām—becoming a burden; avatīrṇau—(both of You) descended; kila—indeed; adya—now; me—to me.
Taking birth from me, You have now descended to this world in order to kill those kings whose good qualities have been destroyed by the present age, and who thus defy the authority of revealed scriptures and burden the earth.
TEXT 31
yasyaAMzAAMzAAMzABaAgAena
ivaṅAetpaiÔalayaAed"yaA:
Bavainta ik(la ivaṅAtmaMs$a,
taM tvaAâAhM" gAitaM gAtaA
yasyāṁśāṁśāṁśa-bhāgena
viśvotpatti-layodayāḥ
bhavanti kila viśvātmaṁs
taṁ tvādyāhaṁ gatiṁ gatā
yasya—whose; aṁśa—of the expansion; aṁśa—of the expansion; aṁśa—of the expansion; bhāgena—by a part; viśva—of the universe; utpatti—the generation; laya—dissolution; udayāḥ—and prosperity; bhavanti—arise; kila—indeed; viśva-ātman—O Soul of all that be; tat—to Him; tvā—Yourself; adya—today; aham—I; gatim—for shelter; gatā—come.
O Soul of all that be, the creation, maintenance and destruction of the universe are all carried out by a fraction of an expansion of an expansion of Your expansion. Today I have come to take shelter of You, the Supreme Lord.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī explains this verse as follows: The Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, Nārāyaṇa, is but one expansion of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Mahā-Viṣṇu, the first creator, is Lord Nārāyaṇa's expansion. The total material energy emanates from Mahā-Viṣṇu's glance, and of that total material energy the three modes of nature are divided portions. Thus it is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, acting through His expansions, who generates, sustains and dissolves the universe.
TEXTS 32-33
icar"Anma{tas$autaAd"Anae
gAuś&NAA ik(la caAeid"taAE
@AinanyaTau: ipata{sTaAnaAā,"
gAur"vae gAuś&d"iºaNAAma,
taTaA mae ku(ś&taM k(AmaM
yauvaAM yaAegAeṅre"ṅr"AE
BaAejar"Ajah"taAna, pau‡aAna,
k(Amayae ‰"í]"maAô$taAna,
cirān mṛta-sutādāne
guruṇā kila coditau
āninyathuḥ pitṛ-sthānād
gurave guru-dakṣiṇām
tathā me kurutaṁ kāmaṁ
yuvāṁ yogeśvareśvarau
bhoja-rāja-hatān putrān
kāmaye draṣṭum āhṛtān
cirāt—for a long time; mṛta—dead; suta—the son; ādāne—to return; guruṇā—by Your spiritual master; kila—it has been heard; coditau—ordered; āninyathuḥ—You brought him; pitṛ—of the forefathers; sthānāt—from the place; gurave—to Your spiritual master; guru-dakṣiṇām—as a token of thanksgiving for Your guru's mercy; tathā—in the same way; me—my; kurutam—please fulfill; kāmam—the desire; yuvām—You two; yoga-īśvara—of the masters of yoga; īśvarau—O masters; bhoja-rāja—by the king of Bhoja (Kaṁsa); hatān—killed; putrān—my sons; kāmaye—I wish; draṣṭum—to see; āhṛtān—brought back.
It is said that when Your spiritual master ordered You to retrieve his long-dead son, You brought him back from the forefathers' abode as a token of remuneration for Your guru's mercy. Please fulfill my desire in the same way, O supreme masters of all yoga masters. Please bring back my sons who were killed by the king of Bhoja, so that I may see them once again.



Song Prayers by King Bali
TEXT 39
bailaś&vaAca
namaAe'nantaAya ba{h"tae
nama: k{(SNAAya vaeDas$ae
s$aAÊḷYayaAegAivataAnaAya
“aṭNAe par"maAtmanae
balir uvāca
namo 'nantāya bṛhate
namaḥ kṛṣṇāya vedhase
sāṅkhya-yoga-vitānāya
brahmaṇe paramātmane
baliḥ uvāca—Bali said; namaḥ—obeisances; anantāya—to Ananta, the unlimited Lord; bṛhate—the greatest being; namaḥ—obeisances; kṛṣṇāya—to Kṛṣṇa; vedhase—the creator; sāṅkhya—of sāṅkhya analysis; yoga—and of mystic yoga; vitānāya—the disseminator; brahmaṇe—the Absolute Truth; parama-ātmane—the Supersoul.
King Bali said: Obeisances to the unlimited Lord, Ananta, the greatest of all beings. And obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the creator of the universe, who appears as the impersonal Absolute and the Supersoul in order to disseminate the principles of sāṅkhya and yoga.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī identifies the supreme Ananta named here as Lord Balarāma, from whom expands the divine serpent Ananta Śeṣa. Impersonal Brahman is the source of the texts belonging to the sāṅkhya philosophers, while the personal representation of the Lord known as Paramātmā disseminates the textbooks of yoga.
TEXT 40
d"zARnaM vaAM ih" BaUtaAnaAM
āu"S‘aApaM caApyaāu"laRBama,
r"jastama:svaBaAvaAnaAM
yaªa: ‘aAæaAE yaā{"cC$yaA
darśanaṁ vāṁ hi bhūtānāṁ
duṣprāpaṁ cāpy adurlabham
rajas-tamaḥ-svabhāvānāṁ
yan naḥ prāptau yadṛcchayā
darśanam—the vision; vām—of You two; hi—indeed; bhūtānām—for living beings in general; duṣprāpam—rarely achieved; ca api—yet still; adurlabham—not difficult to obtain; rajaḥ—in passion; tamaḥ—and ignorance; svabhāvānām—for those whose natures; yat—in that; naḥ—by us; prāptau—obtained; yadṛcchayā—causelessly.
Seeing You Lords is a rare achievement for most living beings. But even persons like us, situated in the modes of passion and ignorance, can easily see You when You reveal Yourself by Your own sweet will.
By ascribing to himself the degraded status of a demoniac birth, Bali Mahārāja denied any spiritual qualification for being visited by Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. What to speak of demons like himself, Bali thought, even advanced renunciants on the paths of jñāna and yoga fail to please the Lord when they do not give up their pride and envy.
TEXTS 41-43
dE"tyad"AnavagAnDavaAR:
is$aŪ"ivaâA‹acaAr"NAA:
yaºar"ºa:ipazAAcaAê
BaUta‘amaTanaAyak(A:
ivazAuŪ"s$aÔvaDaAmnyaŪ"A
tvaiya zAAṣzAr"Iir"iNA
inatyaM inabaŪ"vaEr"Astae
vayaM caAnyae ca taAā{"zAA:
ke(canaAeḶ"Ū"vaEre"NA
BaftyaA ke(cana k(Amata:
na taTaA s$aÔvas$aMr"bDaA:
s$aiªak{(í"A: s$aur"Ad"ya:
daitya-dānava-gandharvāḥ
siddha-vidyādhra-cāraṇāḥ
yakṣa-rakṣaḥ-piśācāś ca
bhūta-pramatha-nāyakāḥ
viśuddha-sattva-dhāmny addhā
tvayi śāstra-śarīriṇi
nityaṁ nibaddha-vairās te
vayaṁ cānye ca tādṛśāḥ
kecanodbaddha-vaireṇa
bhaktyā kecana kāmataḥ
na tathā sattva-saṁrabdhāḥ
sannikṛṣṭāḥ surādayaḥ
daitya-dānava—the Daitya and Dānava demons; gandharvāḥ—and the Gandharvas, celestial singers; siddha-vidyādhara-cāraṇāḥ—the Siddha, Vidyādhara and Cāraṇa demigods; yakṣa—the Yakṣas (semipious spirits); rakṣaḥ—the Rākṣasas (man-eating spirits); piśācāḥ—the carnivorous Piśāca demons; ca—and; bhūta—the ghosts; pramatha-nāyakāḥ—and the evil Pramatha and Nāyaka spirits; viśuddha—perfectly pure; sattva—of goodness; dhāmni—toward the embodiment; addhā—direct; tvayi—You; śāstra—which comprises the revealed scriptures; śarīriṇi—the possessor of such a body; nityam—always; nibaddha—fixed; vairāḥ—in enmity; te—they; vayam—we; ca—also; anye—others; ca—and; tādṛśāḥ—like them; kecana—some; udbaddha—especially obstinate; vaireṇa—with hatred; bhaktyā—with devotion; kecana—some; kāmataḥ—rising out of lust; na—not; tathā—so; sattva—by the material mode of goodness; saṁrabdhāḥ—those who are predominated; sannikṛṣṭāḥ—attracted; sura—demigods; ādayaḥ—and others.
Many who had been constantly absorbed in enmity toward You ultimately became attracted to You, who are the direct embodiment of transcendental goodness and whose divine form comprises the revealed scriptures. These reformed enemies include Daityas, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Vidyādharas, Cāraṇas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Piśācas, Bhūtas, Pramathas and Nāyakas, and also ourselves and many others like us. Some of us have become attracted to You because of exceptional hatred, while others have become attracted because of their mood of devotion based on lust. But the demigods and others infatuated by material goodness feel no such attraction for You.
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī explains this passage as follows: The Gandharvas, Siddhas, Vidyādharas and Cāraṇas are adversaries of the Supreme Lord when they follow the lead of the Daitya and Dānava demons. The Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Piśācas and so on tend to be inimical because they are generally covered by ignorance. There are some rascals in the pure mode of ignorance, like Śiśupāla and Pauṇḍraka, who are totally absorbed in meditation on the Lord as their enemy, and this fixed consciousness earns them liberation. Others, in a mixed condition of passion and ignorance, associate with the Lord with a desire for position and prestige; Mahārāja Bali sees himself as belonging to this category. Yet Lord Viṣṇu favored Bali by becoming his doorkeeper in the subterranean region of Sutala, just as He favored the demons by killing and liberating them, and the Gandharvas by engaging them in singing His glories. On the other hand, the Lord awards sense gratification to those demigods who are proud of their being situated in the mode of goodness; thus they become deluded and forget Him.
TEXT 44
wd"imatTaimaita ‘aAyas$a,
tava yaAegAeṅre"ṅr"
na ivad"ntyaipa yaAegAezAA
yaAegAmaAyaAM ku(taAe vayama,
idam ittham iti prāyas
tava yogeśvareśvara
na vidanty api yogeśā
yoga-māyāṁ kuto vayam
idam—this; ittham—characterized like this; iti—in such terms; prāyaḥ—for the most part; tava—Your; yoga-īśvara—of the masters of yoga; īśvara—O supreme master; na vidanti—they do not know; api—even; yoga-īśāḥ—the masters of yoga; yoga-māyām—Your spiritual power of delusion; kutaḥ—what then of; vayam—us.
What to speak of ourselves, O Lord of all perfect yogīs, even the greatest mystics do not know what Your spiritual power of delusion is or how it acts.
Systematic understanding of something should include knowledge of both its svarūpa, or essential identity, and also its viśeṣas, the attributes that make it different from other things. Māyā, the energy underlying all material existence, is more subtle than ordinary phenomena. Only God and His liberated devotees, therefore, can know its svarūpa and viśeṣa.
TEXT 45
taªa: ‘as$aId" inar"paeºaivama{gyayauSmata,
paAd"Ar"ivand"iDaSaNAAnyagA{h"AnDakU(paAta,
inaS‚(mya ivaṅzAr"NAAx.~„yaupalabDava{iÔa:
zAAntaAe yaTaEk( ota s$avaRs$aKaEêr"Aima
tan naḥ prasīda nirapekṣa-vimṛgya-yuṣmat
pādāravinda-dhiṣaṇānya-gṛhāndha-kūpāt
niṣkramya viśva-śaraṇāṅghry-upalabdha-vṛttiḥ
śānto yathaika uta sarva-sakhaiś carāmi
tat—in such a way; naḥ—to us; prasīda—please be merciful; nirapekṣa—by those who have no material motives; vimṛgya—searched for; yuṣmat—Your; pāda—than the feet; aravinda—lotus; dhiṣaṇa—shelter; anya—other; gṛha—from the home; andha—blind; kūpāt—which is a well; niṣkramya—going out; viśva—to the whole world; śaraṇa—of those who are helpful (the trees); aṅghri—at the feet; upalabdha—obtained; vṛttiḥ—whose livelihood; śāntaḥ—peaceful; yathā—as; ekaḥ—alone; uta—or else; sarva—of everyone; sakhaiḥ—with the friends; carāmi—I may wander.
Please be merciful to me so I may get out of the blind well of family life—my false home—and find the true shelter of Your lotus feet, which selfless sages always seek. Then, either alone or in the company of great saints, who are the friends of everyone, I may wander freely, finding life's necessities at the feet of the universally charitable trees.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī states that in response to Bali's prayers, Śrī Kṛṣṇa invited him to choose some benediction, and in this verse Bali submits his request. Bali begs to be relieved of the entanglement of material life so he will be free to leave home and wander in the wilderness, with only the Lord's lotus feet as his shelter. For his subsistence, Bali proposes, he will take help from the forest trees, at whose feet are fruits to eat and leaves to sleep on, for all to use as needed. And if the Lord is especially merciful to him, Bali hopes, he will not have to wander alone but will be allowed to travel in the company of Lord Kṛṣṇa's devotees.
TEXT 46
zAADyasmaAnaIizAtavyaezA
inaSpaApaAna, ku(ś& na: ‘aBaAe
paumaAna, yacC)$Ū"yaAitañM"zA,
caAed"naAyaA ivamaucyatae
śādhy asmān īśitavyeśa
niṣpāpān kuru naḥ prabho
pumān yac chraddhayātiṣṭhaṁś
codanāyā vimucyate
śādhi—please order; asmān—us; īśitavya—of those who are subject to being controlled; īśa—O controller; niṣpāpān—sinless; kuru—please make; naḥ—us; prabho—O master; pumān—a person; yat—which; śraddhayā—with faith; ātiṣṭhan—executing; codanāyāḥ—of scriptural regulation; vimucyate—becomes free.
O Lord of all subordinate creatures, please tell us what to do and thus free us of all sin. One who faithfully executes Your command, O master, is no longer obliged to follow the ordinary Vedic rites.
The ācāryas explain Bali's thoughts as follows. Reflecting on the possibility that his request for immediate deliverance may have been too bold, Bali Mahārāja considers that first he will need to become sufficiently purified. In any case, he thinks, Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma must have come to him for some specific purpose; if he can receive the Lords' order and carry it out, that will be his best opportunity for purification. Indeed, as Bali states, a devotee acting under the Personality of Godhead's instruction need no longer follow the sacrificial injunctions and prohibitions of the Vedas.



Song Players by King Bahulasva
TEXT 31
™aIbaḍ"laAṅ ovaAca
BavaAna, ih" s$avaRBaUtaAnaAma,
@AtmaA s$aAºaI svaā{"igvaBaAe
@Ta nastvatpad"AmBaAejaM
smar"taAM d"zARnaM gAta:
śrī-bahulāśva uvāca
bhavān hi sarva-bhūtānām
ātmā sākṣī sva-dṛg vibho
atha nas tvat-padāmbhojaṁ
smaratāṁ darśanaṁ gataḥ
śrī-bahulāśvaḥ uvāca—Śrī Bahulāśva said; bhavān—You; hi—indeed; sarva—of all; bhūtānām—created beings; ātmā—the Supreme Soul; sākṣī—the witness; sva-dṛk—self-illumined; vibho—O almighty one; atha—thus; naḥ—to us; tvat—Your; pada-ambhojam—lotus feet; smaratām—who are remembering; darśanam gataḥ—have become visible.
Śrī Bahulāśva said: O almighty Lord, You are the Soul of all created beings, their self-illumined witness, and now You are giving Your audience to us, who constantly meditate on Your lotus feet.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī explains Bahulāśva's inner thoughts as follows: Bahulāśva glorifies Lord Kṛṣṇa as the inspiring Soul of all life and consciousness, thinking that even an inert dullard like himself could be awakened to devotional awareness by His mercy. He glorifies the Lord as the witness of all pious and impious actions, confident that the Lord remembers whatever little devotional service he has ever done. And he glorifies Him as self-illumined, never needing to be enlightened or informed by any external source, with the knowledge that the Lord has always been aware of Bahulāśva's long-cherished secret desire to see Him.
TEXT 32
svavacastaā{"taM k(tauRma,
@smaā,"ā{"ggAAecar"Ae BavaAna,
yad"AtTaEk(AntaBa·(Anmae
naAnanta: ™aIr"ja: i‘aya:
sva-vacas tad ṛtaṁ kartum
asmad-dṛg-gocaro bhavān
yad ātthaikānta-bhaktān me
nānantaḥ śrīr ajaḥ priyaḥ
sva—Your own; vacaḥ—statement; tat—that; ṛtam—true; kartum—to make; asmat—our; dṛk—to the eyes; gocaraḥ—accessible; bhavān—You; yat—which; āttha—spoke; eka-anta—with a single aim; bhaktāt—than the devotee; me—my; na—not; anantaḥ—Lord Ananta; śrīḥ—Goddess Śrī; ajaḥ—unborn Brahmā; priyaḥ—more dear.
You have said, "Neither Ananta, Goddess Śrī nor unborn Brahmā is dearer to Me than My unalloyed devotee." To prove Your own words true, You have now revealed Yourself to our eyes.
TEXT 33
k(Ae nau tva»ar"NAAmBaAejama,
WvaMivaiã"s$a{jaetpaumaAna,
inaiSk(ÂanaAnaAM zAAntaAnaAM
maunaInaAM yastvamaAtmad":
ko nu tvac-caraṇāmbhojam
evaṁ-vid visṛjet pumān
niṣkiñcanānāṁ śāntānāṁ
munīnāṁ yas tvam ātma-daḥ
kaḥ—who; nu—at all; tvat—Your; caraṇa-ambhojam—lotus feet; evam—like this; vit—being in knowledge; visṛjet—would abandon; pumān—person; niṣkiñcanānām—for those who have no material possessions; śāntānām—who are peaceful; munīnām—sages; yaḥ—who; tvam—You; ātma—Yourself; daḥ—giving.
What person who knows this truth would ever abandon Your lotus feet, when You are ready to give Your very self to peaceful sages who call nothing their own?
TEXT 34
yaAe'vataIyaR yad"Aeva<zAe
na{NAAM s$aMs$ar"taAimah"
yazAAe ivataenae tacC$AntyaE
‡aElaAefyava{ijanaApah"ma,
yo 'vatīrya yador vaṁśe
nṛṇāṁ saṁsaratām iha
yaśo vitene tac-chāntyai
trai-lokya-vṛjināpaham
yaḥ—who; avatīrya—descending; yadoḥ—of Yadu; vaṁśe—into the dynasty; nṛṇām—for people; saṁsaratām—who are caught up in the cycle of birth and death; iha—in this world; yaśaḥ—Your fame; vitene—has disseminated; tat—of that (material existence); śāntyai—for the stopping; trai-lokya—of the three worlds; vṛjina—the sins; apaham—which removes.
Appearing in the Yadu dynasty, You have spread Your glories, which can remove all the sins of the three worlds, just to deliver those entrapped in the cycle of birth and death.
TEXT 35
namastauByaM BagAvatae
k{(SNAAyaAku(NQ&maeDas$ae
naAr"AyaNAAya [%Sayae
s$auzAAntaM tapa wRyauSae
namas tubhyaṁ bhagavate
kṛṣṇāyākuṇṭha-medhase
nārāyaṇāya ṛṣaye
su-śāntaṁ tapa īyuṣe
namaḥ—obeisances; tubhyam—to You; bhagavate—the Supreme Lord; kṛṣṇāya—Kṛṣṇa; akuṇṭha—unconstricted; medhase—whose intelligence; nārāyaṇāya ṛṣaye—to the sage Nara-Nārāyaṇa; su-śāntam—perfectly peaceful; tapaḥ—austerities; īyuṣe—undergoing.
Obeisances to You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose intelligence is ever unrestricted. Obeisances to the sage Nara-Nārāyaṇa, who always undergoes austerities in perfect peace.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī comments that the king offered these prayers to encourage Lord Kṛṣṇa to remain at his home for some days. The king thought, "Since contact with the Supreme Lord can free anyone from misconceptions and doubts, Kṛṣṇa's presence in my home will fortify my intelligence so that I can withstand the onslaughts of material desires. In His expansion as Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi, the Lord always resides in Badarikāśrama for the good of the whole land of Bharata, and so He may also create good fortune for the land of Mithilā by remaining here for at least a few days. Since Lord Kṛṣṇa's propensity is toward peace and simplicity, He will certainly prefer my simple home to the excessive opulence of Dvārakā."
TEXT 36
id"naAina k(itaicaṁU"mana,
gA{h"AªaAe inavas$a iã"jaE:
s$amaeta: paAd"r"jas$aA
paunaIh"IdM" inamae: ku(lama,
dināni katicid bhūman
gṛhān no nivasa dvijaiḥ
sametaḥ pāda-rajasā
punīhīdaṁ nimeḥ kulam
dināni—days; katicit—a few; bhūman—O omnipresent one; gṛhān—in the home; naḥ—-our; nivasa—please dwell; dvijaiḥ—by the brāhmaṇas; sametaḥ—joined; pāda—of Your feet; rajasā—with the dust; punīhi—please sanctify; idam—this; nimeḥ—of King Nimi; kulam—the dynasty.
Please stay a few days in our house, along with these brāhmaṇas, O all-pervading one, and with the dust of Your feet sanctify this dynasty of Nimi.



Song Players by Srutadeva
TEXT 44
™autade"va ovaAca
naAâ naAe d"zARnaM ‘aAæa:
parM" par"mapaUś&Sa:
yah"I=dM" zAi·(iBa: s$a{"î"A
‘aivaí"Ae ÷Atmas$aÔayaA
śrutadeva uvāca
nādya no darśanaṁ prāptaḥ
paraṁ parama-pūruṣaḥ
yarhīdaṁ śaktibhiḥ sṛṣṭvā
praviṣṭo hy ātma-sattayā
śrutadevaḥ uvāca—Śrutadeva said; na—not; adya—today; naḥ—by us; darśanam—vision; prāptaḥ—obtained; param—only; parama—the supreme; pūruṣaḥ—person; yarhi—when; idam—this (universe); śaktibhiḥ—with His energies; sṛṣṭvā—creating; praviṣṭaḥ—entered; hi—indeed; ātma—His own; sattayā—in the state of existence.
Śrutadeva said: It is not that we have attained the audience of the Supreme Person only today, for we have in fact been associating with Him ever since He created this universe with His energies and then entered it in His transcendental form.
TEXT 45
yaTaA zAyaAna: pauś&SaAe
manas$aEvaAtmamaAyayaA
s$a{"î"A laAekM( parM" svaA«ama,
@nauivazyaAvaBaAs$atae
yathā śayānaḥ puruṣo
manasaivātma-māyayā
sṛṣṭvā lokaṁ paraṁ svāpnam
anuviśyāvabhāsate
yathā—as; śayānaḥ—sleeping; puruṣaḥ—a person; manasā—with his mind; eva—alone; ātma—own; māyayā—by his imagination; sṛṣṭvā—creating; lokam—a world; param—separate; svāpnam—dream; anuviśya—entering; avabhāsate—he appears.
The Lord is like a sleeping person who creates a separate world in his imagination and then enters his own dream and sees himself within it.
In the illusion of his dream, a sleeping person creates an apparent world, complete with cities populated by the fictional products of his imagination. In somewhat the same way, the Lord manifests the cosmos. Of course, the creation is not illusory for the Lord, but it is for those souls who are put under the control of His Māyā potency. As her service to the Lord, Māyā deludes the conditioned souls into accepting as real her temporary, insubstantial manifestations.
TEXT 46
Za{NvataAM gAd"taAM zAṅā,"
@caRtaAM tvaAiBavand"taAma,
NA{NAAM s$aMvad"taAmantar,"
ô$id" BaAsyamalaAtmanaAma,
śṛṇvatāṁ gadatāṁ śaśvad
arcatāṁ tvābhivandatām
ṇṛṇāṁ saṁvadatām antar
hṛdi bhāsy amalātmanām
śṛṇvatām—for those who are hearing; gadatām—speaking; śaśvat—constantly; arcatām—worshiping; tvā—You; abhivandatām—offering praise; nṛṇām—for men; saṁvadatām—conversing; antaḥ—within; hṛdi—the heart; bhāsi—You appear; amala—spotless; ātmanām—whose minds.
You reveal Yourself within the hearts of those persons of pure consciousness who constantly hear about You, chant about You, worship You, glorify You and converse with one another about You.
TEXT 47
ô$id"sTaAe'pyaitaāU"r"sTa:
k(maRivaiºaæacaetas$aAma,
@AtmazAi·(iBar"ƒaA÷Ae
'pyantyaupaetagAuNAAtmanaAma,
hṛdi-stho 'py ati-dūra-sthaḥ
karma-vikṣipta-cetasām
ātma-śaktibhir agrāhyo
'py anty upeta-guṇātmanām
hṛdi—in the heart; sthaḥ—situated; api—although; ati—very; dūra-sthaḥ—far away; karma—by material activities; vikṣipta—disturbed; cetasām—for those whose minds; ātma—by one's own; śaktibhiḥ—powers; agrāhyaḥ—not to be taken hold of; api—although; anti—near; upeta—realized; guṇa—Your qualities; ātmanām—by whose hearts.
But although You reside within the heart, You are very far away from those whose minds are disturbed by their entanglement in material work. Indeed, no one can grasp You by his material powers, for You reveal Yourself only in the hearts of those who have learned to appreciate Your transcendental qualities.
The all-merciful Lord is in everyone's heart. Seeing Him there, however, is possible only when one's heart is completely purified. Materialists may demand that God prove His existence by coming into view as a result of their empirical investigations, but God has no need to respond to such impudence. As Lord Kṛṣṇa states in the Bhagavad-gītā (7.25):
nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya
yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ
mūḍho 'yaṁ nābhijānāti
loko mām ajam avyayam
"I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am covered by My internal potency, and therefore they do not know that I am unborn and infallible."
TEXT 48
namaAe'stau tae'DyaAtmaivad"AM par"Atmanae
@naAtmanae svaAtmaivaBa·(ma{tyavae
s$ak(Ar"NAAk(Ar"NAilaṆḷmaIyauSae
svamaAyayaAs$aMva{taś&Ū"ā{"í"yae
namo 'stu te 'dhyātma-vidāṁ parātmane
anātmane svātma-vibhakta-mṛtyave
sa-kāraṇākāraṇa-liṅgam īyuṣe
sva-māyayāsaṁvṛta-ruddha-dṛṣṭaye
namaḥ—obeisances; astu—may there be; te—unto You; adhyātma—the Absolute Truth; vidām—for those who know; para-ātmane—the Supreme Soul; anātmane—to the conditioned jīva soul; sva-ātma—from Yourself (in the form of time); vibhakta—who gives; mṛtyave—death; sa-kāraṇa—having a cause; akāraṇa—having no cause; liṅgam—the forms (respectively, the material form of the universe and also Your original spiritual form); īyuṣe—who assume; sva-māyayā—by Your own mystic potency; asaṁvṛta—uncovered; ruddha—and blocked; dṛṣṭaye—vision.
Let me offer my obeisances unto You. You are realized as the Supreme Soul by those who know the Absolute Truth, whereas in Your form of time You impose death upon the forgetful souls. You appear both in Your causeless spiritual form and in the created form of this universe, thus simultaneously uncovering the eyes of Your devotees and obstructing the vision of the nondevotees.
When the Lord appears before His devotees in His eternal, spiritual form, their eyes become "uncovered" in the sense that all vestiges of illusion are dispelled and they drink in the beautiful vision of the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead. For the nondevotees, on the other hand, the Lord "appears" as material nature, His universal form, and in this way He covers their vision so that His spiritual, personal form remains invisible to them.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī gives another interpretation of this verse, based on an alternative understanding of anātmane, a form of the word anātmā: Various classes of men know the Absolute Truth in different ways. The devotees of the Lord who are in the reciprocal mood of neutral admiration (śānta-rasa) meditate on the Supreme as possessing a divine, personal form (ātmā or śrī-vigraha) transcending all aspects of material illusion. The impersonal philosophers (jñānīs) conceive of Him as formless (anātmā). And the envious demons see Him in the form of death.
TEXT 49
s$a tvaM zAAiDa svaBa{tyaAªa:
ikM( de"va k(r"vaAma he"
Wtad"ntaAe na{NAAM flaezAAe
yaṁ"vaAnaiºagAAecar":
sa tvaṁ śādhi sva-bhṛtyān naḥ
kiṁ deva karavāma he
etad-anto nṛṇāṁ kleśo
yad bhavān akṣi-gocaraḥ
saḥ—He; tvam—You; śādhi—please order; sva—Your; bhṛtyān—servants; naḥ—us; kim—what; deva—O Lord; karavāma—we should do; he—oh; etat—having this; antaḥ—as its end; nṛṇām—of humans; kleśaḥ—the troubles; yat—that; bhavān—Your good self; akṣi—to the eyes; go-caraḥ—visible.
O Lord, You are that Supreme Soul, and we are Your servants. How shall we serve You? My Lord, simply seeing You puts an end to all the troubles of human life.

Song Prayers of Personified Vedas
TEXT 14
™aI™autaya Ocau:
jaya jaya ja÷jaAmaijata d"AeSagA{BaItagAuNAAM
tvamais$a yad"AtmanaA s$amavaś&Ū"s$amastaBagA:
@gAjagAd"Aek(s$aAmaiKalazAftyavabaAeDak( tae
¸(icad"jayaAtmanaA ca car"taAe'naucare"iªagAma:
śrī-śrutaya ūcuḥ
jaya jaya jahy ajām ajita doṣa-gṛbhīta-guṇāṁ
tvam asi yad ātmanā samavaruddha-samasta-bhagaḥ
aga-jagad-okasām akhila-śakty-avabodhaka te
kvacid ajayātmanā ca carato 'nucaren nigamaḥ
śrī-śrutayaḥ ūcuḥ—the Vedas said; jayajaya—victory to You, victory to You; jahi—please defeat; ajām—the eternal illusory potency of Māyā; ajita—O unconquerable one; doṣa—to create discrepancies; gṛbhīta—who has assumed; guṇām—the qualities of matter; tvam—You; asi—are; yat—because; ātmanā—in Your original status; samavaruddha—complete; samasta—in all; bhagaḥ—opulences; aga—nonmoving; jagat—and moving; okasām—of those who possess material bodies; akhila—of all; śakti—the energies; avabodhaka—O You who awaken; te—You; kvacit—sometimes; ajayā—with Your material energy; ātmanā—and with Your internal, spiritual energy; ca—also; carataḥ—engaging; anucaret—can appreciate; nigamaḥ—the Vedas.
The śrutis said: Victory, victory to You, O unconquerable one! By Your very nature You are perfectly full in all opulences; therefore please defeat the eternal power of illusion, who assumes control over the modes of nature to create difficulties for conditioned souls. O You who awaken all the energies of the moving and nonmoving embodied beings, sometimes the Vedas can recognize You as You sport with Your material and spiritual potencies.
According to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, the twenty-eight verses of the prayers of the personified Vedas (Texts 14–41) represent the opinions of each of the twenty-eight major śrutis. These chief Upaniṣads and other śrutis concern themselves with various approaches to the Absolute Truth, and among them those śrutis are supreme which emphasize pure, unalloyed devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Upaniṣads direct our attention to the Personality of Godhead by first negating what is distinct from Him and then defining some of His important characteristics.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī interprets the first words of this prayer, jaya jaya, to mean "please reveal Your superexcellence." The word jaya is repeated out of either reverence or joy.
"How should I reveal My excellence?" the Lord might ask.
The śrutis answer by requesting Him to mercifully destroy the ignorance of all living beings and attract them to His lotus feet.
The Lord says, "But Māyā, who imposes ignorance on the jīvas, is full of good qualities [gṛbhīta-guṇām]. Why should I oppose her?"
"Yes," the Vedas answer, "but she has taken on the three modes of nature to bewilder the conditioned souls and make them falsely identify with their material bodies. Her modes of goodness, passion and ignorance, moreover, are tainted [doṣa-gṛbhīta] because You are not manifest in their presence."
The śrutis go on to address the Lord as ajita, implying that "only You cannot be conquered by Māyā, whereas others, like Brahmā, are defeated by their own faults."
The Lord responds, "But what proof do you have that she cannot conquer Me?"
"The proof lies in the fact that in Your original state You have already realized the perfection of all opulences."
At this point the Lord might object that merely destroying the ignorance of the jīvas will not suffice to bring them to His lotus feet, since the jīva soul, even after his ignorance is dispelled, cannot attain the Lord without engaging in devotional service. As the Lord states in His own words, bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ: "I am attainable only through devotional service." (SB 11.14.21)
To this objection the śrutis reply, "My Lord, O You who awaken all energies, after creating the intelligence and senses of the living entities, You inspire them to work hard and enjoy the fruits of their labor. In addition, by Your mercy You awaken their ability to pursue the progressive paths of knowledge, mystic yoga and devotional service, allowing them to advance toward You in Your aspects of Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān, respectively. And when jñāna, yoga and bhakti mature, You empower the living beings to directly realize You in each of Your three aspects."
If the Lord were to ask for authoritative evidence to support this statement by the personified Vedas, they humbly reply, "We ourselves are the evidence. On some occasions—such as now, the time of creation—You consort with Your external, Māyā potency, whereas You are always present with Your internal energy. It is at times such as the present, when Your activity is outwardly manifest, that we, the Vedas, can recognize You in Your play."
Thus endowed with authority by their personal association with the Supreme Lord, the śrutis promulgate the processes of karma, jñāna, yoga and bhakti as various means for the conditioned souls to employ their intelligence, senses, mind and vitality in search of the Absolute Truth.
In many places the Vedas glorify the transcendental, personal qualities of the Supreme. The following verse appears in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.11), the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (Uttara 97), and the Brahma Upaniṣad (4.1):
eko devaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu gūḍhaḥ
sarva-vyāpī sarva-bhūtāntarātmā
karmādhyakṣaḥ sarva-bhūtādhivāsaḥ
sākṣī cetāḥ kevalo nirguṇaś ca
"The one Supreme Lord lives hidden inside all created things. He pervades all matter and sits within the hearts of all living beings. As the indwelling Supersoul, He supervises their material activities. Thus, while having no material qualities Himself, He is the unique witness and giver of consciousness."
The Supreme's personal qualities are further described in the following quotations from the Upaniṣads: Yaḥ sarva-jñaḥ sa sarva-vid yasya jñāna-mayaṁ tapaḥ. "He who is all-knowing, from whom the potency of all knowledge comes—He is the wisest of all" (Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.1.9); sarvasya vaśī sarvasyeśānaḥ: "He is the Lord and controller of everyone" (Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.4.22); and yaḥ pṛthivyāṁ tiṣṭhan pṛthivyā āntaro yaṁ pṛthivī na veda: "He who resides within the earth and pervades it, whom the earth does not know." (Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 3.7.3)
The Lord's role in creation is mentioned in many statements of the śruti. The Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (1.2.4) states, so 'kāmayata bahu syām: "He desired, 'I will become many.' " "The phrase so 'kāmayata ("He desired") here implies that the Lord's personality is eternal, for even prior to the creation the Absolute Truth experienced desire, and desire is an attribute unique to persons. The Aitareya Upaniṣad (3.11) similarly states, sa aikṣata tat-tejo 'sṛjata: "He saw, and His power sent forth the creation." Here the word tat-tejaḥ refers to the Lord's partial expansion Mahā-Viṣṇu, who glances upon Māyā and thus manifests the material creation. Or tat-tejaḥ may refer to the Lord's impersonal Brahman feature, His potency of all-pervasive, eternal existence. As described in Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā (5.40),
yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-
koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam
tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ
govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is endowed with great power. The glowing effulgence of His transcendental form is the impersonal Brahman, which is absolute, complete and unlimited and which displays the varieties of countless planets, with their different opulences, in millions and millions of universes."
In summing up this verse, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
jaya jayājita jahy aga-jaṅgamā-
vṛtim ajām upanīta-mṛṣā-guṇām
na hi bhavantam ṛte prabhavanty amī
nigama-gīta-guṇārṇavatā tava
"All glories, all glories to You, O unconquerable one! Please defeat the influence of Your eternal Māyā, who covers all moving and nonmoving creatures and who rules over the modes of illusion. Without Your influence, all these Vedic mantras would be powerless to sing of You as the ocean of transcendental qualities."
TEXT 15
ba{h"āu"palabDamaetad"vayantyavazAeSatayaA
yata od"yaAstamayaAE ivak{(taema{Rid" vaAivak{(taAta,
@ta [%SayaAe d"Daustvaiya manaAevacanaAcair"taM
k(TamayaTaA Bavainta Bauiva d"Ôapad"Aina na{NAAma,
bṛhad upalabdham etad avayanty avaśeṣatayā
yata udayāstamayau vikṛter mṛdi vāvikṛtāt
ata ṛṣayo dadhus tvayi mano-vacanācaritaṁ
katham ayathā bhavanti bhuvi datta-padāni nṛṇām
bṛhat—as the Supreme; upalabdham—perceived; etat—this (world); avayanti—they consider; avaśeṣatayā—in terms of its being the all-pervading foundation of existence; yataḥ—since; udaya—the generation; astamayau—and dissolution; vikṛteḥ—of a transformation; mṛdi—of clay; vā—as if; avikṛtāt—(the Supreme itself) not being subject to transformation; ataḥ—therefore; ṛṣayaḥ—the sages (who compiled the Vedic mantras); dadhuḥ—placed; tvayi—in You; manaḥ—their minds; vacana—words; ācaritam—and actions; katham—how; ayathā—not as they are; bhavanti—become; bhuvi—upon the ground; datta—placed; padāni—the steps; nṛṇām—of men.
This perceivable world is identified with the Supreme because the Supreme Brahman is the ultimate foundation of all existence, remaining unchanged as all created things are generated from it and at last dissolved into it, just as clay remains unchanged by the products made from it and again merged with it. Thus it is toward You alone that the Vedic sages direct all their thoughts, words and acts. After all, how can the footsteps of men fail to touch the earth on which they live?
There may be some doubt as to whether the Vedic mantras are unanimous when identifying the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After all, some mantras state, indro yāto 'vasitasya rājā: "Indra is the king of all moving and nonmoving beings" (Ṛg Veda 1.32.15), while others say, agnir mūrdhā divaḥ: "Agni is the chief of the heavens," and yet other mantras point to different deities as the Absolute. It would seem, then, that the Vedas present a polytheistic world view.
Answering this doubt, the Vedas themselves explain in this verse that there can be only one source of universal creation, called Brahman or Bṛhat, "the greatest," which is the singular truth underlying and pervading all existence. No finite deity like Indra or Agni can fulfill this unique role, nor would the śrutis be so ignorant as to propose such an idea. As indicated here by the word tvayi, Lord Viṣṇu alone is the Absolute Truth. Indra and other demigods may be glorified in various ways, but they possess only those powers Lord Śrī Viṣṇu has granted them.
The Vedic sages understand that this entire world—including Indra, Agni, and everything else perceivable by the eyes, ears and other senses—is identical with the one Supreme Truth, the Personality of Godhead, who is called Bṛhat, "the greatest," because He is avaśeṣa, "the ultimate substance that remains." From the Lord everything expands at creation, and into Him everything dissolves at annihilation. He exists before and after the material manifestation as the constant basis, known to philosophers as the "ingredient cause," upādāna. Despite the fact that countless manifestations emanate from Him, the Supreme Lord exists eternally unchanged—an idea the śrutis specifically emphasize here with the word avikṛtāt.
The words mṛdi vā ("as in the case of clay") allude to a famous analogy spoken by Udālaka to his son Śvetaketu in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad (6.4.1): vācārambhanaṁ vikāro nāmadheyaṁ mṛttikety eva satyam. "The objects of the material world exist merely as names, transformations defined by language, whereas the ingredient cause, like the clay from which pots are made, is the actual reality." A mass of clay is the ingredient cause of various pots, statues and so on, but the clay itself remains in its essence unchanged. Eventually, the pots and other objects will be destroyed and return to the clay from which they came. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the total ingredient cause, yet He remains eternally untouched by transformation. This is the purport of the statement sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma: "Everything is Brahman." (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 3.14.1) Wondering at this mystery, the great devotee Gajendra prayed,
namo namas te 'khila-kāraṇāya
niṣkāraṇāyādbhuta-kāraṇāya
"Obeisances again and again to You, the source of all creation. You are the inconceivable cause of all causes, and of You there is no other cause." (SB 8.3.15)
Prakṛti, material nature, is often considered the ingredient cause of creation, in Western science as well as in the Vedas. This does not contradict the higher fact of the Supreme Lord's being the final cause, since prakṛti is His energy, and is herself subject to change. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.24.19), Lord Kṛṣṇa says,
prakṛtir yasyopādānam
ādhāraḥ puruṣaḥ paraḥ
sato 'bhivyañjakaḥ kālo
brahma tat tritayaṁ tv aham
"The material universe is real, having prakṛti as its original ingredient and final state. Lord Mahā-Viṣṇu is the resting place of nature, which becomes manifest by the power of time. Thus nature, the almighty Viṣṇu and time are not different from Me, the Supreme Absolute Truth." Prakṛti, however, undergoes transformation, while her Lord, the supreme puruṣa, does not. Prakṛti is the Personality of Godhead's external energy, but He has another energy—His internal energy—which is svarūpa-bhūtā, nondifferent from His very essence. The Lord's internal energy, like Himself, is never subject to material change.
Therefore the mantras of the Vedas, along with the ṛṣis who have received these mantras in meditation and transmitted them for the benefit of mankind, direct their attention primarily toward the Personality of Godhead. The Vedic sages direct the activities of their mind and words—that is to say, the inner as well as the literal meaning (abhidhā-vṛtti) of their utterances—first of all toward Him, and only secondarily toward separated transformations of prakṛti, such as Indra and other demigods.
Just as a man's footsteps, whether placed on mud, stone or bricks, cannot fail to touch the surface of the earth, so whatever the Vedas discuss within the realm of material generation, they relate to the Absolute Truth. Mundane literature describes limited phenomena, disregarding the relation of its subjects to the total reality, but the Vedas always focus their perfect vision on the Supreme. As the Chāndogya Upaniṣad affirms in its statements mṛttikety eva satyam and sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma, reality is understood properly when everything is seen to be dependent on Brahman, the Absolute, for its existence. Brahman alone is real, not because nothing we see in this world is real, but because Brahman is the absolute, final cause of everything. Thus the word satyam, as used in the phrase mṛttikety eva satyam, has been defined in another context as "ingredient cause" by no less an authority than Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself:
yad upādāya pūrvas tu
bhāvo vikurute param
ādir anto yadā yasya
tat satyam abhidhīyate
"A material object, itself composed of an essential ingredient, creates another material object through transformation. In this way one created object becomes the cause and basis of another created object. A particular thing may be called real in that it possesses the basic nature of another object that constitutes its cause and original state." (SB 11.24.18)
Explaining the word Brahman, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, "The word 'Brahman' indicates the greatest of all and the maintainer of everything. The impersonalists are attracted by the greatness of the sky, but because of their poor fund of knowledge they are not attracted by the greatness of Kṛṣṇa. In our practical life, however, we are attracted by the greatness of a person and not by the greatness of a big mountain. Thus the term 'Brahman' actually applies to Kṛṣṇa only; therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā Arjuna concluded that Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Para-brahman, or the supreme resting place of everything.
"Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Brahman because of His unlimited knowledge, unlimited potencies, unlimited strength, unlimited influence, unlimited beauty and unlimited renunciation. Ultimately, therefore, the word 'Brahman' can be applied to Kṛṣṇa only. Arjuna affirms that because the impersonal Brahman is the effulgence emanating as rays of Kṛṣṇa's transcendental body, Kṛṣṇa is the Para-brahman. Everything rests on Brahman, but Brahman itself rests on Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate Brahman, or Para-brahman. The material elements are accepted as the inferior energy of Kṛṣṇa. By their interaction the cosmic manifestation takes place, rests on Kṛṣṇa, and after dissolution again enters into the body of Kṛṣṇa as His subtle energy. Kṛṣṇa is therefore the cause of both manifestation and dissolution."
In summary, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
druhiṇa-vahni-ravīndra-mukhāmarā
jagad idaṁ na bhavet pṛthag utthitam
bahu-mukhair api mantra-gaṇair ajas
tvam uru-mūrtir ato vinigadyase
"The demigods, headed by Śiva, Agni, Sūrya and Indra, and indeed all beings in the universe, do not come into existence independently of You. The mantras of the Vedas, though they speak from various viewpoints, all speak about You, the unborn Lord appearing in numerous forms."
TEXT 16
wita tava s$aUr"yas$‡yaiDapatae'iKalalaAek(mala-
ºapaNAk(TaAma{taAibDamavagAA÷ tapaAMis$a jaḍ":
ik(mauta pauna: svaDaAmaivaDautaAzAyak(AlagAuNAA:
par"ma Bajainta yae pad"maja›as$auKaAnauBavama,
iti tava sūrayas try-adhipate 'khila-loka-mala-
kṣapaṇa-kathāmṛtābdhim avagāhya tapāṁsi jahuḥ
kim uta punaḥ sva-dhāma-vidhutāśaya-kāla-guṇāḥ
parama bhajanti ye padam ajasra-sukhānubhavam
iti—thus; tava—Your; sūrayaḥ—wise saints; tri—of the three (planetary systems of the universe, or the three modes of nature); adhipate—O master; akhila—of all; loka—the worlds; mala—the contamination; kṣapaṇa—which eradicates; kathā—of discussions; amṛta—nectar; abdhim—into the ocean; avagāhya—by diving deeply; tapāṁsi—their troubles; jahuḥ—have given up; kim uta—what to speak; punaḥ—moreover; sva—their own; dhāma—by the power; vidhuta—dispelled; āśaya—of their minds; kāla—and of time; guṇāḥ—the (undesirable) qualities; parama—O supreme one; bhajanti—worship; ye—who; padam—Your true nature; ajasra—uninterrupted; sukha—of happiness; anubhavam—(in which there is) experience.
Therefore, O master of the three worlds, the wise get rid of all misery by diving deep into the nectarean ocean of topics about You, which washes away all the contamination of the universe. Then what to speak of those who, having by spiritual strength rid their minds of bad habits and freed themselves from time, are able to worship Your true nature, O supreme one, finding within it uninterrupted bliss?
According to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, in the previous verse those śrutis whose presentation of the Supreme Truth may seem impersonal clarified their true purpose. Now, in the present verse, those who focus exclusively on the divine Personality of Godhead, who speak of His transcendental pastimes, take their turn in praising Him.
Because all the Vedas declare the supremacy of the Personality of Godhead as the cause of all causes, discriminating persons should take to His worship. By diving into the ocean of His glories, intelligent devotees help dispel the distress of all souls and loosen their own burning attachment to materialistic life. These advancing devotees gradually give up all material attachment and lose any interest they once had in the troublesome austerities of karma, jñāna and yoga.
Beyond these devotees are the sūris, connoisseurs of spiritual truth, who honor the nectarean ocean of the Supreme Lord's glories by immersing themselves fully within it. These mature devotees of the Supreme Lord achieve unimaginable perfection. The Lord, reciprocating their sincere endeavors, empowers them to realize Him in His personal form. Remembering with rapture the Lord's intimate pastimes and entourage, they are automatically freed from the last subtle traces of mental contamination and from sensitivity to the unavoidable pains of disease and old age.
Referring to the purifying power of devotional service, the śrutis say, tad yathā puṣkara-palāśa āpo na śliṣyante evam evaṁ-vidi pāpaṁ karma na śliṣyate: "Just as water does not adhere to a lotus leaf, so sinful activities do not adhere to one who knows the truth in this way." The Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa (14.7.28), Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa (3.12.9.8), Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.4.28) and Baudhāyana-dharma-śāstra (2.6.11.30) all concur: na karmaṇā lipyate pāpakena. "One thus avoids becoming tainted by sinful activity."
The Ṛg Veda (1.154.1) refers to the Supreme Lord's pastimes as follows: viṣṇor nu kaṁ vīryāṇi pravocaṁ yaḥ pārthivāni vimame rajāṁsi. "Only he may fully enunciate the heroic deeds of Lord Viṣṇu who can count all the particles of dust in the world." Many śruti-mantras glorify devotional service to the Lord, such as eko vaśī sarva-go ye 'nubhajanti dhīrās/ teṣāṁ sukhaṁ śāśvataṁ netareṣām: "He is the one omnipresent Lord and controller; only those wise souls who worship Him obtain eternal happiness, not anyone else."
In this connection Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
sakala-veda-gaṇerita-sad-guṇas
tvam iti sarva-manīṣi-janā ratāḥ
tvayi subhadra-guṇa-śravaṇādibhis
tava pada-smaraṇena gata-klamāḥ
"Because all the Vedas describe Your transcendental qualities, all thoughtful persons are attracted to hearing and chanting about Your all-auspicious qualities. Thus by remembering Your lotus feet, they are freed from material distress."
TEXT 17
ā{"taya wva ṅs$antyas$auBa{taAe yaid" tae'nauivaDaA
mah"d"h"maAd"yaAe'Nx"mas$a{jana, yad"nauƒah"ta:
pauś&SaivaDaAe'nvayaAe'‡a car"maAe'ªamayaAid"Sau ya:
s$ad"s$ata: parM" tvamaTa yade"SvavazAeSama{tama,
dṛtaya iva śvasanty asu-bhṛto yadi te 'nuvidhā
mahad-aham-ādayo 'ṇḍam asṛjan yad-anugrahataḥ
puruṣa-vidho 'nvayo 'tra caramo 'nna-mayādiṣu yaḥ
sad-asataḥ paraṁ tvam atha yad eṣv avaśeṣam ṛtam
dṛtayaḥ—bellows; iva—as if; śvasanti—they breathe; asu-bhṛtaḥ—alive; yadi—if; te—Your; anuvidhāḥ—faithful followers; mahat—the total material energy; aham—false ego; ādayaḥ—and the other elements of creation; aṇḍam—the universal egg; asṛjan—produced; yat—whose; anugrahataḥ—by the mercy; puruṣa—of the living entity; vidhaḥ—according to the particular forms; anvayaḥ—whose entrance; atra—among these; caramaḥ—the ultimate; anna-maya-ādiṣu—among the manifestations known as anna-maya and so on; yaḥ—who; sat-asataḥ—from gross and subtle matter; param—distinct; tvam—You; atha—and furthermore; yat—which; eṣu—among these; avaśeṣam—underlying; ṛtam—the reality.
Only if they become Your faithful followers are those who breathe actually alive; otherwise their breathing is like that of a bellows. It is by Your mercy alone that the elements, beginning with the mahat-tattva and false ego, created the egg of this universe. Among the manifestations known as anna-maya and so forth, You are the ultimate one, entering within the material coverings along with the living entity and assuming the same forms as those he takes. Distinct from the gross and subtle material manifestations, You are the reality underlying them all.
Life is without purpose for one who remains ignorant of his most well-wishing benefactor and thus fails to worship Him. Such a person's breathing is no better than the breathing of a blacksmith's bellows. The gift of human life is a fortunate opportunity for the conditioned soul, but by turning away from his Lord, the living being commits spiritual suicide.
In the words of Śrī Īśopaniṣad (3),
asuryā nāma te lokā
andhena tamasāvṛtāḥ
tāṁs te pretyābhigacchanti
ye ke cātma-hano janāḥ
"The killer of the soul, whoever he may be, must enter into the planets known as the worlds of the faithless, full of darkness and ignorance." Asuryāḥ means "to be obtained by demons," and demons are persons who have no devotion for the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu. This definition is stated in the Agni Purāṇa:
dvau bhūta-sargau loke 'smin
daiva āsura eva ca
viṣṇu-bhakti-paro daiva
āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ
 [Bg. 16.6]
"There are two kinds of created beings in this world, godly and demoniac. Those dedicated to the devotional service of Lord Viṣṇu are godly, and those opposed to such service are demoniac."
Similarly, the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.4.15) states, na ced avedīn mahatī vinaṣṭiḥ . . . ye tad vidur amṛtās te bhavanty athetare duḥkham evopayanti: "If one does not come to know the Supreme, he must suffer utter destruction.... Those who realize the Supreme become immortal, but others inevitably suffer." A person must revive his Kṛṣṇa consciousness to be relieved of the suffering caused by ignorance, but the process by which this is done need not be difficult, as Lord Kṛṣṇa assures us in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.34):
man-manā bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru
mām evaiṣyasi yuktvaivam
ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ
"Engage your mind in always thinking of Me, become My devotee, offer obeisances to Me and worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will come to Me." Despite disqualifications and weaknesses, one need only willingly become anuvidha, the Supreme Lord's trusting and trustworthy servant. The Kaṭha Upaniṣad (2.2.13) proclaims,
nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām
eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān
taṁ pīṭha-gaṁ ye 'nupaśyanti dhīrās
teṣāṁ śāntiḥ śāśvatī netareṣām
"Among all the eternal, conscious beings, there is one who supplies the needs of everyone else. The wise souls who worship Him in His abode attain everlasting peace. Others cannot."
What is alive, and what is dead? The bodies and minds of materialistic nondevotees seem to display the symptoms of life, but this appearance is deceptive. Actually, the conditioned soul has little control over his own bodily existence. Against his will, he has to excrete waste, get sick from time to time, and eventually age and die. And in his mind he unwillingly suffers anger, hankering and lamentation. Lord Kṛṣṇa describes this situation as yantrārūḍhāni māyayā (Bg. 18.61), riding helplessly as a passenger in a mechanical vehicle. The soul undoubtedly is alive, and irrevocably so, but in his ignorance that inner life is covered and forgotten. In its place, the automation of the external mind and body carries out the dictates of the modes of nature, which force one to act in a way altogether irrelevant to the dormant needs of the soul. Calling out to the forgetful prisoners of illusion, the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (2.5) urges,
śṛṇvantu viśve amṛtasya putrā
ā ye dhāmāni divyāni tasthuḥ
"All you sons of immortality, hear, you who once resided in the divine kingdom!"
So, on the one hand, what is normally viewed as living—the material body—is in actuality a dead machine being manipulated by the modes of nature. And on the other hand, what the materialist condescendingly views as inert matter meant for exploitation is in its unknown essence connected with a living intelligence vastly more potent than his own. The Vedic civilization recognizes the intelligence behind nature as belonging to demigods who preside over the various elements, and ultimately to the Supreme Lord Himself. Matter, after all, cannot act coherently without the impulse and guidance of a living force. As Kṛṣṇa states in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.10),
mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ
sūyate sa-carācaram
hetunānena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature, which is one of My energies, is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, producing all moving and nonmoving beings. Under its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again."
In the beginning of creation, Lord Mahā-Viṣṇu glanced at the dormant material nature, prakṛti. Thus awakened, the subtle prakṛti began to evolve into more concrete forms: first the mahat; then false ego in conjunction with each of prakṛti's three modes; and gradually the various material elements, including intelligence, mind, the senses and the five physical elements with their presiding demigods. Even after becoming separately manifested, however, the deities responsible for the various elements could not work together to produce the perceptible world until Lord Viṣṇu, by His special mercy, once more intervened. This is described in the Third Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.5.38-39):
ete devāḥ kalā viṣṇoḥ
kāla-māyāṁśa-liṅginaḥ
nānātvāt sva-kriyānīśāḥ
procuḥ prāñjalayo vibhum
devā ūcuḥ
nanāma te deva padāravindaṁ
prapanna-tāpopaśamātapatram
yan-mūla-ketā yatayo 'ñjasoru-
saṁsāra-duḥkhaṁ bahir utkṣipanti
"The controlling deities of these physical elements are empowered expansions of Lord Viṣṇu. They are embodied by eternal time under the external energy, and they are His parts and parcels. Because they were entrusted with different functions of universal duties but were unable to perform them, they offered fascinating prayers to the Lord. The demigods said, 'O Lord, Your lotus feet are like an umbrella for the surrendered souls, protecting them from all the miseries of material existence. All the sages under that shelter throw off all material miseries. We therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto Your lotus feet.'"
Hearing the prayers of the assembled demigods of the elements, the Supreme Lord then showed His favor (SB 3.6.1-3):
iti tāsāṁ sva-śaktīnāṁ
satīnām asametya saḥ
prasupta-loka-tantrāṇāṁ
niśāmya gatim īśvaraḥ
kāla-saṁjñāṁ tadā devīṁ
bibhrac chaktim urukramaḥ
trayoviṁśati tattvānāṁ
gaṇaṁ yugapad āviśat
so 'nupraviṣṭo bhagavāṁś
ceṣṭā-rūpeṇa taṁ gaṇam
bhinnaṁ saṁyojayām āsa
suptaṁ karma prabodhayan
"The Lord thus heard about the suspension of the progressive creative functions of the universe due to the noncombination of His potencies, such as the mahat-tattva. The Supreme Powerful Lord then simultaneously entered into the twenty-three elements with the goddess Kālī, His external energy, who alone amalgamates all the different elements. Thus when the Personality of Godhead entered into the elements by His energy, all the living entities were enlivened into different activities, just as one is engaged in his work after awakening from sleep."
In Kṛṣṇa, Śrīla Prabhupāda explains the five levels of ego covering the self: "Within the body there are five different departments of existence, known as anna-maya, prāṇa-maya, mano-maya, vijñāna-maya and, at last, ānanda-maya. In the beginning of life, every living entity is food conscious. A child or an animal is satisfied only by getting nice food. This stage of consciousness, in which the goal is to eat sumptuously, is called anna-maya. Anna means "food." After this one lives in the consciousness of being alive. If one can continue his life without being attacked or destroyed, one thinks himself happy. This stage is called prāṇa-maya, or consciousness of one's existence. After this stage, when one is situated on the mental platform, his consciousness is called mano-maya. The materialistic civilization is primarily situated in these three stages, anna-maya, prāṇa-maya and mano-maya. The first concern of civilized persons is economic development, the next concern is defense against being annihilated, and the next consciousness is mental speculation, the philosophical approach to the values of life.
"If by the evolutionary process of philosophical life one happens to reach the platform of intellectual life and understands that he is not this material body but a spiritual soul, he is situated in the vijñāna-maya stage. Then, by evolution in spiritual life, he comes to the understanding of the Supreme Lord, or the Supreme Soul. When one develops his relationship with Him and executes devotional service, that stage of life is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the ānanda-maya stage. Ānanda-maya is the blissful life of knowledge and eternity. As it is said in the Vedānta-sūtra, ānanda-mayo 'bhyāsāt. The Supreme Brahman and the subordinate Brahman, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the living entities, are both joyful by nature. As long as the living entities are situated in the lower four stages of life—anna-maya, prāṇa-maya, mano-maya and vijñāna-maya—they are considered to be in the material condition of life, but as soon as one reaches the stage of ānanda-maya, he is a liberated soul. This ānanda-maya stage is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā as the brahma-bhūta stage. There it is said that in the brahma-bhūta stage of life there is no anxiety and no hankering. This stage begins when one is equally disposed toward all living entities, and it then expands to the stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, in which one always hankers to render service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This hankering for advancement in devotional service is not the same as hankering for sense gratification in material existence. In other words, hankering remains in spiritual life, but it becomes purified. Similarly, when our senses are purified, they are freed from all material stages, namely anna-maya, prāṇa-maya, mano-maya and vijñāna-maya, and they become situated in the highest stage—ānanda-maya, or blissful life in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The Māyāvādī philosophers consider ānanda-maya to be the state of being merged in the Supreme. To them, ānanda-maya means that the Supersoul and the individual soul become one. But the real fact is that oneness does not mean merging into the Supreme and losing one's own individual existence. Merging into the spiritual existence is the living entity's realization of qualitative oneness with the Supreme Lord in His aspects of eternity and knowledge. But the actual ānanda-maya (blissful) stage is attained when one is engaged in devotional service. That is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā: mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām [Bg. 18.54]. Here Lord Kṛṣṇa states that the brahma-bhūta ānanda-maya stage is complete only when there is an exchange of love between the Supreme and the subordinate living entities. Unless one comes to this ānanda-maya stage, his breathing is like the breathing of a bellows in a blacksmith's shop, his duration of life is like that of a tree, and he is no better than the lower animals like the camels, hogs and dogs."
In accompanying the jīva within the coverings of Māyā, the Paramātmā is not bound by karmic entanglement as the jīva is. Rather, the Supreme Soul's connection with these coverings is like the apparent connection between the moon and some tree branches it is seen through. The Supersoul is sad-asataḥ param, always transcendental to the subtle and gross manifestations of anna-maya and so on, although He enters among them as the sanctioning witness of all activities. As their final cause, the Supersoul is in one sense identical with the manifest products of creation, but in His original identity (svarūpa) He remains distinct. In this second sense He is the ānanda-maya alone, the last of the five kośas. Therefore the śrutis address Him here as avaśeṣam, the residual essence. This is also expressed in the text of the Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.7): raso vai saḥ. Within His personal essence, the Supreme Lord enjoys rasa, the reciprocation of the mellows of devotional service, and integral to the play of rasas is the participation of realized jīvas. Raso vai saḥ, rasam hy evāyaṁ labdhvānandī bhavati: "He is the embodiment of rasa, and the jīva who realizes this rasa becomes fully ecstatic." Or in the words of the personified Vedas praying in this verse, the Supersoul is ṛtam, which Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī interprets as here meaning "realized by great sages."
In the opinion of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, the last word of all authoritative scripture (sarvāntima-śruti) is contained in the aphorism raso vai saḥ, which is demonstrably a reference to Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the infinitely expanding embodiment of divine pleasure (sarva-bṛhattamānanda). The Gopāla-tāpanī śruti (Uttara 96) states, yo 'sau jāgrat-svapna-suṣuptim atītya turyātīto gopālaḥ: "Lord Kṛṣṇa, the cowherd, transcends not only the material consciousness of wakefulness, dream and deep sleep, but also the fourth realm of pure, spiritual awareness." The ānanda-maya Supersoul is simply an aspect of the primeval Lord Govinda, as declared by Him, viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam ekāṁśena sthito jagat: "With a single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe." (Bg. 10.42)
The śrutis thus tactfully assert that even among the various personal forms of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa is supreme. Understanding this, Nārada Muni will later offer obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa in the words namas tasmai bhagavate kṛṣṇāyāmala-kīrtaye (Text 46), even though He is standing in front of Lord Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī concludes his comments on this verse by praying,
nara-vapuḥ pratipādya yadi tvayi
śravaṇa-varṇana-saṁsmaraṇādibhiḥ
nara-hare na bhajanti nṛṇām idaṁ
dṛti-vad ucchvasitaṁ viphalaṁ tataḥ
"O Lord Narahari, persons who have attained this human form live uselessly, merely breathing like bellows, if they fail to worship You by hearing about You, chanting Your glories, remembering You and performing the other devotional practices."
TEXT 18
od"r"maupaAs$atae ya [%iSavatmaRs$au kU(paRā{"zA:
pair"s$ar"paŪ"itaM ô$d"yamaAś&NAyaAe d"h"r"ma,
tata od"gAAd"nanta tava DaAma izAr": par"maM
paunair"h" yats$amaetya na patainta k{(taAntamauKae
udaram upāsate ya ṛṣi-vartmasu kūrpa-dṛśaḥ
parisara-paddhatiṁ hṛdayam āruṇayo daharam
tata udagād ananta tava dhāma śiraḥ paramaṁ
punar iha yat sametya na patanti kṛtānta-mukhe
udaram—the abdomen; upāsate—worship; ye—who; ṛṣi—of sages; vartmasu—according to the standard methods; kūrpa—gross; dṛśaḥ—their vision; parisara—from which all the prāṇic channels emanate; paddhatim—the node; hṛdayam—the heart; āruṇayaḥ—the Āruṇi sages; daharam—subtle; tataḥ—thence; udagāt—(the soul) rises up; ananta—O unlimited Lord; tava—Your; dhāma—place of appearance; śiraḥ—to the head; paramam—the highest destination; punaḥ—again; iha—into this world; yat—which; sametya—reaching; na patanti—they do not fall down; kṛta-anta—of death; mukhe—into the mouth.
Among the followers of the methods set forth by great sages, those with less refined vision worship the Supreme as present in the region of the abdomen, while the Āruṇis worship Him as present in the heart, in the subtle center from which all the prāṇic channels emanate. From there, O unlimited Lord, these worshipers raise their consciousness upward to the top of the head, where they can perceive You directly. Then, passing through the top of the head toward the supreme destination, they reach that place from which they will never again fall to this world, into the mouth of death.
Here the śrutis who teach meditational yoga glorify the Personality of Godhead. The various processes of yoga are for the most part gradual and full of opportunities for distraction. Authentic methods of yoga, nonetheless, all aim at meditation on the Supersoul (Paramātmā), whose primary residence is in the region of the heart, alongside the jīva soul. This manifestation of Paramātmā in the heart is very subtle and difficult to perceive (daharam), and thus only advanced yogīs can realize Him there.
Neophyte meditators often practice focusing on the Supersoul's secondary presence in one of the lower centers of vital energy, such as the mūlādhāra-cakra, at the base of the spine, the svādhiṣṭhāna-cakra, in the area of the navel, or the maṇipūra-cakra, in the abdomen. Lord Kṛṣṇa refers to His expansion as Paramātmā in the abdominal cakra as follows:
ahaṁ vaiśvānaro bhūtvā
prāṇinaṁ deham āsthitaḥ
prāṇāpāna-samāyuktaḥ
pacāmy annaṁ catur-vidham
"I am the fire of digestion in the bodies of all living entities, and I join with the air of life, outgoing and incoming, to digest the four kinds of food." (Bg. 15.14) Lord Vaiśvānara presides over digestion and in general bestows the capacity of mobility on animals, humans and demigods. In the judgment of the śrutis speaking this verse, those who limit their meditation to this form of the Lord are less intelligent, kūrpa-dṛśaḥ, meaning literally "having eyes clouded by dust."
The superior yogīs known as Āruṇis, on the other hand, worship the Supersoul in His form as the indwelling companion of the jīva in the heart, the Lord who endows His dependent with the power of knowledge and inspires him with all varieties of practical intelligence. And just as the physical heart is the center of blood circulation, so the subtle heart-cakra is the crossroads of numerous channels of prāṇa, called nāḍīs, which extend outward to all parts of the body. When these passageways have been sufficiently purified, the Āruṇi yogīs can leave the heart region and go upward to the cakra at the roof of the brain. Yogīs who leave their bodies through this cakra, the brahma-randhra, go directly to the kingdom of God, from which they need never return to be reborn. Thus even the unsure process of meditational yoga can bear the fruit of pure devotion if it is followed perfectly.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura cites several śruti-mantras that echo the words of this verse: udaraṁ brahmeti śārkarākṣā upāsate hṛdayaṁ brahmeti āruṇayo brahmā haivaitā ita ūrdhvaṁ tv evodasarpat tac-chiro 'śrayate. "Those whose vision is clouded identify Brahman with the abdomen, while the Āruṇis worship Brahman in the heart. One who is truly Brahman-realized travels upward from the heart to take shelter of the Lord who is manifested at the top of the head."
śataṁ caikā ca hṛdayasya nāḍyas
tāsāṁ mūrdhānam abhiniḥsṛtaikā
tayordhvam āyann amṛtatvam eti
viśvaṅṅ anyā utkramaṇe bhavanti
"There are one hundred and one subtle prāṇic channels emanating from the heart. One of these—the suṣumṇā—extends to the top of the head. By passing up through this channel, one transcends death. The other channels lead in all directions, to various kinds of rebirth." (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 8.6.6)
The Upaniṣads refer repeatedly to the indwelling Paramātmā. Śrī Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (3.12-13) describes Him as follows:
mahān prabhur vai puruṣaḥ
sattvasyaiṣa pravartakaḥ
su-nirmalāṁ imāṁ prāptim
īśāno jyotir avyayaḥ
aṅguṣṭha-mātraḥ puruṣo 'ntar-ātmā
sadā janānāṁ hṛdaye sanniviṣṭaḥ
hṛdā manīṣā manasābhikḷpto
ya etad vidur amṛtās te bhavanti
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead becomes the Puruṣa to initiate the expansion of this cosmos. He is the perfectly pure goal that yogīs strive to reach, the effulgent and infallible ultimate controller. Measuring the size of a thumb, the Puruṣa is always present as the Supersoul within the hearts of all living beings. By exercising proper intelligence, one can realize Him within the heart; those who learn this method will gain immortality."
In conclusion, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
udarādiṣu yaḥ puṁsāṁ
cintito muni-vartmabhiḥ
hanti mṛtyu-bhayam devo
hṛd-gataṁ tam upāsmahe
"Let us worship the Supreme Lord, who resides in the heart. When mortal beings think of Him by the standard procedures established by great sages, meditating upon Him in His expansions in the abdomen and other regions of the body, the Lord reciprocates by destroying all fear of death."
TEXT 19
svak{(taivaica‡ayaAeinaSau ivazAiªava he"tautayaA
tar"tamataêk(As$syanalavatsvak{(taAnauk{(ita:
@Ta ivataTaAsvamaUSvaivataTaAM tava DaAma s$amaM
ivar"jaiDayaAe'nauyantyaiBaivapaNyava Wk(r"s$ama,
sva-kṛta-vicitra-yoniṣu viśann iva hetutayā
taratamataś cakāssy anala-vat sva-kṛtānukṛtiḥ
atha vitathāsv amūṣv avitathāṁ tava dhāma samaṁ
viraja-dhiyo 'nuyanty abhivipaṇyava eka-rasam
sva—by Yourself; kṛta—created; vicitra—variegated; yoniṣu—within the species of life; viśan—entering; iva—apparently; hetutayā—as their motivation; taratamataḥ—according to hierarchies; cakāssi—You become visible; anala-vat—like fire; sva—Your own; kṛta—creation; anukṛtiḥ—imitating; atha—therefore; vitathāsu—unreal; amūṣu—among these (various species); avitatham—not unreal; tava—Your; dhāma—manifestation; samam—undifferentiated; viraja—spotless; dhiyaḥ—whose minds; anuyanti—understand; abhivipaṇyavaḥ—those who are free from all material entanglements (paṇa); eka-rasam—unchanging.
Apparently entering among the variegated species of living beings You have created, You inspire them to act, manifesting Yourself according to their higher and lower positions, just as fire manifests differently according to the shape of what it burns. Therefore those of spotless intelligence, who are altogether free from material attachments, realize Your undifferentiated, unchanging Self to be the permanent reality among all these impermanent life forms.
Hearing these prayers of the personified Vedas, in which the śrutis describe the Supersoul as entering countless varieties of material bodies, a critic may question how the Supreme can do this without becoming limited. Indeed, proponents of Advaita philosophy see no essential distinction between the Supreme Soul and His creation. In the impersonalists' conception, the Absolute has inexplicably gotten itself entrapped by illusion and has thus become first a personal God and then the demigods, humans, animals, plants and finally matter. Śaṅkarācārya and his followers take great pains to cite Vedic evidence to support this theory of how illusion is imposed on the Absolute. But speaking for themselves, the Vedas here answer this objection and refuse to lend their authority to Māyāvāda impersonalism.
The process of creation is technically called sṛṣṭi, "sending forth." The Supreme Lord sends forth His variegated energies, and these partake of His nature while remaining distinct from Him. This fact is expressed in the true Vedic philosophy of acintya-bhedābheda, the inconceivable, simultaneous oneness and difference of the Supreme Lord and His energies. Thus although each of the multitude of individual souls is a distinct entity, all souls consist of the same spiritual substance as the Supreme. Since they partake of the Supreme Lord's spiritual essence, the jīvas are unborn and eternal, just as He is. Lord Kṛṣṇa, speaking to Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, confirms this:
na tv evāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ
na tvaṁ neme janādhipāḥ
na caiva na bhaviṣyāmaḥ
sarve vayam ataḥ param
"Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be." (Bg. 2.12) Material creation is a special arrangement for those jīvas who choose to separate themselves from the Supreme Lord's service, and thus the creation involves producing an imitation world where they can try to be independent.
After creating the many species of material life, the Supreme Lord expands into His own creation as the Supersoul in order to provide the intelligence and inspiration every living being needs for his day-to-day existence. As stated in the Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.6.2), tat sṛṣṭvā tad evānuprāviśat: "After creating this world, He then entered within it." The Lord enters the material world, however, without forming any binding connection to it; this the śrutis here declare by the phrase viśann iva, "only seeming to enter." Taratamataś cakāssi means that the Paramātmā enters the body of every living being, from the great demigod Brahmā down to the insignificant germ, and exhibits differing degrees of His potency according to each soul's capacity for enlightenment. Analavat sva-kṛtānukṛtiḥ: Just as fire ignited in several objects burns according to the different forms of those objects, so the Supreme Soul, entering the bodies of all living creatures, illuminates the consciousness of each conditioned soul according to his individual capacity.
Even in the midst of material creation and destruction, the Lord of all creatures remains eternally unchanged, as expressed here by the word eka-rasam. In other words, the Lord eternally maintains His personal form of immeasurable, unalloyed spiritual pleasure. The rare living beings who completely (abhitas) disengage themselves from material dealings, or paṇa (thereby becoming abhivipaṇyavaḥ), come to know the Supreme Lord as He is. Every intelligent person should follow the example of these great souls and beg from them the chance to also be engaged in the Supreme Lord's devotional service.
This prayer is recited by śrutis whose mood is similar to that expressed in the following mantra of the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.11):
eko devaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu gūḍhaḥ
sarva-vyāpī sarva-bhūtāntarātmā
karmādhyakṣaḥ sarva-bhūtādhivāsaḥ
sākṣī cetā kevalo nirguṇaś ca
"The one Supreme Lord lives hidden inside all created things. He pervades all matter and sits within the hearts of all living beings. As the indwelling Supersoul, He supervises their material activities. Thus, while having no material qualities Himself, He is the unique witness and giver of consciousness."
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī submits his own prayer:
sva-nirmiteṣu kāryeṣu
tāratamya-vivarjitam
sarvānusyūta-san-mātraṁ
bhagavantaṁ bhajāmahe
"Let us worship the Supreme Lord, who enters the products of His own creation yet remains aloof from their superior and inferior material gradations. He is the pure, undifferentiated existence pervading everything."
TEXT 20
svak{(tapaure"SvamaISvabaih"r"ntar"s$aMvar"NAM
tava pauś&SaM vad"ntyaiKalazAi·(Da{taAe"M'zAk{(tama,
wita na{gAitaM ivaivacya k(vayaAe inagAmaAvapanaM
Bavata opaAs$atae'x.~i„amaBavamBauiva ivaṅis$ataA:
sva-kṛta-pureṣv amīṣv abahir-antara-saṁvaraṇaṁ
tava puruṣaṁ vadanty akhila-śakti-dhṛto 'ṁśa-kṛtam
iti nṛ-gatiṁ vivicya kavayo nigamāvapanaṁ
bhavata upāsate 'ṅghrim abhavam bhuvi viśvasitāḥ
sva—by himself; kṛta—created; pureṣu—in the bodies; amīṣu—these; abahiḥ—not externally; antara—or internally; saṁvaraṇam—whose factual envelopment; tava—Your; puruṣam—living entity; vadanti—(the Vedas) say; akhila—of all; śakti—energies; dhṛtaḥ—of the possessor; aṁśa—as the expansion; kṛtam—manifested; iti—in this manner; nṛ—of the living entity; gatim—the status; vivicya—ascertaining; kavayaḥ—learned sages; nigama—of the Vedas; āvapanam—the field in which all offerings are sown; bhavataḥ—Your; upāsate—they worship; aṅghrim—the feet; abhavam—which cause the cessation of material existence; bhuvi—on the earth; viśvasitāḥ—having developed faith.
The individual living entity, while inhabiting the material bodies he has created for himself by his karma, actually remains uncovered by either gross or subtle matter. This is so because, as the Vedas describe, he is part and parcel of You, the possessor of all potencies. Having determined this to be the status of the living entity, learned sages become imbued with faith and worship Your lotus feet, to which all Vedic sacrifices in this world are offered, and which are the source of liberation.
Not only does the Supreme Lord remain totally uncontaminated when He resides within the material bodies of the conditioned souls, but even the infinitesimal jīva souls are never directly touched by the coverings of ignorance and lust they acquire while passing through repeated cycles of birth and death. Thus the Taittirīya Upaniṣad (3.10.5) proclaims, sa yaś cāyaṁ puruṣe yaś cāsāv āditye sa ekaḥ: "The soul of the embodied living being is one with Him who stands within the sun." Similarly, the Chāndogya Upaniṣad (6.8.7) teaches, tat tvam asi: "You are nondifferent from that Supreme Truth."
In this prayer, the personified Vedas refer to the finite enjoyer of material bodies (the jīva soul) as an expansion of the transcendental reservoir of all potencies, the Supreme Lord. The term aṁśa-kṛtam, "made as His portion," must be properly understood, however, in this context. The jīva is not created at any time, nor is he the same kind of expansion of the Lord as the omnipotent viṣṇu-tattva expansions. The Supreme Soul is the proper object of all worship, and the subordinate jīva soul is meant to be His worshiper. The Supreme Lord enacts His pastimes by showing Himself in innumerable aspects of His personality, whereas the jīva is forced to change bodies whenever his accumulated karmic reactions so dictate. According to Śrī Nārada Pañcarātra,
yat taṭa-sthaṁ tu cid-rūpaṁ
sva-saṁvedyād vinirgatam
rañjitaṁ guṇa-rāgeṇa
sa jīva iti kathyate
"The marginal potency, who is spiritual by nature, who emanates from the self-cognizant saṁvit energy, and who becomes tainted by his attachment to the modes of material nature, is called the jīva.''
Although the jīva soul is also an expansion of Lord Kṛṣṇa, he is distinguished from Kṛṣṇa's independent Viṣṇu expansions by his constitutional position on the margin between spirit and matter. As the Mahā-varāha Purāṇa explains,
svāṁśaś cātha vibhinnāṁśa
iti dvidhā sa iṣyate
aṁśino yat tu sāmarthyaṁ
yat-svarūpaṁ yathā sthitiḥ
tad eva nāṇu-mātro 'pi
bhedaṁ svāṁśāṁśinoḥ kvacit
vibhinnāṁśo 'lpa-śaktiḥ syāt
kiñcit sāmarthya-mātra-yuk
"The Supreme Lord is known in two ways: in terms of His plenary expansions and His separated expansions. Between the plenary expansions and Their source of expansion there is never any essential difference in terms of either Their capabilities, forms or situations. The separated expansions, on the other hand, possess only minute potency, being endowed only to a small extent with the Lord's powers."
The conditioned soul in this world appears as if covered by matter, internally as well as externally. Externally, gross matter surrounds him in the forms of his body and environment, while internally desire and aversion impinge upon his consciousness. But from the transcendental perspective of realized sages, both kinds of material covering are insubstantial. By logically eliminating all material identities, which are misconceptions based on the soul's gross and subtle coverings, a thoughtful person can determine that the soul is nothing material. Rather, he is a pure spark of divine spirit, a servant of the Supreme Godhead. Understanding this, one should worship the Supreme Lord's lotus feet; such worship is the fully bloomed flower of the tree of Vedic rituals. One's realization of the splendor of the Lord's lotus feet, gradually nourished by the offering of Vedic sacrifices, automatically bears the fruits of liberation from material existence and irrevocable faith in the Lord's mercy. One can accomplish all this while still living in the material world. As Lord Kṛṣṇa states in the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (Uttara 47),
mathurā-maṇḍale yas tu
jambūdvīpe sthito 'tha vā
yo 'rcayet pratimāṁ prati
sa me priyataro bhuvi
"One who worships Me in My Deity form while living in the district of Mathurā or, indeed, anywhere in Jambūdvīpa, becomes most dear to Me in this world."
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
tvad-aṁśasya mameśāna
tvan-māyā-kṛta-bandhanam
tvad-aṅghri-sevām ādiśya
parānanda nivartaya
"My Lord, please free me, Your partial expansion, from the bondage created by Your Māyā. Please do this, O abode of supreme bliss, by directing me to the service of Your feet."
TEXT 21
āu"r"vagAmaAtmataÔvainagAmaAya tavaAÔatanaAe
êir"tamah"Ama{taAibDapair"vataRpair"™amaNAA:
na pair"laSainta ke(icad"pavagARmapaIṅr" tae 
car"NAs$ar"AejahM"s$aku(las$aṆḷivas$a{í"gA{h"A:
duravagamātma-tattva-nigamāya tavātta-tanoś 
carita-mahāmṛtābdhi-parivarta-pariśramaṇāḥ
na parilaṣanti kecid apavargam apīśvara te 
caraṇa-saroja-haṁsa-kula-saṅga-visṛṣṭa-gṛhāḥ
duravagama—difficult to understand; ātma—of the self; tattva—the truth; nigamāya—in order to propagate; tava—of You; ātta—who have assumed; tanoḥ—Your personal forms; carita—of the pastimes; mahā—vast; amṛta—of nectar; abdhi—in the ocean; parivarta—by diving; pariśramaṇāḥ—who have been relieved of fatigue; na parilaṣanti—do not wish for; kecit—a few persons; apavargam—liberation; api—even; īśvara—O Lord; te—Your; caraṇa—at the feet; saroja—lotus; haṁsa—of swans; kula—with the community; saṅga—because of association; visṛṣṭa—abandoned; gṛhāḥ—whose homes.
My Lord, some fortunate souls have gotten relief from the fatigue of material life by diving into the vast nectar ocean of Your pastimes, which You enact when You manifest Your personal forms to propagate the unfathomable science of the self. These rare souls, indifferent even to liberation, renounce the happiness of home and family because of their association with devotees who are like flocks of swans enjoying at the lotus of Your feet.
Ritualistic brāhmaṇas (smārtas) and impersonalists (Māyāvādīs) always try to relegate the process of bhakti-yoga to a relative or minor role. They say that devotion to the Personality of Godhead is for sentimental persons who lack the maturity to observe strict rituals or pursue the rigorous culture of knowledge.
In this verse, however, the personified Vedas most emphatically declare the superexcellence of devotional service, clearly identifying it with ātma-tattva, the science of the self that impersonalists so proudly claim as their own domain. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī here defines ātma-tattva as the confidential mystery of the Supreme Lord's personal forms, qualities and pastimes. He also gives a second meaning for the phrase ātta-tanoḥ. Instead of meaning "who assumes various bodies," the phrase can also mean "He who attracts everyone to His transcendental body."
The pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa and His various expansions and incarnations are an unfathomable ocean of enjoyment. When a person comes to the point of complete exhaustion in his materialistic pursuits—whether he has been searching after material success or some impersonal notion of spiritual annihilation—he can gain relief by submerging himself in this nectar. As Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī explains in his textbook on the science of bhakti-yoga, Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (rendered into English by Śrīla Prabhupāda as The Nectar of Devotion), one who tastes even a single drop of this vast ocean will forever lose all desire for anything else.
Giving an alternative interpretation of the word pariśramaṇāḥ, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī comments that although the devotees of the Lord become fatigued after repeatedly diving into the endless waves and undercurrents in the ocean of the Lord's pleasure pastimes, these devotees never desire any happiness other than the Lord's service, even the happiness of liberation. Rather, their very fatigue becomes pleasure for them, just as the fatigue produced by sex indulgence is pleasurable to those addicted to sex. The Supreme Lord's pure devotees become enthused by hearing the charming narrations of His pastimes and feel impelled to dance, sing, shout out loud, kick their heels together, faint, sob and run about like madmen. Thus they become too absorbed in ecstasy to notice any bodily discomfort.
Pure Vaiṣṇavas do not want even liberation, what to speak of other desirable goals, such as an exalted position as ruler of the heavenly planets. This degree of exclusive dedication is admittedly only rarely achieved in this world, as the śrutis speaking this verse indicate by the word kecit ("a few"). Not only do pure devotees abandon their hankering for future gain, but they also lose all their attraction for what they already possess—the common comforts of home and family life. The association of saintly Vaiṣṇavas—the disciplic succession of masters, disciples and granddisciples—becomes for them their real family, filled with swanlike personalities like Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī. These great personalities always drink the sweet nectar of service to the Supreme Lord's lotus feet.
Many mantras of the Upaniṣads and other śrutis openly declare devotional service to be superior to liberation itself. In the words of the Nṛsiṁha-pūrva-tāpanī Upaniṣad, yaṁ sarve vedā namanti mumukṣavo brahma-vādinaś ca: "To Him all the Vedas, all seekers of liberation and all students of the Absolute Truth offer their obeisances." Commenting on this mantra, Śrī Śaṅkarācārya admits, muktā api līlayā vigrahaṁ kṛtvā bhajanti: "Even liberated souls take pleasure in establishing the Supreme Lord's Deity and worshiping Him." The great rival of Ācārya Śaṅkara, Śrīla Madhvācārya Ānandatīrtha, cites his own favorite śruti-mantras in this regard, such as muktā hy etam upāsate, muktānām api bhaktir hi paramānanda-rūpiṇī: "Even those who are liberated worship Him, and even for them devotional service is the embodiment of supreme bliss"; and amṛtasya dhārā bahudhā dohamānaṁ/ caraṇaṁ no loke su-dhitāṁ dadhātu/ oṁ tat sat: "May His feet, which bountifully pour forth floods of nectar, bestow wisdom upon us who are living in this world."
In summary, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
tvat-kathāmṛta-pāthodhau
viharanto mahā-mudaḥ
kurvanti kṛtinaḥ kecic
catur-vargaṁ tṛṇopamam
"Those rare, fortunate souls who derive great delight by sporting in the nectar ocean of topics about You consider the four great goals of life [religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and liberation] to be no more important than a blade of grass."
TEXT 22
tvad"naupaTaM ku(laAyaimad"maAtmas$auô$it‘ayavaca,
car"ita taTaAenmauKae tvaiya ih"tae i‘aya @Atmaina ca
na bata r"mantyah"Ae @s$aāu"paAs$anayaAtmah"naAe
yad"nauzAyaA ”amantyauś&Bayae ku(zAr"Ir"Ba{ta:
tvad-anupathaṁ kulāyam idam ātma-suhṛt-priya-vac
carati tathonmukhe tvayi hite priya ātmani ca
na bata ramanty aho asad-upāsanayātma-hano
yad-anuśayā bhramanty uru-bhaye ku-śarīra-bhṛtaḥ
tvat—You; anupatham—useful for serving; kulāyam—body; idam—this; ātma—self; suhṛt—friend; priya—and beloved; vat—as; carati—acts; tathā—nevertheless; unmukhe—who are favorably disposed; tvayi—in You; hite—who are helpful; priye—who are affectionate; ātmani—who are their very Self; ca—and; na—not; bata—alas; ramanti—they take pleasure; aho—ah; asat—of the unreal; upāsanayā—by worship; ātma—themselves; hanaḥ—killing; yat—in which (worship of the unreal); anuśayāḥ—whose persistent desires; bhramanti—they wander; uru—greatly; bhaye—in the fearful (material existence); ku—degraded; śarīra—bodies; bhṛtaḥ—carrying.
When this human body is used for Your devotional service, it acts as one's self, friend and beloved. But unfortunately, although You always show mercy to the conditioned souls and affectionately help them in every way, and although You are their true Self, people in general fail to delight in You. Instead they commit spiritual suicide by worshiping illusion. Alas, because they persistently hope for success in their devotion to the unreal, they continue to wander about this greatly fearful world, assuming various degraded bodies.
The Vedas have strong words for those who choose to remain in illusion rather than serve the all-merciful Personality of Godhead. The Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.3.15) states, ārāmam asya paśyanti na taṁ paśyati kaścana. na tam vidātha ya imā jajānānyad yuṣmākam antaram babhūva. nīhāreṇa prāvṛtā jalpyā cāsu-tṛpa uktha-śāsaś caranti: "Everyone can see the place where the Lord manifested Himself in this world for His own pleasure, but still no one sees Him. None of you know Him who generated all these living beings, and thus there is a great difference between your vision and His. Covered by the fog of illusion, you performers of Vedic rituals indulge in useless talk and live only to gratify your senses."
The Supreme Lord pervades this universe, as He says in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.4), mayā tataṁ idaṁ sarvaṁ jagat. Nothing in this world, not even the most insignificant clay pot or shred of cloth, is devoid of the presence of the Personality of Godhead. But because He keeps Himself invisible to envious eyes (avyakta-mūrtinā), materialists are misled by His material energy and think that the source of material creation is a combination of atoms and physical forces.
Displaying their compassion for such foolish materialists, the personified Vedas advise them in this prayer to remember the real purpose for which they exist: to serve the Lord, their greatest well-wisher, with loving devotion. The human body is the ideal facility for reviving one's spiritual consciousness; its organs—ears, tongue, eyes and so on—are quite suitable for hearing about the Lord, chanting His glories, worshiping Him and performing all the other essential aspects of devotional service.
One's material body is destined to remain intact for only a short time, and so it is called kulāyam, subject to "dissolving into the earth" (kau līyate). Nonetheless, if properly utilized it can be one's best friend. When one is immersed in material consciousness, however, the body becomes a false friend, distracting the bewildered living entity from his true self-interest. Persons too much infatuated with their own bodies and those of their spouses, children, pets and so on are in fact misdirecting their devotion to the worship of illusion, asad-upāsanā. In this way, as the śrutis state here, such people commit spiritual suicide, insuring future punishment for failing to carry out the higher responsibilities of human existence. As the Īśopaniṣad (3) declares,
asuryā nāma te lokā
andhena tamasāvṛtāḥ
tāṁs te pretyābhigacchanti
ye ke cātma-hano janāḥ
"The killer of the soul, whoever he may be, must enter into the planets known as the worlds of the faithless, full of darkness and ignorance."
Those who are overly attached to sense gratification, or who worship the impermanent in the form of false, materialistic scriptures and philosophies, maintain desires that carry them into more degraded bodies in each successive life. Since they are entrapped in the perpetually rotating cycle of saṁsāra, their only hope for salvation is getting a chance to hear the merciful instructions spoken by the Supreme Lord's devotees.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
tvayy ātmani jagan-nāthe
man-mano ramatām iha
kadā mamedṛśaṁ janma
mānuṣaṁ sambhaviṣyati
"When will I receive a human birth in which my mind may take pleasure in You, who are the Supreme Soul and Lord of the universe?"
TEXT 23
inaBa{tamaś&nmanaAe'ºaā{"X#yaAegAyaujaAe ô$id" yana,
maunaya opaAs$atae tad"r"yaAe'ipa yayau: smar"NAAta,
iṣya or"gAen‰"BaAegABaujad"Nx"ivaSa·(iDayaAe
vayamaipa tae s$amaA: s$amaā{"zAAe'x.~i„as$ar"Aejas$auDaA:
nibhṛta-marun-mano-'kṣa-dṛḍha-yoga-yujo hṛdi yan
munaya upāsate tad arayo 'pi yayuḥ smaraṇāt
striya uragendra-bhoga-bhuja-daṇḍa-viṣakta-dhiyo
vayam api te samāḥ sama-dṛśo 'ṅghri-saroja-sudhāḥ
nibhṛta—brought under control; marut—with breathing; manaḥ—mind; akṣa—and senses; dṛḍha-yoga—in steadfast yoga; yujaḥ—engaged; hṛdi—in the heart; yat—which; munayaḥ—sages; upāsate—worship; tat—that; arayaḥ—enemies; api—also; yayuḥ—attained; smaraṇāt—by remembering; striyaḥ—women; uraga-indra—of lordly serpents; bhoga—(like) the bodies; bhuja—whose arms; daṇḍa—rodlike; viṣakta—attracted; dhiyaḥ—whose minds; vayam—we; api—also; te—to You; samāḥ—equal; sama—equal; dṛśaḥ—whose vision; aṅghri—of the feet; saroja—lotuslike; sudhāḥ—(relishing) the nectar.
Simply by constantly thinking of Him, the enemies of the Lord attained the same Supreme Truth whom sages fixed in yoga worship by controlling their breath, mind and senses. Similarly, we śrutis, who generally see You as all-pervading, will achieve the same nectar from Your lotus feet that Your consorts are able to relish because of their loving attraction to Your mighty, serpentine arms, for You look upon us and Your consorts in the same way.
According to Ācārya Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, the few śrutis—such as the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad—who identify the cowherd boy Kṛṣṇa with absolute Brahman in its highest aspect had so far been patiently waiting for their turn to speak. But after hearing the other śrutis offer prayers openly glorifying the Lord's personality, these intimate śrutis could no longer contain themselves, and so they spoke out of turn in this verse.
Followers of the path of mystic yoga subdue their senses and minds by practicing breath control and severe austerities. If they succeed in thoroughly purifying themselves by this regimen, they may eventually begin to realize the Paramātmā, the personal form of Brahman within the heart. And if they continue this meditation without deviation for a long time, they may in the end come to the point of true God consciousness. But the same objective achieved in this difficult and uncertain way was also attained by the demons who were killed by Lord Kṛṣṇa during His pastimes on the earth. Obsessed with enmity toward Him, demons like Kaṁsa and Śiśupāla quickly obtained the perfection of liberation simply by His killing them.
Speaking for themselves, however, the personified Vedas here state that they would prefer to develop love of Godhead by learning to emulate the favorable surrender of Lord Kṛṣṇa's confidential devotees, especially the young gopīs of Vraja. Though they appeared to be simple women attracted conjugally to the Lord's physical beauty and strength, the goddesses of Vraja exhibited the highest perfection of meditation. The śrutis wish to become just like them.
In this regard, Lord Brahmā relates the following historical account in the supplement to the Bṛhad-vāmana Purāṇa:
brahmānanda-mayo loko
vyāpī vaikuṇṭha-saṁjñitaḥ
tal-loka-vāsī tatra-sthaiḥ
stuto vedaiḥ parāt-paraḥ
"The infinite world of spiritual bliss is called Vaikuṇṭha. There the Supreme Truth lives, being glorified by the personified Vedas, who are also present there."
ciraṁ stutvā tatas tuṣṭaḥ
parokṣaṁ prāha tān girā
tuṣṭo 'smi brūta bho prājñā
varaṁ yaṁ manasepsitam
"Once, after the Vedas had elaborately praised Him, the Lord felt especially satisfied and spoke to them in a voice whose source remained invisible: 'My dear sages, I am very satisfied with you. Please ask of Me some benediction that you secretly desire.'"
śrutaya ūcuḥ
yathā tal-loka-vāsinyaḥ
kāma-tattvena gopikāḥ
bhajanti ramaṇaṁ matvā
cikīrṣājani nas tathā
"The śrutis replied, 'We have developed the desire to become like the cowherd women of the mortal world who, inspired by lust, worship You in the mood of a lover.' "
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
durlabho durghaṭaś caiva
yuṣmākaṁ sa manorathaḥ
mayānumoditaḥ samyak
satyo bhavitum arhati
"The Lord then said, 'This desire of yours is difficult to fulfill. Indeed, it is almost impossible. But since I am sanctioning it, your wish must inevitably come true.' "
āgāmini viriñcau tu
jāte sṛṣṭy-artham udite
kalpaṁ sāraśvataṁ prāpya
vraje gopyo bhaviṣyatha
" 'When the next Brahmā takes birth to faithfully execute his duties of creation, and when the day of his life called the Sārasvata-kalpa arrives, you will all appear in Vraja as gopīs.' "
pṛthivyāṁ bhārate kṣetre
māthure mama maṇḍale
vṛndāvane bhaviṣyāmi
preyān vo rāsa-maṇḍale
" 'On the earth, in the land of Bhārata, in My own district of Mathurā, in the forest of Vṛndāvana, I will become your beloved in the circle of the rāsa dance.' "
jāra-dharmeṇa su-snehaṁ
su-dṛḍhaṁ sarvato 'dhikam
mayi samprāpya sarve 'pi
kṛta-kṛtyā bhaviṣyatha
" 'Thus obtaining Me as your paramour, you will all gain the most exalted and steadfast pure love for Me, and in this way you will fulfill all your ambitions.' "
brahmovāca
śrutvaitac cintayantyas tā
rūpaṁ bhagavataś ciram
ukta-kālaṁ samāsādya
gopyo bhūtvā hariṁ gatāḥ
"Lord Brahmā said: After hearing these words, the śrutis meditated on the Personality of Godhead's beauty for a long time. When the designated time ultimately arrived, they became gopīs and obtained the association of Kṛṣṇa."
A similar account can be found in the Sṛṣṭi-khaṇḍa of the Padma Purāṇa, which describes how the Gāyatrī mantra also became a gopī.
Regarding the development of bhakti, Lord Kṛṣṇa further states in the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (Uttara 4), apūtaḥ pūto bhavati yaṁ māṁ smṛtvā, avratī vratī bhavati yaṁ māṁ smṛtvā, niṣkāmaḥ sa-kāmo bhavati yaṁ māṁ smṛtvā, aśrotrī śrotrī bhavati yaṁ māṁ smṛtvā: "By remembering Me, one who is impure becomes pure. By remembering Me, one who follows no vows becomes a strict follower of vows. By remembering Me, one who is desireless develops desires [to serve Me]. By remembering Me, one who has studied no Vedic mantras becomes an expert knower of the Vedas."
The Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.5.6) refers to the gradual steps in the process of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious: ātmā vā are draṣṭavyaḥ śrotavyo mantavyo nididhyāsitavyaḥ. "It is the Self which must be observed, heard about, thought of and meditated upon with fixed concentration." The idea here is that one should realize the Supreme Self as directly visible in His full personality by the following means: First one should hear the instructions of a qualified representative of the Paramātmā and take the words of such a spiritual master into one's heart by offering him humble service and striving in all ways to please him. One should then ponder the divine message of the spiritual master continuously, with the aim of dispelling all one's doubts and misconceptions. Then one can proceed to meditate on the Supreme Lord's lotus feet with total conviction and determination.
So-called jñānīs may think that the Upaniṣads praise nirviśeṣa (impersonal) realization of the Supreme as more complete and final than sa-viśeṣa (personal) worship of the Supreme Godhead. All honest Vaiṣṇavas, however, join in adhering to the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, always meditating with pleasure on His infinitely wonderful, variegated spiritual qualities. In the words of the śruti-mantras, yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas/ tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanūṁ svām: "To that person whom the Supreme Soul chooses, He becomes attainable. To that person the Supreme Soul reveals His personal form." (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 1.2.23 and Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.2.3)
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī concludes with the prayer,
caraṇa-smaraṇaṁ premṇā
tava deva su-durlabham
yathā kathañcid nṛ-hare
mama bhūyād ahar-niśam
"O Lord, loving remembrance of Your lotus feet is very rarely achieved. Please, O Nṛhari, somehow arrange for me to have that remembrance day and night."
TEXT 24
k( wh" nau vaed" bataAvar"janmalayaAe'ƒas$arM"
yata od"gAAā{"iSayaRmanau de"vagANAA oBayae
taihR" na s$aªa caAs$aāu"BayaM na ca k(Alajava:
ik(maipa na ta‡a zAAṣmavak{(Sya zAyaIta yad"A
ka iha nu veda batāvara-janma-layo 'gra-saraṁ
yata udagād ṛṣir yam anu deva-gaṇā ubhaye
tarhi na san na cāsad ubhayaṁ na ca kāla-javaḥ
kim api na tatra śāstram avakṛṣya śayīta yadā
kaḥ—who; iha—in this world; nu—indeed; veda—knows; bata—ah; avara—recent; janma—whose birth; layaḥ—and annihilation; agra-saram—who came first; yataḥ—from whom; udagāt—arose; ṛṣiḥ—the learned sage, Brahmā; yam anu—following whom (Brahmā); deva-gaṇāḥ—the groups of demigods; ubhaye—both (those who control the senses and those who live in the regions above the heavenly planets); tarhi—at that time; na—no; sat—gross matter; na—no; ca—also; asat—subtle matter; ubhayam—that which is comprised of both (namely, the material bodies); na ca—nor; kāla—of time; javaḥ—the flow; kim api na—none at all; tatra—there; śāstram—authoritative scripture; avakṛṣya—withdrawing; śayīta—(the Supreme Lord) lies down; yadā—when.
Everyone in this world has recently been born and will soon die. So how can anyone here know Him who existed prior to everything else and who gave rise to the first learned sage, Brahmā, and all subsequent demigods, both lesser and greater? When He lies down and withdraws everything within Himself, nothing else remains—no gross or subtle matter or bodies composed of these, no force of time or revealed scripture.
Here the śrutis express the difficulty of knowing the Supreme. Devotional service, or bhakti-yoga, as described in these prayers of the personified Vedas, is the surest and easiest path to knowledge of the Lord and to liberation. In comparison, the philosophic search for knowledge, known as jñāna-yoga, is very difficult, favored though it is by those who are disgusted with material life but still unwilling to surrender to the Lord. As long as the finite soul remains envious of the Lord's supremacy, the Lord does not reveal Himself. As He states in the Bhagavad-gītā (7.25),
nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya
yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ
mūdho 'yaṁ nābhijānāti
loko mām ajam avyayam
"I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am covered by My internal potency, and therefore they do not know that I am unborn and infallible." And in the words of Lord Brahmā,
panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyo
vāyor athāpi manaso muni-puṅgavānām
so 'py asti yat-prapada-sīmny avicintya-tattve
govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, only the tip of the toe of whose lotus feet is approached by the yogīs, who aspire after the transcendental and betake themselves to prāṇāyāma by drilling the respiration; or by the jñānīs, who search out the undifferentiated Brahman by the process of elimination of the mundane, extending over thousands of millions of years." (Bs. 5.34)
Brahmā, the first-born living being in this universe, is also the foremost sage. He is born from Lord Nārāyaṇa, and from him appear the hosts of demigods, including both the controllers of earthly activities and the rulers of heaven. All these powerful and intelligent beings are relatively recent productions of the Lord's creative energy. As the first speaker of the Vedas, Lord Brahmā should know their purport at least as well as any other authority, but even he knows the Personality of Godhead only to a limited extent. As Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam states (1.3.35), veda-guhyāni hṛt-pateḥ: "The Lord of the heart hides Himself deep within the confidential recesses of the Vedic sound." If Brahmā and the demigods born from him cannot easily know the Supreme Lord, how then can mere mortals expect success in their independent pursuit of knowledge?
As long as this creation lasts, living beings face many obstacles on the path of knowledge. Because of identifying themselves with their material coverings, consisting of body, mind and ego, they acquire all sorts of prejudices and misconceptions. Even if they have the divine scripture to guide them and the opportunity to execute the prescribed methods of karma, jñāna and yoga, the conditioned souls have but little power for gaining knowledge of the Absolute. And when the time of annihilation comes, the Vedic scriptures and their regulative injunctions become unmanifest, leaving the dormant jīvas completely in darkness. Therefore we should abandon our futile endeavors for knowledge without devotion and simply surrender ourselves to the Supreme Lord's mercy, heeding the advice of Lord Brahmā:
jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva
jīvanti san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām
sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gataṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ
ye prāyaśo jita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyām
"Those who, even while remaining situated in their established social positions, throw away the process of speculative knowledge and with their body, words and mind offer all respects to descriptions of Your personality and activities, dedicating their lives to these narrations, which are vibrated by You personally and by Your pure devotees, certainly conquer Your Lordship, although You are otherwise unconquerable by anyone within the three worlds." (SB 10.14.3)
In this regard, the Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.4.1) refers to the Supreme as yato vāco nivartante aprāpya manasā saha, "where words cease, and where the mind cannot reach." The Īśopaniṣad (4) states,
anejad ekaṁ manaso javīyo
naitad devā āpnuvan pūrvam arśat
tad dhāvato 'nyān atyeti tiṣṭhat
tasmin apo mātariśvā dadhāti
"Although fixed in His abode, the Personality of Godhead is more swift than the mind and can overcome all others running. The powerful demigods cannot approach Him. Although in one place, He controls those who supply the air and rain. He surpasses all in excellence." And in the Ṛg Veda (3.54.5) we find this mantra:
ko 'ddhā veda ka iha pravocat
kuta āyātāḥ kuta iyaṁ visṛṣṭiḥ
arvāg devā visarjanenā-
thā ko veda yata ā babhūva
"Who in this world actually knows, and who can explain, whence this creation has come? The demigods, after all, are younger than the creation. Who, then, can tell whence this world has come into being?"
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī thus prays,
kvāhaṁ buddhy-ādi-saṁruddhaḥ
kva ca bhūman mahas tava
dīna-bandho dayā-sindho
bhaktiṁ me nṛ-hare diśa
"What am I, a being entrapped by the material coverings of worldly intelligence and so on? And what are Your glories by comparison, O almighty one? O friend of the fallen, O ocean of mercy, Lord Nṛhari, please bless me with Your devotional service."
TEXT 25
jainamas$ata: s$ataAe ma{itamautaAtmaina yae ca iBad"AM
ivapaNAma{taM smar"ntyaupaid"zAinta ta @Aś&ipataE:
i‡agAuNAmaya: paumaAinaita iBad"A yad"baAeDak{(taA
tvaiya na tata: par"‡a s$a Bavaed"vabaAeDar"s$ae
janim asataḥ sato mṛtim utātmani ye ca bhidāṁ
vipaṇam ṛtaṁ smaranty upadiśanti ta ārupitaiḥ
tri-guṇa-mayaḥ pumān iti bhidā yad abodha-kṛtā
tvayi na tataḥ paratra sa bhaved avabodha-rase
janim—creation; asataḥ—of the manifest world (from atoms); sataḥ—of that which is eternal; mṛtim—destruction; uta—also; ātmani—in the soul; ye—who; ca—and; bhidām—duality; vipaṇam—mundane business; ṛtam—real; smaranti—declare authoritatively; upadiśanti—teach; te—they; ārupitaiḥ—in terms of illusions imposed on reality; tri—three; guṇa—of the material modes; mayaḥ—composed; pumān—the living entity; iti—thus; bhidā—dualistic conception; yat—which; abodha—by ignorance; kṛtā—created; tvayi—in You; na—not; tataḥ—to such; paratra—transcendental; saḥ—that (ignorance); bhavet—can exist; avabodha—total consciousness; rase—whose composition.
Supposed authorities who declare that matter is the origin of existence, that the permanent qualities of the soul can be destroyed, that the self is compounded of separate aspects of spirit and matter, or that material transactions constitute reality—all such authorities base their teachings on mistaken ideas that hide the truth. The dualistic conception that the living entity is produced from the three modes of nature is simply a product of ignorance. Such a conception has no real basis in You, for You are transcendental to all illusion and always enjoy perfect, total awareness.
The true position of the Supreme Personality is a sublime mystery, as is also the dependent position of the jīva soul. Most thinkers are mistaken in one way or another about these truths, since there are countless varieties of false designation that can cover the soul and create illusion. Foolish conditioned souls submit to obvious delusions, but the illusory power of Māyā can easily subvert the intelligence of even the most sophisticated philosophers and mystics. Thus there are always divergent schools of thought propounding conflicting theories concerning basic principles of truth.
In traditional Indian philosophy, the followers of Vaiśeṣika, Nyāya, Sāṅkhya, Yoga and Mīmāṁsā philosophies all have their own erroneous ideas, which the personified Vedas point out in this prayer. The Vaiśeṣikas say that the visible universe is created from an original stock of atoms (janim asataḥ). As Kaṇāda Ṛṣi's Vaiśeṣika-sūtras (7.1.20) state, nityaṁ parimaṇḍalam: "That which is of the smallest size, the atom, is eternal. "Kaṇāda and his followers also postulate eternality for other, nonatomic entities, including the souls who become embodied, and even a Supreme Soul. But in Vaiśeṣika cosmology the souls and the Supersoul play only token roles in the atomic production of the universe. Śrīla Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa criticizes this position in his Vedānta-sūtras (2.2.12): ubhayathāpi na karmātas tad-abhāvaḥ. According to this sūtra, one cannot claim that, at the time of creation, atoms first combine together because they are impelled by some karmic impulse adhering in the atoms themselves, since atoms by themselves, in their primeval state before combining into complex objects, have no ethical responsibility that might lead them to acquire pious and sinful reactions. Nor can the initial combination of atoms be explained as a result of the residual karma of the living entities who lie dormant prior to creation, since these reactions are each jīva's own and cannot be transferred from them even to other jīvas, what to speak of inert atoms.
Alternatively, the phrase janim asataḥ can be taken to allude to the Yoga philosophy of Patañjali Ṛṣi, inasmuch as his Yoga-sūtras teach one how to achieve the transcendental status of Brahmanhood by a mechanical process of exercise and meditation. Patañjali's yoga method is here called asat because it ignores the essential aspect of devotion—surrender to the will of the Supreme Person. As Lord Kṛṣṇa states in the Bhagavad-gītā (17.28),
aśraddhayā hutaṁ dattaṁ
tapas taptaṁ kṛtaṁ ca yat
asad ity ucyate pārtha
na ca tat pretya no iha
"Anything done as sacrifice, charity or penance without faith in the Supreme, O son of Pṛthā, is impermanent. It is called asat and is useless both in this life and in the next."
The Yoga-sūtras acknowledge the Personality of Godhead in an oblique way, but only as a helper whom the advancing yogī can utilize. Īśvara-praṇidhānād vā: "Devotional meditation on God is yet another means of achieving concentration." (Yoga-sūtra 1.23) In contrast, Bādarāyaṇa Vedavyāsa's philosophy of Vedānta emphasizes devotional service not only as the primary means to liberation but also as identical with liberation itself. Ā-prāyaṇāt tatrāpi hi dṛṣṭam: "Worship of the Lord continues up to the point of liberation, and indeed goes on in the liberated state also, as the Vedas reveal." (Vedānta-sūtra 4.1.12)
Gautama Ṛṣi, in his Nyāya-sutras, proposes that one can attain liberation by negating both illusion and unhappiness: duḥkha-janma-pravṛtti-doṣa-mithyā-jñānānām uttarottarāpāye tad-anantarābhāvād apavargaḥ. "By successively dispelling false conceptions, bad character, entangling action, rebirth and misery—the disappearance of one of these allowing the disappearance of the next—one can achieve final liberation." (Nyāya-sutra 1.1.2) But since Nyāya philosophers believe that awareness is not an essential quality of the soul, they teach that a liberated soul has no consciousness. The Nyāya idea of liberation thus puts the soul in the condition of a dead stone. This attempt by the Nyāya philosophers to kill the soul's innate consciousness is here called sato mṛtim by the personified Vedas. But the Vedānta-sūtra (2.3.17) unequivocally states, jño 'ta eva: "The jīva soul is always a knower."
Although the soul is in truth both conscious and active, the proponents of Sāṅkhya philosophy wrongly separate these two functions of the living force (ātmani ye ca bhidām), ascribing consciousness to the soul (puruṣa) and activity to material nature (prakṛti). According to the Sāṅkhya-kārikā (19-20),
tasmāc ca viparyāsāt
siddhaṁ sākṣitvaṁ puruṣasya
kaivalyaṁ madhya-sthyaṁ
draṣṭṛtvam akartṛ-bhāvaś ca
"Thus, since the apparent differences between puruṣas are only superficial (being due to the various modes of nature that cover them), the puruṣa's true status is proven to be that of a witness, characterized by his separateness, his passive indifference, his status of being an observer, and his inactivity."
tasmāt tat-saṁyogād
acetanaṁ cetanā-vad iva liṅgam
guṇa-kartṛtve 'pi tathā
karteva bhavaty udāsīnaḥ
"Thus, by contact with the soul, the unconscious subtle body seems to be conscious, while the soul appears to be the doer although he is aloof from the activity of nature's modes."
Śrīla Vyāsadeva refutes this idea in the section of the Vedānta-sūtra (2.3.31-39) that begins, kartā śāstrārtha-vattvāt: "The jīva soul must be a performer of actions, because the injunctions of scripture must have some purpose." Ācārya Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, in his Govinda-bhāṣya, explains: "The jīva, not the modes of nature, is the doer. Why? Because the injunctions of scripture must have some purpose (śāstrārtha-vattvāt). For example, such scriptural injunctions as svarga-kāmo yajeta ('One who desires to attain to heaven should perform ritual sacrifice') and ātmānam eva lokam upāsīta (Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.4.15: 'One should worship with the aim of attaining the spiritual kingdom') are meaningful only if a conscious doer exists. If the modes of nature were the doer, these statements would serve no purpose. After all, scriptural injunctions engage the living entity in performing prescribed actions by convincing him that he can act to bring about certain enjoyable results. Such a mentality cannot be aroused in the inert modes of nature."
Jaimini Ṛṣi, in his Pūrva-mīmāṁsā-sūtras, presents material work and its results as the whole of reality (vipaṇam ṛtam). He and later proponents of Karma-mīmāṁsā philosophy teach that material existence is endless—that there is no liberation. For them the cycle of karma is perpetual, and the best one can aim for is higher birth among the demigods. Therefore, they say, the whole purpose of the Vedas is to engage human beings in rituals for creating good karma, and consequently the mature soul's prime responsibility is to ascertain the exact meaning of the Vedas' sacrificial injunctions and to execute them. Codanā-lakṣaṇo 'rtho dharmaḥ: "Duty is that which is indicated by the injunctions of the Vedas." (Pūrva-mīmāṁsā-sūtra 1.1.2)
The Vedānta-sūtra, however—especially in the fourth chapter, which deals with life's ultimate goal—elaborately describes the soul's potential for achieving liberation from birth and death, while it subordinates ritual sacrifice to the role of helping one become qualified to receive spiritual knowledge. As stated there (Vedānta-sūtra 4.1.16), agnihotrādi tu tat-kāryāyaiva tad-darśanāt: "The Agnihotra and other Vedic sacrifices are meant only for producing knowledge, as the statements of the Vedas show." And the very last words of the Vedānta-sūtra (4.4.22) proclaim, anāvṛttiḥ śabdāt: "The liberated soul never returns to this world, as promised by the revealed scripture."
Thus the fallacious conclusions of the speculative philosophers prove that even great scholars and sages are often bewildered by the misuse of their own God—given intelligence. As the Kaṭha Upaniṣad (1.2.5) says,
avidyāyām antare vartamānāḥ
svayaṁ dhīrāḥ paṇḍitam-manyamānāḥ
jaṅghanyamānāḥ pariyanti mūḍhā
andhenaiva nīyamānā yathāndhāḥ
"Caught in the grip of ignorance, self-proclaimed experts consider themselves learned authorities. They wander about this world befooled, like the blind leading the blind."
Of the six orthodox philosophies of Vedic tradition—Sāṅkhya, Yoga, Nyāya, Vaiśeṣika, Mīmāṁsā and Vedānta—only the Vedānta of Bādarāyaṇa Vyāsa is free of error, and even that only as properly explained by the bona fide Vaiṣṇava ācāryas. Each of the six schools, nonetheless, makes some practical contribution to Vedic education: atheistic Sāṅkhya explains the evolution of natural elements from subtle to gross, Patañjali's yoga describes the eightfold method of meditation, Nyāya sets forth the techniques of logic, Vaiśeṣika considers the basic metaphysical categories of reality, and Mīmāṁsā establishes the standard tools of scriptural interpretation. Apart from these six, there are also the more deviant philosophies of the Buddhists, Jains and Cārvākas, whose theories of voidism and materialism deny the spiritual integrity of the eternal soul.
Ultimately, the only perfectly reliable source of knowledge is God Himself. The Personality of Godhead is avabodha-rasa, the infinite reservoir of unfailing vision. To those who depend on Him with absolute conviction, He grants the divine eye of knowledge. Others, following their own speculative theories, must grope for the truth through the obscuring curtain of Māyā. Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
mithyā-tarka-śukarkaśerita-mahā-vādāndhakārāntara-
bhrāmyan-manda-mater amanda-mahimaṁs tvad-jñāna-vartmāsphuṭam
śrīman mādhava vāmana tri-nayana śrī-śaṅkara śrī-pate
govindeti mudā vadan madhu-pate muktaḥ kadā syām aham
"For the bewildered soul wandering within the darkness of those exalted philosophies promoted by the harsh methods of false logic, the path of true knowledge of You, O Lord of magnificent glory, remains invisible. O Lord of Madhu, husband of the goddess of fortune, when will I become liberated by joyfully chanting Your names—Mādhava, Vāmana, Trinayana, Śrī Śaṅkara, Śrīpati and Govinda?"
TEXT 26
s$aid"va manaiṣva{Ôvaiya ivaBaAtyas$ad"AmanaujaAta,
s$ad"iBama{zAntyazAeSaimad"maAtmatayaAtmaivad":
na ih" ivak{(itaM tyajainta k(nak(sya tad"AtmatayaA
svak{(tamanau‘aivaí"imad"maAtmatayaAvais$atama,
sad iva manas tri-vṛt tvayi vibhāty asad ā-manujāt
sad abhimṛśanty aśeṣam idam ātmatayātma-vidaḥ
na hi vikṛtiṁ tyajanti kanakasya tad-ātmatayā
sva-kṛtam anupraviṣṭam idam ātmatayāvasitam
sat—real; iva—as if; manaḥ—the mind (and its manifestations); tri-vṛt—threefold (by the modes of material nature); tvayi—in You; vibhāti—appears; asat—unreal; ā-manujāt—extending to the human beings; sat—as real; abhimṛśanti—they consider; aśeṣam—entire; idam—this (world); ātmatayā—as nondifferent from the Self; ātma-vidaḥ—the knowers of the Self; na—not; hi—indeed; vikṛtim—the transformations; tyajanti—reject; kanakasya—of gold; tat-ātmatayā—inasmuch as they are nondifferent from it; sva—by Himself; kṛtam—created; anupraviṣṭam—and entered; idam—this; ātmatayā—as nondifferent from Himself; avasitam—ascertained.
The three modes of material nature comprise everything in this world—from the simplest phenomena to the complex human body. Although these phenomena appear real, they are only a false reflection of the spiritual reality, being a superimposition of the mind upon You. Still, those who know the Supreme Self consider the entire material creation to be real inasmuch as it is nondifferent from the Self. Just as things made of gold are indeed not to be rejected, since their substance is actual gold, so this world is undoubtedly nondifferent from the Lord who created it and then entered within it.
In one sense the visible world is real (sat), while in another it is not (asat). The substance of this universe is solid fact, being the Lord's external energy, but the forms that Māyā imposes on this substance are only temporary. And because material forms are temporary manifestations, those who consider them permanent are in illusion. Impersonalistic scholars, however, misinterpret this division of sat and asat; denying commonsense reality, they declare that not only material form but also material substance is unreal, and they confuse their own spiritual essence with that of the Absolute Whole. A Māyāvādī philosopher would take the words spoken by the personified Vedas in the preceding prayer—tri-guṇa-mayaḥ pumān iti bhidā—as negating any distinction between the Paramātmā and the jīva soul. He would claim that since the jīva's material embodiment is an ephemeral display of the three modes of nature, when the jīva's ignorance is destroyed by knowledge, he becomes the Paramātmā, the Supreme Soul; bondage, liberation and the manifest world are all unreal creations of ignorance. In response to such ideas, the Vedas here clarify the factual relationship between sat and asat.
In the śruti literature we find this statement: asato 'dhimano 'sṛjyata, manaḥ prajāpatim asṛjat, prajāpatiḥ prajā asṛjat, tad vā idaṁ manasy eva paramaṁ pratiṣṭhitaṁ yad idaṁ kiṁ ca. "The supreme mind was originally created from asat. This mind created Prajāpati, and Prajāpati created all living beings. Thus mind alone is the ultimate foundation of everything that exists in this world." Although impersonalists might misread this to mean that all manifest existence is based on the unreality of illusion (asat), the apparently contrary use of the word asat in this passage actually refers to the original cause, the Supreme Godhead, because He is transcendental to material existence (sat). The logic of the Vedānta-sūtra (2.1.17) corroborates this interpretation while denying the wrong interpretation of the impersonalists: asad-vyapadeśān neti cen na dharmāntareṇa vākya-śeṣāt. "If one objects that the material world and its source cannot be of one substance because the world has been called unreal, we reply, 'No, because the statement that Brahman is asat makes sense in terms of His having qualities distinct from those of the creation.' " Thus the Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.7.1) declares, asad vā idam agra āsīt: "In the beginning of this creation, only asat was present."
In the opinion of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, the word adhimanaḥ in the passage quoted above refers to the ruler of the aggregate mind of the universe, Lord Aniruddha, who appears as a plenary expansion of Śrī Nārāyaṇa when the latter desires to create. Prajāpati is Brahmā, the father of all other created beings. This is described in the Mahā-nārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (1.4): atha punar eva nārāyaṇaḥ so 'nyaṁ kāmaṁ manasā dhyāyet. tasya dhyānāntaḥ-sthasya lalanāt svedo 'patat. tā imā pratatāpa tāsu tejo hiraṇ-mayam aṇḍaṁ tatra brahmā catur-mukho 'jāyata. "Then Lord Nārāyaṇa meditated upon another desire of His, and as He pondered, a drop of perspiration fell from His forehead. All the material creations evolved from the fermentation of this drop. Therein the fiery, golden egg of the universe appeared, and within that globe four-headed Brahmā took his birth."
When a particular object is manufactured, it appears as a transformation of its ingredient cause, as in the case of jewelry made from gold. Persons who want gold will not reject gold earrings or necklaces, since these items are still gold, despite their modification. True jñānīs see in this mundane example an analogy to the different-yet-nondifferent relationship of the Puruṣa and His emanations, both material and spiritual. Thus this transcendental knowledge frees them from the bondage of illusion, for they can then see the Lord throughout His creation.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
yat sattvataḥ sadā bhāti
jagad etad asat svataḥ
sad-ābhāsam asaty asmin
bhagavantaṁ bhajāma tam
"Let us worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by virtue of whose substantial existence this created world seems to exist perpetually, although it is essentially insubstantial. As the Supersoul, He constitutes the representation of the real within this unreality."
TEXT 27
tava pair" yae car"ntyaiKalas$aÔvainake(tatayaA
ta ota pad"A‚(mantyaivagANAyya izAr"Ae ina[R%tae:
pair"vayas$ae pazAUinava igAr"A ivabauDaAnaipa taAMs$a,
tvaiya k{(tas$aAEô$d"A: Kalau paunainta na yae ivamauKaA:
tava pari ye caranty akhila-sattva-niketatayā
ta uta padākramanty avigaṇayya śiro nirṛteḥ
parivayase paśūn iva girā vibudhān api tāṁs
tvayi kṛta-sauhṛdāḥ khalu punanti na ye vimukhāḥ
tava—You; pari ye caranti—who worship; akhila—of all; sattva—created entities; niketatayā—as the shelter; te—they; uta—simply; padā—with their feet; ākramanti—step upon; avigaṇayya—disregarding; śiraḥ—the head; nirṛteḥ—of Death; parivayase—You tie up; paśūn iva—like animals; girā—with Your words (of the Vedas); vibudhān—wise; api—even; tān—them; tvayi—to whom; kṛta—those who have made; sauhṛdāḥ—friendship; khalu—indeed; punanti—purify; na—not; ye—who; vimukhāḥ—inimical.
The devotees who worship You as the shelter of all beings disregard Death and place their feet on his head. But with the words of the Vedas You bind the nondevotees like animals, though they be vastly learned scholars. It is Your affectionate devotees who can purify themselves and others, not those who are inimical to You.
The personified Vedas have now set aside the erroneous philosophies of several contending schools: the asad-utpatti-vāda of the Vaiśeṣikas, who presume a material source of creation; the sad-vināśa-vada of the Naiyāyikas, who would deprive the liberated soul of consciousness; the saguṇatva-bheda-vāda of the Sāṅkhyas, who isolate the soul from all his apparent qualities; the vipaṇa-vāda of the Mīmāṁsakas, who condemn the soul to eternal involvement in the mundane commerce of karma; and the vivarta-vāda of the Māyāvādīs, who denigrate the soul's real life in this world as a hallucination. Having rejected all these ideas, the personified Vedas now present the philosophy of devotional service, paricaryā-vāda.
The Vaiṣṇavas who accept this philosophy teach that the jīva soul is an atomic particle of spiritual personality who possesses minute knowledge, is not independent and has no material qualities. Being minute, he is prone to come under the control of the material energy, where he suffers the pains of material life. He can end his suffering and regain the shelter of the Supreme Lord's divine, internal energy only by rendering devotional service to the Lord, not by engaging in fruitive work, mental speculation or any other process.
As Lord Kṛṣṇa says in His own words,
bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ
śraddhayātmā priyaḥ satām
bhaktiḥ punāti man-niṣṭhā
śva-pākān api sambhavāt
"Only by practicing unalloyed devotional service with full faith in Me can one obtain Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I am naturally dear to My devotees, who take Me as the only goal of their loving service. By engaging in such pure devotional service, even the dog-eaters can purify themselves from the contamination of their low birth." (SB 11.14.21)
Devotees of the Personality of Godhead worship Him as the shelter (niketa) of everything that exists (akhila-sattva). Moreover, these Vaiṣṇava devotees themselves can be called akhila-sattva-niketa in the sense that their abode and shelter is the philosophic truth of the reality (sattvam) of both the material and spiritual worlds. Thus Śrīpāda Madhvācārya, in his Vedānta-sūtra-bhāṣya, quotes the śruti-mantra: satyaṁ hy evedaṁ viśvam asṛjata. "He created this world as real." And the Seventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.1.11) refers to the Supreme Lord as pradhāna-pumbhyāṁ naradeva satya-kṛt, "the creator of a real universe of matter and living entities."
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura points out yet another, more confidential, meaning of akhila-sattva-niketa: that the Supreme Lord's personal abodes are in no way khila, or imperfect, and so are called Vaikuṇṭha, the realms free of anxiety and restriction. Vaiṣṇavas whose devotional service the Lord has kindly accepted are so sure of His protection that they no longer fear death, which becomes for them just another easy step on the way back to their eternal home.
But are only devotees of the Supreme Lord eligible for liberation from the fear of death? Why are all other mystics and learned scholars disqualified? Here the śrutis answer: "Anyone who is vimukha, who has not turned his face toward the Lord with hopeful expectation of His mercy, is bound up in illusion by the same words of the Vedas that enlighten the surrendered devotees." The Vedas themselves warn, tasya vāk-tantir nāmāni dāmāni. tasyedaṁ vācā tantyā nāmabhir dāmabhiḥ sarvaṁ sitam: "The threads of this transcendental sound form a string of sacred names, but also a set of binding ropes. With the rope of their injunctions, the Vedas tie up this entire world, leaving all beings fettered by false designations."
The reality of the soul and Supersoul is aparokṣa, perceivable, but only to one with transcendental vision. Philosophers whose hearts are impure mistakenly presume that this truth is instead parokṣa, that it can only be speculated upon and never experienced directly. The knowledge of such thinkers may help them dispel certain doubts and misconceptions about the lesser aspects of reality, but it is useless for transcending material illusion and approaching the Absolute Truth. As a general rule, only the devotees who faithfully render loving service unto the Supreme Lord up to the point of complete purification receive His grace in the form of aparokṣa-jñāna, direct realization of His greatness and wonderful compassion. The Personality of Godhead is of course free to award His mercy even to the undeserving, as He does when He personally kills offensive demons, but He is much less inclined to bless Māyāvādīs and other atheistic philosophers.
One should not think, however, that the devotees of Viṣṇu are ignorant because they may not be expert in philosophic analysis and argument. The soul's perfect realization is to be gained not through his own efforts at mental speculation but by receiving the Lord's favor. This we hear from Vedic authority (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 1.2.23 and Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.2.3):
nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo
na medhayā na bahunā śrutena
yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas
tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanūṁ svām
"This Supreme Self cannot be reached by argumentation, or by applying one's independent brain power, or by studying many scriptures. Rather, he alone can achieve the Self whom the Self chooses to favor. To that person the Self reveals His own true, personal form."
Elsewhere the śruti describes the devotee's success: dehānte devaḥ paraṁ brahma tārakaṁ vyacaṣṭe. "At the end of this body's life, the sanctified soul perceives the Supreme Lord just as clearly as if seeing the stars in the sky." And in its last statement, the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.23) offers this encouragement to aspiring Vaiṣṇavas:
yasya deve parā bhaktir
yathā deve tathā gurau
tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ
prakāśante mahātmanaḥ
 [ŚU  6.23]
"Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the spiritual master, all the imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically revealed."
In this regard Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī cites other verses of Śrī Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.7-8 and 4.13):
juṣṭaṁ yadā paśyaty anyam īśam
asya mahimānam iti vīta-śokaḥ
ṛco 'kṣare pare vyoman
yasmin devā adhi viśve niṣeduḥ
yas taṁ veda kim ṛcā kariṣyati
ya it tad vidus ta ime samāsate
"The Supreme Lord is He who is referred to by the mantras of the Ṛg Veda, who resides in the topmost, eternal sky, and who elevates His saintly devotees to share that same position. One who has developed pure love for Him and realizes His uniqueness then appreciates His glories and is freed from sorrow. What further good can the Ṛg mantras bestow on one who knows that Supreme Lord? All who come to know Him achieve the supreme destination."
yo vedānām adhipo
yasmil̐ lokā adhiśrītāḥ
ya īśo 'sya dvipadaś catuṣpadas
tasmai devāya haviṣā vidhema
"To Him who is the master of all the Vedas, in whom all planets rest, who is the Lord of all known creatures, both the two-legged and the four-legged—to Him, the Personality of Godhead, we offer our worship with oblations of ghee."
Referring to those who desire liberation, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
tapantu tāpaiḥ prapatantu parvatād
aṭantu tīrthāni paṭhantu cāgamān
yajantu yāgair vivadantu vādair
hariṁ vina naiva mṛtiṁ taranti
"Let them suffer austerities, throw themselves from mountaintops, travel to holy places, study the scriptures, worship with fire sacrifices and argue various philosophies, but without Lord Hari they will never cross beyond death."
TEXT 28
tvamak(r"NA: svar"Ax"iKalak(Ar"k(zAi·(Dar"s$a,
tava bailamauã"h"inta s$amad"ntyajayaAinaimaSaA:
vaSaRBaujaAe'iKalaiºaitapataeir"va ivaṅs$a{jaAe
ivad"Daita ya‡a yae tvaiDak{(taA Bavataêik(taA:
tvam akaraṇaḥ sva-rāḍ akhila-kāraka-śakti-dharas
tava balim udvahanti samadanty ajayānimiṣāḥ
varṣa-bhujo 'khila-kṣiti-pater iva viśva-sṛjo
vidadhati yatra ye tv adhikṛtā bhavataś cakitāḥ
tvam—You; akaraṇaḥ—devoid of material senses; sva-rāṭ—self-effulgent; akhila—of all; kāraka—sensory functions; śakti—of the potencies; dharaḥ—the maintainer; tava—Your; balim—tribute; udvahanti—carry; samadanti—and partake of; ajayā—along with material nature; animiṣāḥ—the demigods; varṣa—of districts of a kingdom; bhujaḥ—the rulers; akhila—entire; kṣiti—of the land; pateḥ—of the lord; iva—as if; viśva—of the universe; sṛjaḥ—the creators; vidadhati—execute; yatra—in which; ye—they; tu—indeed; adhikṛtā—assigned; bhavataḥ—of You; cakitāḥ—afraid.
Though You have no material senses, You are the self-effulgent sustainer of everyone's sensory powers. The demigods and material nature herself offer You tribute, while also enjoying the tribute offered them by their worshipers, just as subordinate rulers of various districts in a kingdom offer tribute to their lord, the ultimate proprietor of the land, while also enjoying the tribute paid them by their own subjects. In this way the universal creators faithfully execute their assigned services out of fear of You.
All intelligent living beings should acknowledge the sovereignty of the Lord and willingly engage in devotional service to Him. Such is the consensus of the personified Vedas. But Lord Nārāyaṇa, while hearing these prayers, may have reasonably asked, "Since I also have a bodily form with sense organs and limbs, am I not just another doer and enjoyer? Especially since as the Supersoul in every being's heart I supervise countless organs and limbs, how am I not implicated in the sum total of everyone's sense gratification?" "No," the assembled śrutis here rejoin, "You have no material senses, yet You are the absolute controller of all." As expressed in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (3.18),
apāṇi-pādo javano grahītā
paśyaty acakṣuḥ sa śṛṇoty akarṇaḥ
sa vetti vedyaṁ na ca tasya vettā
tam āhur agryaṁ puruṣaṁ purāṇam
"He has no feet or hands, yet He is the swiftest runner and can grasp anything. Though without eyes or ears, He sees and hears. Nobody knows Him, yet He is the knower and the object of knowledge. Sages describe Him as the supreme, original Personality of Godhead."
The hands, feet, eyes and ears of the Supreme Person are not like those of an ordinary, conditioned soul, which are derived from false ego, a material substance. Rather, the Lord's transcendentally beautiful features are direct manifestations of His internal nature. Thus, unlike the soul and body of conditioned living beings, the Lord and His bodily form are identical in all respects. Moreover, His lotus hands, lotus feet, lotus eyes and other limbs are not restricted in their functions. Śrī Brahmā, the Lord's first creature, glorifies Him on this account:
angāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti
paśyanti pānti kalayanti ciraṁ jaganti
ānanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya
govindam ādi-puruṣam tam ahaṁ bhajāmi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, whose transcendental form is full of bliss, truth and substantiality and thus emanates the most dazzling splendor. Each of the limbs of that transcendental figure possesses in itself the full-fledged functions of all the organs, and He eternally sees, maintains and manifests the infinite universes, both spiritual and material." (Bs. 5.32)
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī gives an alternative explanation of the phrase akhila-śakti-dhara: The power that the Supreme Lord maintains within Himself is akhila, free from the limitations of all that is khila, or inferior and insignificant. He energizes the living being's senses, as described by the Kena Upaniṣad (1.2): śrotrasya śrotraṁ manaso mano yad vāco ha vācam. "He is the ear's ear, the mind's mind, and the voice's capacity of speech." And the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8) declares,
na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate
na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate
parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate
svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca
 [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]
"He has no material work to perform, nor any material senses with which to perform it. No one can be found who is equal to or greater than Him. From the Vedas we hear how that Supreme Lord possesses multifarious energies—the potencies of knowledge, strength and action—each of which acts autonomously."
Indra and the other demigods who rule over mortal beings are themselves servants of the Personality of Godhead, as are their superiors—Brahmā and his sons, the secondary creators. All of these great gods and sages worship the Supreme Lord by performing their respective services of managing the universe and providing religious guidance for mankind.
The powerful controllers of the universe submit themselves in fearful reverence to the supreme controller, Lord Śrī Viṣṇu. As the Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.8.1) states,
bhīṣāsmād vātaḥ pavate
bhīṣād eti sūryaḥ
bhīṣāsmād agniś cendraś ca
mṛtyur dhāvati pañcamaḥ
"Out of fear of Him, the wind blows. Out of fear of Him, the sun moves and Agni and Indra execute their duties. And death, the fifth of their number, races along out of fear of Him."
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
anindriyo 'pi yo devaḥ
sarva-kāraka-śakti-dhṛk
sarva-jñaḥ sarva-kartā ca
sarva-sevyaṁ namāmi tam
"The Supreme Lord has no material senses, yet He controls every living entity's sensory functions. He is the knower of everything, the ultimate performer of all action, and everyone's proper object of devotional service. I offer my obeisances to Him."
TEXT 29
isTar"car"jaAtaya: syaur"jayaAetTainaimaÔayaujaAe
ivah"r" od"IºayaA yaid" par"sya ivamau·( tata:
na ih" par"masya k(iêd"par"Ae na par"ê Bavaeā,"
ivayata wvaApad"sya tava zAUnyataulaAM d"Data:
sthira-cara-jātayaḥ syur ajayottha-nimitta-yujo
vihara udīkṣayā yadi parasya vimukta tataḥ
na hi paramasya kaścid aparo na paraś ca bhaved
viyata ivāpadasya tava śūnya-tulāṁ dadhataḥ
sthira—stationary; cara—and moving; jātayaḥ—species of life; syuḥ—become manifest; ajayā—with the material energy; uttha—awakened; nimitta—their motivations for activity (and the subtle bodies activated by such); yujaḥ—assuming; viharaḥ—sport; udīkṣayā—by Your brief glance; yadi—if; parasya—of Him who is aloof; vimukta—O eternally liberated one; tataḥ—from her; na—not; hi—indeed; paramasya—for the supreme; kaścit—anyone; aparaḥ—not foreign; na—nor; paraḥ—foreign; ca—also; bhavet—can be; viyataḥ—for the ethereal sky; iva—as if; apadasya—which has no perceptible qualities; tava—for You; śūnya—to a void; tulām—a resemblance; dadhataḥ—who take on.
O eternally liberated, transcendental Lord, Your material energy causes the various moving and nonmoving species of life to appear by activating their material desires, but only when and if You sport with her by briefly glancing at her. You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, see no one as an intimate friend and no one as a stranger, just as the ethereal sky has no connection with perceptible qualities. In this sense You resemble a void.
Not only are living beings totally dependent on the all-powerful, independent Lord for their maintenance and welfare, but even the very fact of their embodied existence is due only to His exceptional mercy. The Personality of Godhead has no interest in material affairs, since He has nothing to gain from the petty pleasures of this world and is altogether free from any contamination of envy or lust. He is exclusively involved in confidential, loving pastimes with His pure devotees in the internal realm of His spiritual energies. Therefore the only reason He ever turns to the business of material creation is to help draw lost souls back into this inner circle of eternal enjoyment.
To attempt a life separate from the Lord, rebellious souls must be provided with suitable bodies and an illusory environment in which to act out their fantasies of independence. The merciful Lord agrees to let them learn in their own way, and so He glances at Mahā-Māyā, His energy of material creation. Simply by this glance, she is awakened and makes all required arrangements on His behalf. She and her helpers manufacture countless varieties of gross and subtle bodies of demigods, humans, animals and so on, along with countless situations in heavenly and hellish worlds—all just to give the conditioned souls the exact facilities they desire and deserve.
While the uninformed may blame God for the suffering of His creatures, a sincere student of the Vedic literature will come to appreciate the Supreme Lord's equal concern for each soul. Since He has nothing to lose or gain, there is no reason for Him to distinguish between friends and opponents. We may choose to oppose Him and make all endeavors to forget Him, but He never forgets us, nor does He ever stop providing us with all our necessities, along with His unseen guidance.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
tvad-īkṣaṇa-vaśa-kśobha-
māyā-bodhita-karmabhiḥ
jatān saṁsarataḥ khinnān
nṛ-hare pāhi naḥ pitaḥ
"O Father, O Lord appearing as half man, half lion, please save those who have been born into the endless cycle of birth and death. These souls are distressed by their karmic entanglement, which Māyā awakened when Your glance excited her to activity."
TEXT 30
@pair"imataA ‹auvaAstanauBa{taAe yaid" s$avaRgAtaAs$a,
taihR" na zAAsyataeita inayamaAe ‹auva naetar"TaA
@jaina ca yanmayaM tad"ivamaucya inayanta{ Bavaeta,
s$amamanaujaAnataAM yad"mataM mataāu"í"tayaA
aparimitā dhruvās tanu-bhṛto yadi sarva-gatās
tarhi na śāsyateti niyamo dhruva netarathā
ajani ca yan-mayaṁ tad avimucya niyantṛ bhavet
samam anujānatāṁ yad amataṁ mata-duṣṭatayā
aparimitāḥ—countless; dhruvāḥ—permanent; tanu-bhṛtaḥ—the embodied living entities; yadi—if; sarva-gatāḥ—omnipresent; tarhi—then; na—not; śāsyatā—sovereignty; iti—such; niyamaḥ—rule; dhruva—O unchanging one; na—not; itarathā—otherwise; ajani—was generated; ca—and; yat-mayam—from whose substance; tat—from that; avimucya—not separating itself; niyantṛ—regulator; bhavet—must be; samam—equally present; anujānatām—of those who supposedly know; yat—which; amatam—misunderstood; mata—of what is known; duṣṭatayā—because of the imperfection.
If the countless living entities were all-pervading and possessed forms that never changed, You could not possibly be their absolute ruler, O immutable one. But since they are Your localized expansions and their forms are subject to change, You do control them. Indeed, that which supplies the ingredients for the generation of something is necessarily its controller because a product never exists apart from its ingredient cause. It is simply illusion for someone to think that he knows the Supreme Lord, who is equally present in each of His expansions, since whatever knowledge one gains by material means must be imperfect.
Because the conditioned soul cannot directly understand the Supreme, the Vedas commonly refer to that Supreme Truth in such impersonal terms as Brahman and oṁ tat sat. If an ordinary scholar presumes to know the confidential meaning of these symbolic references, he should be rejected as an imposter. In the words of Śrī Kena Upaniṣad (2.1), yadi manyase su-vedeti dabhram evāpi nūnaṁ tvaṁ vettha brahmaṇo rūpaṁ, yad asya tvaṁ yad asya deveṣu: "If you think you know Brahman well, then your knowledge is very meager. If you think you can identify Brahman's form from among the demigods, indeed you know but little." And again,
yasyāmataṁ tasya mataṁ
mataṁ yasya na veda saḥ
avijñātaṁ vijānatāṁ
vijñātam avijānatām
"Whoever denies having any opinion of his own about the Supreme Truth is correct in his opinion, whereas one who has his own opinion about the Supreme does not know Him. He is unknown to those who claim to know Him, and can only be known by those who do not claim to know Him." (Kena Upaniṣad 2.3)
Ācārya Śrīdhara Svāmī gives the following explanation of this verse: Many philosophers have studied the mysteries of life from various perspectives and have formed widely differing theories. The Advaita Māyāvādīs, for example, propose that there is only one living being and one power of illusion (avidyā) that covers him, producing the appearance of plurality. But this hypothesis leads to the absurd conclusion that when any one living being becomes liberated, everyone obtains liberation. If, on the other hand, there are many avidyās to cover the one living being, each avidyā will cover only some part of him, and we would have to talk about his becoming partly liberated at particular times while his other parts remain in bondage. This is also obviously absurd. Thus the plurality of living beings is an unavoidable conclusion.
Furthermore, there are other theoreticians, namely the proponents of Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika, who claim that the jīva soul is infinite in size. If souls were infinitesimal, these scholars argue, they would not pervade their own bodies, whereas if they were of medium size they would be divisible into parts and thus could not be eternal, at least according to the axioms of Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika metaphysics. But if the numerous eternal jīva souls are each infinitely large, how could they be covered by any power of bondage, whether belonging to avidyā or to the Supreme Lord Himself? According to this theory, there can be no illusion for the soul, no limitations from which to be liberated. The infinite souls must eternally remain as they are, without change. This would mean that the souls would all be equal to God, since He would have no scope for controlling these all-pervading, unchanging rivals.
The Vedic śruti-mantras, which affirm unequivocally the mastery of the Lord over the individual souls, cannot be validly contradicted. A true philosopher must accept the statements of śruti as reliable authority on all matters they touch. Certainly in numerous places the Vedic literatures contrast the Supreme Lord's perpetual, unchanging oneness with the ever-changing embodiments of living beings caught up in the cycle of birth and death.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
antar-yantā sarva-lokasya gītaḥ
śrutyā yuktyā caivam evāvaseyaḥ
yaḥ sarva-jñaḥ sarva-śaktir nṛṣiṁhaḥ
śrīmantaṁ taṁ cetasaivāvalambe
"In my heart I take shelter of Him who is glorified as the inner controller of all the worlds, and whom the Vedas ascertain in truth through logical reasoning. He is Nṛsiṁha, the omniscient and omnipotent Lord of the goddess of fortune."
TEXT 31
na Gaq%ta oṁ"va: ‘ak{(itapaUś&SayaAer"jayaAer,"
oBayayaujaA Bavantyas$auBa{taAe jalabauā,"baud"vata,
tvaiya ta wmae tataAe ivaivaDanaAmagAuNAE: par"mae
s$air"ta wvaANAR"vae maDauina ilalyaur"zAeSar"s$aA:
na ghaṭata udbhavaḥ prakṛti-pūruṣayor ajayor
ubhaya-yujā bhavanty asu-bhṛto jala-budbuda-vat
tvayi ta ime tato vividha-nāma-guṇaiḥ parame
sarita ivārṇave madhuni lilyur aśeṣa-rasāḥ
na ghaṭate—does not happen; udbhavaḥ—the generation; prakṛti—of material nature; pūruṣayoḥ—and of the soul who is her enjoyer; ajayoḥ—who are unborn; ubhaya—of both; yujā—by the combination; bhavanti—come into being; asu-bhṛtaḥ—living bodies; jala—on water; budbuda—bubbles; vat—like; tvayi—in You; te ime—these (living beings); tataḥ—therefore; vividha—various; nāma—with names; guṇaiḥ—and qualities; parame—in the Supreme; saritaḥ—rivers; iva—as; arṇave—within the ocean; madhuni—in honey; lilyuḥ—become merged; aśeṣa—all; rasāḥ—flavors.
Neither material nature nor the soul who tries to enjoy her are ever born, yet living bodies come into being when these two combine, just as bubbles form where water meets the air. And just as rivers merge into the ocean or the nectar from many different flowers blends into honey, so all these conditioned beings eventually merge back into You, the Supreme, along with their various names and qualities.
Without proper spiritual guidance, one may misunderstand the Vedas' description of the living entities emanating from the Lord to mean that they have come into being in this process and will eventually pass again into nonexistence. But if the living entities were to thus have only temporary existence, then when one of them would die his remaining karma would simply vanish without being used up, and when a soul would be born he would appear with unaccountable karma he had done nothing to earn. Furthermore, a living being's liberation would amount to the total eradication of his identity and being.
The truth is, however, that the soul's essence is one with Brahman's, just as the small portion of space contained within the walls of a clay pot is one in essence with the all-expanding sky. And like the making and breaking of a pot, the "birth" of an individual soul consists of his first becoming covered by a material body, and his "death," or liberation, consists of the destruction of his gross and subtle bodies once and for all. Certainly such "birth" and "death" take place only by the mercy of the Supreme Lord.
The combination of material nature and her controller that produces the numerous conditioned beings in material creation is likened here to the combination of water and air that produces countless bubbles of foam on the surface of the sea. Just as the efficient cause, air, impels the ingredient cause, water, to form itself into bubbles, so by His glance the Supreme Puruṣa inspires prakṛti to transform herself into the array of material elements and the innumerable material forms manifest from those elements. Prakṛti thus serves as the upādāna-kāraṇa, or ingredient cause, of creation. In the ultimate issue, however, since she is also an expansion of the Supreme Lord, it is the Lord alone who is the ingredient cause as well as the efficient cause. This is as stated in the Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.2.1), tasmād vā etasmād ātmana ākāśaḥ sambhūtaḥ: "From this Supreme Soul the ether evolved," and so 'kāmayata bahu syāṁ prajāyeya: "He desired, 'Let Me become many by expanding into progeny.' "
The individual jīva souls are not created when "born" from the Supreme Lord and prakṛti, nor are they destroyed when they "merge" back into the Lord, rejoining Him in the pleasure pastimes of His eternal kingdom. And in the same way as the infinitesimal jīvas can appear to undergo birth and death without any factual change, the Supreme Lord can send forth and withdraw His emanations without Himself undergoing any transformation. Thus the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.5.14) affirms, avināśi vāre 'yam ātmā: "This ātmā is indeed indestructible"—a statement that can be applied to both the Supreme Soul and the subordinate jīva soul.
As explained by Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī, the dissolution of the living being's material condition occurs in two ways, partial and complete. partial dissolution occurs when the soul experiences dreamless sleep, when he leaves his body and when all souls reenter the body of Mahā-Viṣṇu at the time of universal annihilation. These different types of dissolution are like the mixing of nectar brought by bees from different kinds of flowers. The different flavors of nectar represent the dormant individual karmic reactions of each living entity, which still exist but cannot easily be distinguished from one another. In contrast, the ultimate dissolution of the soul's material condition is his liberation from saṁsāra, which is like the flowing of rivers into the ocean. As the waters from different rivers merge together after entering the ocean and become indistinguishable from one another, so the false material designations of the jīvas are given up at the time of liberation and all the liberated jīvas once again become equally situated as servants of the Supreme Lord.
The Upaniṣads describe these dissolutions as follows: yathā saumya madhu madhu-kṛto nistiṣṭhanti nānātyayānāṁ vṛkṣānāṁ rasān samavahāram ekatāṁ saṅgayanti. te yathā tatra na vivekaṁ labhante amuṣyāhaṁ vṛkṣasya raso 'smy amuṣyāham raso 'smīty evam eva khalu saumyemāḥ sarvāḥ prajāḥ sati sampadya na viduḥ sati sampadyāmahe: "My dear boy, this [partial dissolution] resembles what happens when honeybees collect honey by extracting the nectar from the flowers of various kinds of trees and merge it all into a single mixture. Just as the mixed nectars cannot distinguish, 'I am the juice of such-and-such a flower,' or 'I am the juice of another flower,' so, dear boy, when all these living entities merge together they cannot consciously think, 'Now we have merged together.' " (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.9.1-2)
yathā nadyaḥ syandamānāḥ samudre
'staṁ gacchanti nāma-rūpe vihāya
tathā vidvān nāma-rūpād vimuktaḥ
parāt-paraṁ puruṣam upaiti divyam
"As rivers flow to their dissolution in the sea, giving up their names and forms at their destination, so the wise man who becomes free from material names and forms attains to the Supreme Absolute, the wonderful Personality of Godhead." (Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.2.8)
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
yasminn udyad-vilayam api yad bhāti viśvaṁ layādau
jīvopetaṁ guru-karuṇayā kevalātmāvabodhe
atyantāntaṁ vrajati sahasā sindhu-vat sindhu-madhye
madhye cittaṁ tri-bhuvana-guruṁ bhāvaye taṁ nṛ-siṁham
"The Supreme Lord is self-effulgently omniscient. By His great mercy, this universe, which is subject to repeated creation and destruction, remains present within Him after merging back into Him along with the living entities at the time of cosmic dissolution. This total withdrawal of the universal manifestation occurs suddenly, like the flowing of a river into the ocean. Within the core of my heart I meditate upon that master of the three worlds, Lord Nṛsiṁha."
TEXT 32
na{Sau tava mayayaA ”amamamaISvavagAtya Ba{zAM
tvaiya s$auiDayaAe'Bavae d"Daita BaAvamanau‘aBavama,
k(TamanauvataRtaAM BavaBayaM tava yaā," ”auku(iq%:
s$a{jaita mauḍ"iṣnaeimar"BavacC$r"NAeSau Bayama,
nṛṣu tava māyayā bhramam amīṣv avagatya bhṛśaṁ
tvayi su-dhiyo 'bhave dadhati bhāvam anuprabhavam
katham anuvartatāṁ bhava-bhayaṁ tava yad bhru-kuṭiḥ
sṛjati muhus tri-nemir abhavac-charaṇeṣu bhayam
nṛṣu—among humans; tava—Your; māyayā—by the illusory energy; bhramam—bewilderment; amīṣu—among these; avagatya—understanding; bhṛśam—fervent; tvayi—unto You; su-dhiyaḥ—those who are wise; abhave—unto the source of liberation; dadhati—render; bhāvam—loving service; anuprabhavam—potent; katham—how; anuvartatām—for those who follow You faithfully; bhava—of material life; bhayam—fear; tava—Your; yat—since; bhru—of the eyebrows; kuṭiḥ—the furrowing; sṛjati—creates; muhuḥ—repeatedly; tri-nemiḥ—three-rimmed (in the three phases of time, namely past, present and future); a—not; bhavat—from You; śaraṇeṣu—for those who take shelter; bhayam—fear.
The wise souls who understand how Your Māyā deludes all human beings render potent loving service to You, who are the source of liberation from birth and death. How, indeed, can fear of material life affect Your faithful servants? On the other hand, Your furrowing eyebrows—the triple-rimmed wheel of time—repeatedly terrify those who refuse to take shelter of You.
The Vedas reveal their most cherished secret—devotional service to the Personality of Godhead—only to those who are tired of material illusion, which is based on a false sense of independence from the Lord. The Vājasaneyī-saṁhitā (32.11) of the White Yajur Veda contains the following mantra:
parītya bhūtāni parītya lokān
parītya sarvāḥ pradiśo diśaś ca
upasthāya prathama-jāmṛtasyā-
manātmānam abhisaṁviveśa
"After passing beyond all the species of life, all the planetary systems and all the limits of space in all directions, one approaches the original Soul of immortality. Then one receives the opportunity to enter permanently into His domain and worship Him with personal service."
The proponents of various contending materialistic philosophies may consider themselves very wise, but they are in fact all deluded by the Supreme Lord's Māyā. Vaiṣṇavas recognize this pattern of general delusion and submit themselves to the Supreme Lord in the devotional moods of servitude, friendship and so on. Instead of the heat and strife of philosophical quarrel, the pure Vaiṣṇavas experience only delight at every moment, because the object of their love is He who brings an end to material entanglement. And the devotees of Lord Viṣṇu enjoy constant pleasure not only in this life but in future lives. In whatever births they take, they enjoy loving reciprocations with the Lord. Thus the sincere Vaiṣṇava prays,
nātha yoni-sahasreṣu
yeṣu yeṣu bhramāmy aham
tatra tatrācyutā bhaktir
acyutāstu dṛḍhā tvayi
"Wherever I may wander, O master, among thousands of species of life, in each situation may I have firmly fixed devotion to You, O Acyuta." (Viṣṇu Purāṇa)
Some philosophers will question how the Vaiṣṇavas can overcome their material entrapment without thorough analytic knowledge of the entities tvam ("you," the jīva) and tat ("that," the Supreme), and without developing a sufficient hatred of material life. The personified Vedas here answer that there is no chance of material illusion continuing to act on devotees of the Lord because even in the earliest stages of devotional service all fear and attachment are removed by the Lord's grace.
Time is the root cause of all fear in this world. Indeed, with its three divisions of past, present and future it creates terror at the prospect of impending disease, death and hellish suffering—but only for those who have failed to obtain shelter at the feet of the Supreme Lord. As the Lord Himself says in the Rāmāyaṇa (Yuddha-kāṇḍa 12.20),
sakṛd eva prapanno yas
tavāsmīti ca yācate
abhayaṁ sarvadā tasmai
dadāmy etad vrataṁ mama
"To whomever even once surrenders to Me, pleading 'I am Yours,' I give eternal fearlessness. This is my solemn vow." Furthermore, in the Bhagavad-gītā (7.14) the Lord says,
daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī
mama māyā duratyayā
mām eva ye prapadyante
māyāṁ etāṁ taranti te
"This divine energy of Mine consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily cross beyond it."
Vaiṣṇavas do not like to waste their time in prolonged and fruitless wrangling over dry philosophic subjects. They would rather worship the Personality of Godhead than quarrel with philosophical adversaries. The Vaiṣṇavas' understanding concurs with the essential message of revealed scripture. These devotees' conception of the Supreme Absolute Truth as the infinite ocean of personality and loving pastimes in His worshipable forms of Kṛṣṇa, Rāma and other divine manifestations, and their conception of themselves as His eternal servants, amount to the perfect conclusion of Vedānta philosophy in terms of the entities tat and tvam.
The Personality of Godhead and His emanations, such as the jīva souls, are simultaneously different and nondifferent, just like the sun and its expanding rays. There are more jīvas than anyone can count, and each of them is eternally alive with consciousness, as the śrutis confirm: nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 5.13 and Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.13) When they are sent forth from the body of Mahā-Viṣṇu at the beginning of material creation, the jīvas are all equal in the sense that they are all atomic particles of the Lord's marginal energy. But according to their differing conditions, they divide into four groups: Some are covered by ignorance, which obscures their vision like a cloud. Others become liberated from ignorance through a combination of knowledge and devotion. A third group of souls become endowed with pure devotion, with a slight mixture of desire for speculative knowledge and fruitive activity. Those souls attain purified bodies composed of perfect knowledge and bliss with which they can engage in the Lord's service. Finally, there are those who are devoid of any connection with ignorance; these are the Lord's eternal associates.
The marginal position of the jīva soul is described in the Nārada Pañcarātra:
yat taṭa-sthaṁ tu cid-rūpaṁ
sva-saṁvedyād vinirgatam
rañjitaṁ guṇa-rāgeṇa
sa jīva iti kathyate
"The taṭa-stha potency should be understood as emanating from the Lord's saṁvit [knowledge] energy. This emanation, called the jīva, becomes conditioned by the qualities of material nature." Because the minute jīva lives within the margin between the Lord's external, illusory potency, Māyā, and His internal, spiritual potency, cit, the jīva is called taṭa-stha, "marginal." When he earns liberation by cultivating devotion to the Lord, however, he comes completely under the shelter of the Lord's internal potency, and at that time he is no longer tainted by the modes of material nature. Lord Kṛṣṇa confirms this in the Bhagavad-gītā (14.26):
māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guṇān samatītyaitān
brahma-bhūyāya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, unfailing in all circumstances, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman."
The object of the soul's worship is realized in three aspects: Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. Impersonal Brahman is like the radiant effulgence of the sun; the Supersoul, or Paramātmā, is like the sun globe; and the Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān, is like the presiding deity within the sun, complemented by his elaborate entourage and paraphernalia. Or, to cite another analogy, travelers approaching a city from a distance cannot at first distinguish its features but rather see something vaguely shining ahead of them. As they come closer, they may discern a few of the taller buildings. Then, when they are sufficiently close, they will see the city as it is—a bustling metropolis with many citizens, residences, public buildings, highways and parks. In the same way, persons inclined to impersonal meditation may at best gain some realization of the Supreme Lord's effulgence (Brahman), those who approach closer can learn to see Him as the Lord in the heart (Paramātmā), and those who come very close can know Him in His full personality (Bhagavān).
In summary, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
saṁsāra-cakra-krakacair vidīrṇam
udīrṇa-nānā-bhava-tāpa-taptam
kathañcid āpannam iha prapannaṁ
tvam uddhara śrī-nṛhare nṛ-lokam
"O Śrī Nṛhari, please deliver those human beings who have suffered all kinds of torments and been ripped apart by the sharp edge of saṁsāra's wheel but who have now somehow found You and are surrendering themselves unto You."
TEXT 33
ivaijataô$SaIk(vaAyauiBar"d"Antamanastaur"gAM
ya wh" yatainta yantaumaitalaAelamaupaAyaiKad":
vyas$anazAtaAinvataA: s$amavah"Aya gAur"Aeêr"NAM
vaiNAja wvaAja s$antyak{(tak(NARDar"A jalaDaAE
vijita-hṛṣīka-vāyubhir adānta-manas tura-gaṁ
ya iha yatanti yantum ati-lolam upāya-khidaḥ
vyasana-śatānvitāḥ samavahāya guroś caraṇaṁ
vaṇija ivāja santy akṛta-karṇa-dharā jaladhau
vijita—conquered; hṛṣīka—with senses; vāyubhiḥ—and vital air; adānta—not brought under control; manaḥ—the mind; tura-gam—(which is like) a horse; ye—those who; iha—in this world; yatanti—endeavor; yantum—to regulate; ati—very; lolam—unsteady; upāya—by their various methods of cultivation; khidaḥ—distressed; vyasana—disturbances; śata—by hundreds; anvitāḥ—joined; samavahāya—abandoning; guroḥ—of the spiritual master; caraṇam—the feet; vaṇijaḥ—merchants; iva—as if; aja—O unborn one; santi—they are; akṛta—having not taken; karṇa-dharāḥ—a helmsman; jala-dhau—on the ocean.
The mind is like an impetuous horse that even persons who have regulated their senses and breath cannot control. Those in this world who try to tame the uncontrolled mind, but who abandon the feet of their spiritual master, encounter hundreds of obstacles in their cultivation of various distressful practices. O unborn Lord, they are like merchants on a boat in the ocean who have failed to employ a helmsman.
To become qualified to attain love of Godhead, the mature fruit of liberation, one must first subdue the rebellious material mind. Though difficult, this can be achieved when a person replaces his addictions to sense gratification with a taste for the higher pleasures of spiritual life. But only by the favor of the representative of Godhead, the spiritual master, can one gain this higher taste.
The spiritual master opens the eyes of the disciple to the wonders of the transcendental realm, as indicated in the Gāyatrī prayers by the seed mantra of divine knowledge, aiṁ.
The Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (1.2.12) states,
tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet
samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham
"To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth." And the Kaṭha Upaniṣad (2.9) declares,
naiṣā tarkeṇa matir āpaneyā
proktānyenaiva su-jñānāya preṣṭha
"This realization, my dear boy, cannot be acquired by logic. It must be spoken by an exceptionally qualified spiritual master to a knowledgeable disciple."
Non-Vaiṣṇavas often disregard the importance of surrendering to a spiritual master who stands in an authorized line of disciplic succession. Relying instead on their own abilities, proud yogīs and jñānīs exhibit their apparent success to impress the world, but their glory is but temporary:
yuñjānānām abhaktānāṁ
prāṇāyāmādibhir manaḥ
akṣīṇa-vāsanaṁ rājan
dṛśyate punar utthitam
"The minds of nondevotees who engage in such practices as prāṇāyāma are not fully cleansed of material desires. Thus, O King, material desires are again seen to arise in their minds." (SB 10.51.60)
On the other hand, a humble, steadfast devotee of Lord Viṣṇu and of the Vaiṣṇavas is assured of easy victory over the stubborn mind. He need not concern himself with performing the eightfold system of yoga or taking other such measures to keep his mind steady. Sarvaṁ caitad gurau bhaktyā puruṣo hy añjasā jayet: "A person can easily obtain all these goals simply by being devoted to his spiritual master." Otherwise, a nondevotee may conquer his senses and vital air and still fail to tame his mind, which will continue to run wild like an unbroken horse. He will suffer unending anxiety over the troublesome execution of various spiritual practices, and in the end he will remain just as lost in the vast material ocean as he ever was. The analogy given here is very appropriate: A group of merchants who hastily enter upon a sea voyage with expectations of great profit, but who fail to hire a competent helmsman for their boat, will simply experience great difficulty.
The Bhāgavatam declares the importance of the bona fide spiritual master in many places, such as this verse from the Eleventh Canto (20.17):
nṛ-deham ādyam su-labhaṁ su-durlabhaṁ
plavaṁ su-kalpaṁ guru-karṇa-dhāram
mayānukūlena nabhasvateritaṁ
pumān bhavābdhiṁ na taret sa ātma-hā
"The human body, which can award all benefit in life, is automatically obtained by the laws of nature, although it is a very rare achievement. This human body can be compared to a perfectly constructed boat having the spiritual master as the captain and the instructions of the Personality of Godhead as favorable winds impelling it on its course. Considering all these advantages, a human being who does not utilize his human life to cross the ocean of material existence must be considered the killer of his own soul." Therefore the first business of one who takes human life seriously is to find out a spiritual master who can guide him in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
yadā parānanda-guro bhavat-pade
padaṁ mano me bhagaval labheta
tadā nirastākhila-sādhana-śramaḥ
śrayeya saukhyaṁ bhavataḥ kṛpātaḥ
"O transcendentally blissful guru, when my mind finally achieves a place at your lotus feet, all the tiresome labor of my spiritual practices will be finished, and by your mercy I will experience the greatest happiness."
TEXT 34
svajanas$autaAtmad"Ar"DanaDaAmaDar"As$aur"TaEs$a,
tvaiya s$aita ikM( na{NAAm™ayata @Atmaina s$avaRr"s$ae
wita s$ad"jaAnataAM imaTaunataAe r"tayae car"taAM
s$auKayaita k(Ae invah" svaivah"tae svainar"staBagAe
svajana-sutātma-dāra-dhana-dhāma-dharāsu-rathais
tvayi sati kiṁ nṛṇām śrayata ātmani sarva-rase
iti sad ajānatāṁ mithunato rataye caratāṁ
sukhayati ko nv iha sva-vihate sva-nirasta-bhage
svajana—with servants; suta—children; ātma—body; dāra—wife; dhana—money; dhāma—home; dharā—land; asu—vitality; rathaiḥ—and vehicles; tvayi—when You; sati—have become; kim—what (use); nṛṇām—for human beings; śrayataḥ—who are taking shelter; ātmani—their very Self; sarva-rase—the embodiment of all pleasures; iti—thus; sat—the truth; ajānatām—for those who fail to appreciate; mithunataḥ—from sexual combinations; rataye—for sensual indulgence; caratām—carrying on; sukhayati—gives happiness; kaḥ—what; nu—at all; iha—in this (world); sva—by its very nature; vihate—which is subject to destruction; sva—by its very nature; nirasta—which is devoid; bhage—of any essence.
To those persons who take shelter of You, You reveal Yourself as the Supersoul, the embodiment of all transcendental pleasure. What further use have such devotees for their servants, children or bodies, their wives, money or houses, their land, good health or conveyances? And for those who fail to appreciate the truth about You and go on pursuing the pleasures of sex, what could there be in this entire world—a place inherently doomed to destruction and devoid of significance—that could give them real happiness?
Devotional service to Lord Viṣṇu is considered pure when one's sole desire is to please the Lord. Situated in that perfect consciousness, a Vaiṣṇava has no further interest in wordly gains and is thus excused from any obligation to perform ritual sacrifices and follow austere practices of yoga. As the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (1.2.12) states,
parīkṣya lokān karma-citān brāhmaṇo
nirvedam āyān nāsty akṛtaḥ kṛtena
"When a brāhmaṇa recognizes that elevation to the heavenly planets is merely another accumulation of karma, he becomes renounced and is no longer corrupted by his actions." The Bṛhad-āraṇyaka (4.4.9) and Kaṭha (6.14) Upaniṣads confirm,
yadā sarve pramucyante
kāmā ye 'sya hṛdi śritāḥ
atha martyo 'mṛto bhavaty
atra brahma samaśnute
"When a person completely gives up all the sinful desires he is harboring in his heart, he exchanges mortality for eternal spiritual life and attains real pleasure in the Absolute Truth." And the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (Pūrva 15) concludes, bhaktir asya bhajanaṁ tad ihāmutropādhi-nairāsyenāmuṣmin manaḥ-kalpanam etad eva naiṣkarmyam." Devotional service is the process of worshiping the Supreme Lord. It consists of fixing one's mind upon Him by becoming disinterested in all material designations, both in this life and the next. This indeed, is true renunciation."
The items the śrutis mention here are all measures of worldly success: svajanāḥ, servants; ātmā, a beautiful body; sutāḥ, children to be proud of; dārāḥ, an attractive and competent spouse; dhanam, financial assets; dhāma, a prestigious residence; dharā, holdings of land; asavaḥ, health and strength; and rathāḥ, cars and other vehicles that display one's status. But one who has begun to experience the ecstasy of devotional service loses all attraction for these things, since he finds real satisfaction in the Supreme Lord, the reservoir of all pleasure, who enjoys by sharing His own pleasures with His servitors.
We are each free to choose the course of our life: we can either dedicate our body, mind, words, talents and wealth to the glory of God, or else we can ignore Him and struggle instead for our personal happiness. The second path leads to a life of slavery to sex and ambition, in which the soul never feels real satisfaction but instead suffers continually. Vaiṣṇavas are distressed to see materialists suffering in this way, and so they always strive to enlighten them.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
bhajato hi bhavān sākṣāt
paramānanda-cid-dhanaḥ
ātmaiva kim ataḥ kṛtyaṁ
tuccha-dāra-sutādibhiḥ
"For those who worship You, You become their very Self, their spiritual treasure of topmost bliss. What further use have they for mundane wives, children and so forth?"
TEXT 35
Bauiva pauś&pauNyataITaRs$ad"naAnya{SayaAe ivamad"As$a,
ta ota Bavatpad"Ambaujaô$d"Ae'GaiBad"x.~i„ajalaA:
d"Daita s$ak{(nmanastvaiya ya @Atmaina inatyas$auKae
na paunaś&paAs$atae pauś&Sas$aAr"h"r"Avas$aTaAna,
bhuvi puru-puṇya-tīrtha-sadanāny ṛṣayo vimadās
ta uta bhavat-padāmbuja-hṛdo 'gha-bhid-aṅghri-jalāḥ
dadhati sakṛn manas tvayi ya ātmani nitya-sukhe
na punar upāsate puruṣa-sāra-harāvasathān
bhuvi—on the earth; puru—greatly; puṇya—pious; tīrtha—places of pilgrimage; sadanāni—and personal abodes of the Supreme Lord; ṛṣayaḥ—sages; vimadaḥ—free from false pride; te—they; uta—indeed; bhavat—Your; pada—feet; ambuja—lotus; hṛdaḥ—in whose hearts; agha—sins; bhit—which destroys; aṅghri—(having bathed) whose feet; jalāḥ—the water; dadhati—turn; sakṛt—even once; manaḥ—their minds; tvayi—toward You; ye—who; ātmani—toward the Supreme Soul; nitya—always; sukhe—who is happy; na punaḥ—never again; upāsate—they worship; puruṣa—of a man; sāra—the essential qualities; hara—which steal away; āvasathān—their mundane homes.
Sages free from false pride live on this earth by frequenting the sacred pilgrimage sites and those places where the Supreme Lord displayed His pastimes. Because such devotees keep Your lotus feet within their hearts, the water that washes their feet destroys all sins. Anyone who even once turns his mind toward You, the ever-blissful Soul of all existence, no longer dedicates himself to serving family life at home, which simply robs a man of his good qualities.
The qualification of an aspiring sage is that he has learned about the Absolute Truth from standard authorities and developed a sober mood of renunciation. To develop his capacity for discriminating the important from the unimportant, such a person often wanders from one holy site to another, taking advantage of the association of great souls who frequent or reside in these places. If, in the course of his travels, the aspiring sage can begin to realize the Supreme Lord's lotus feet in the core of his heart, he will be released from the illusion of false ego and from the painful bondage of lust, envy and greed. Though he may still go to places of pilgrimage to bathe away his sins, the now purified sage has the power to sanctify others with the water that washes his feet and with the realized instructions he imparts. Such a sage is described by the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (2.2.9):
bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś
chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ
kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi
tasmin dṛṣṭe parāvare
"The knot in the heart is pierced, all misgivings are cut to pieces, and the chain of fruitive actions is terminated when one sees the Supreme Lord everywhere, within all superior and inferior beings." To sages who have reached this stage, the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (3.2.11) thus pays homage: namaḥ paramarṣibhyaḥ, namaḥ paramarṣibhyaḥ. "Obeisances to the topmost sages, obeisances to the topmost sages!"
Putting aside the affectionate company of wives, children, friends and followers, saintly Vaiṣṇavas travel to the holy dhāmas where the Supreme Lord's worship can be most successfully prosecuted—places such as Vṛndāvana, Māyāpur and Jagannātha Purī, or anywhere else where sincere devotees of Lord Viṣṇu congregate. Even those Vaiṣṇavas who have not taken sannyāsa and still live at home or in their guru's āśrama, but who have once tasted just a drop of the sublime pleasure of devotional service, will also have little inclination to meditate on the pleasures of a materialistic family life, which robs a person of his discretion, determination, sobriety, tolerance and peace of mind.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
muñcann aṅga tad aṅga-saṅgam aniśaṁ tvām eva sañcintayan
santaḥ santi yato yato gata-madās tān āśramān āvasan
nityaṁ tan-mukha-paṅkajād vigalita-tvat-puṇya-gāthāmṛta-
srotaḥ-samplava-sampluto nara-hare na syām ahaṁ deha-bhṛt
"My dear Lord, when I will give up all sense gratification and engage incessantly in meditating upon You, and when I will take up residence in the hermitages of saintly devotees free from false pride, then I will become fully immersed in the inundation of nectar pouring from the devotees' lotus mouths as they chant sacred narrations about You. And then, O Lord Narahari, I will never again have to take a material body."
TEXT 36
s$ata wdM" oitTataM s$aid"ita caeªanau takR(h"taM
vyaiBacar"ita ¸( ca ¸( ca ma{SaA na taTaAeBayayauk,(
vyavaô$tayae ivak(lpa wiSataAe'nDapar"mpar"yaA
”amayaita BaAr"taI ta oś&va{iÔaiBaś&fTajax"Ana,
sata idaṁ utthitaṁ sad iti cen nanu tarka-hataṁ
vyabhicarati kva ca kva ca mṛṣā na tathobhaya-yuk
vyavahṛtaye vikalpa iṣito 'ndha-paramparayā
bhramayati bhāratī ta uru-vṛttibhir uktha-jaḍān
sataḥ—from that which is permanent; idam—this (universe); utthitam—arisen; sat—permanent; iti—thus; cet—if (someone proposes); nanu—certainly; tarka—by logical contradiction; hatam—refuted; vyabhicarati—it is inconsistent; kva ca—in some cases; kva ca—in other cases; mṛṣā—illusion; na—not; tathā—so; ubhaya—of both (the real and illusion); yuk—the conjunction; vyavahṛtaye—for the sake of ordinary affairs; vikalpaḥ—an imaginary situation; iṣitaḥ—desired; andha—of blind men; paramparayā—by a succession; bhramayati—bewilder; bhāratī—the words of wisdom; te—Your; uru—numerous; vṛttibhiḥ—with their semantic functions; uktha—by ritual utterances; jaḍān—dulled.
It may be proposed that this world is permanently real because it is generated from the permanent reality, but such an argument is subject to logical refutation. Sometimes, indeed, the apparent nondifference of a cause and its effect fails to prove true, and at other times the product of something real is illusory. Furthermore, this world cannot be permanently real, for it partakes of the natures of not only the absolute reality but also the illusion disguising that reality. Actually, the visible forms of this world are just an imaginary arrangement resorted to by a succession of ignorant persons in order to facilitate their material affairs. With their various meanings and implications, the learned words of Your Vedas bewilder all persons whose minds have been dulled by hearing the incantations of sacrificial rituals.
According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, the Upaniṣads teach that this created world is real but temporary. This is the understanding that devotees of Lord Viṣṇu adhere to. But there are also materialistic philosophers, like the proponents of Jaimini Ṛṣi's Karma-mīmāṁsā, who claim that this world is the only reality and exists eternally. For Jaimini, the cycle of karmic action and reaction is perpetual, with no possibility of liberation into a different, transcendental realm. This viewpoint, however, is shown to be fallacious by a careful examination of the Upaniṣadic mantras, which contain many descriptions of a higher, spiritual existence. For example, sad eva saumyedam agra āsīd ekam evādvitīyam: "My dear boy, the Absolute Truth alone existed prior to this creation, one without a second." (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.2.1) Also, vijñānam ānandaṁ brahma: "The supreme reality is divine knowledge and bliss." (Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 3.9.34)
In this prayer of the personified Vedas, the materialists' argument is summed up in the words sata idam utthitaṁ sat: "The visible world is permanently real because it is generated from the permanent reality." In general, this argument goes, that which is produced from a certain thing is composed of that thing. For example, earrings and other ornaments made from gold share gold's substance. Thus, the Mīmāṁsā logicians conclude, since the world as we know it is a manifestation of an eternal reality, it is also eternally real. But the Sanskrit ablative expression sataḥ, "from the eternal reality," implies a definite separation of cause and effect. Therefore, what is created from sat, the permanent reality, must be significantly different from it—in other words, temporary. In this way the argument of the materialists is flawed because it proves just the opposite of what it is intended to prove (tarka-hatam), namely that the world as we know it is all that exists, that it is eternal, and that there is no separate, transcendental reality.
In defense, the Mīmāṁsakas may claim that they are not trying to prove nondifference per se, but rather trying to disprove the possibility of difference, or in other words, the possibility of any reality separate from the known world. This attempt to support the Mīmāṁsā argument is easily refuted by the phrase vyabhicarati kva ca: that is to say, there are counterexamples that deviate from the general rule. Sometimes, indeed, the source is very different from what it produces, as in the case of a man and his young son, or of a hammer and the destruction of a clay pot.
But, the Mīmāṁsakas reply, the creation of the universe is not the same kind of causation as your counterexamples: the father and the hammer are only efficient causes, whereas the sat is also this universe's ingredient cause. This reply is anticipated by the words kva ca mṛṣā ("and sometimes the effect is illusory"). In the case of the false perception of a snake where there is a rope on the ground, the rope is the snake-illusion's ingredient cause, differing in many respects from the imagined snake, most obviously in its being real.
The Mīmāṁsakas once more rejoin: But the ingredient cause of the illusory snake is not just the rope by itself: it is the rope plus the observer's ignorance (avidyā). Since avidyā is not a substance, the snake it produces is called an illusion. Yet the same is true, the personified Vedas reply, in the case of the universe's creation from sat in conjunction with ignorance (tathobhaya-yuk); here the unreal element of illusion, Māyā, is the living beings' misconception that their own bodies and other changing material forms are permanent.
But, rejoin the Mīmāṁsakas, our experience of this world is valid because the things we experience are useful for practical activity. If our experience were not valid, we could never be sure that our perceptions corresponded to the facts. We would be like a man who, despite exhaustive examination, would still have to suspect that a rope might be a snake. No, the śrutis here answer, the temporary configurations of matter are nonetheless an illusory imitation of the eternal spiritual reality, cleverly concocted to fulfill the conditioned living entities' desire for material activity (vyavahṛtaye vikalpa iṣitaḥ). The illusion of this world's permanence is sustained by a succession of blind men who learn the materialistic idea from their predecessors and pass on this illusion to their descendants. Anyone can see that an illusion often continues by the momentum of lingering mental impressions, even when its basis is no longer present. Thus throughout history blind philosophers have misled other blind men by convincing them of the absurd idea that they can reach perfection by engaging in mundane rituals. Foolish people may be willing to exchange counterfeit coins among one another, but a wise man knows that such money is useless for the practical business of buying food, medicine and other necessities. And if given in charity, counterfeit money will earn no pious credit.
But, say the Mīmāṁsakas, how can the sincere performer of Vedic rituals be a deluded fool, since the Saṁhitās and Brāhmaṇas of the Vedic scriptures establish that the fruits of karma are eternal? For example, akṣayyaṁ ha vai cāturmāsya-yājinaḥ su-kṛtaṁ bhavati: "For one who observes the Cāturmāsya vows there arises inexhaustible good karma," and apāma somam amṛta babhūma: "We have drunk the soma and become immortal." (Ṛg Veda 8.43.3)
The śrutis reply by pointing out that the Personality of Godhead's learned words, comprising the Vedas, bewilder those whose weak intelligence has been crushed by the weight of too much faith in karma. The specific word used here is uru-vṛttibhiḥ, which indicates that the Vedic mantras, with their confusing variety of meanings in the semantic modes of gauṇa, lakṣaṇā and so on, protect their sublime mysteries from all but those who have faith in Lord Viṣṇu. The Vedas do not truly mean to say in their injunctions that the fruits of karma are eternal, but only indirectly describe in metaphors the praiseworthiness of regulated sacrifices. The Chāndogya Upaniṣad states in no uncertain terms that the results of ritual karma are impermanent: tad yatheha karma-cito lokaḥ kṣīyate evam evāmutra puṇya-cito lokaḥ kṣīyate. "Just as whatever benefit one works hard to attain in this world is eventually depleted, so whatever life one earns for oneself in the next world by his piety will also eventually end." (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 8.1.16) According to the testimony of numerous śruti-mantras, the entire material universe is but a temporary emanation of the Supreme Truth; the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad, for one, says:
yathorṇa-nābhiḥ sṛjate gṛhṇate ca
yathā pṛthivyām oṣadhayaḥ sambhavanti
yathā sataḥ puruṣāt keśa-lomāni
tathākṣarāt sambhavatīha viśvam
"As a web is expanded and withdrawn by a spider, as plants grow from the earth, and as hair grows from a living person's head and body, so this universe is generated from the inexhaustible Supreme." (Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.1.7)
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
udbhūtaṁ bhavataḥ sato 'pi bhuvanaṁ san naiva sarpaḥ srajaḥ
kurvat kāryaṁ apīha kūta-kanakaṁ vedo 'pi naivaṁ paraḥ
advaitaṁ tava sat paraṁ tu paramānandaṁ padaṁ tan mudā
vande sundaram indirānuta hare mā muñca mām ānatam
"Although this world has arisen from You, who are the very substance of reality, it is not eternally real. The illusory snake appearing from a rope is not permanent reality, nor are the transformations produced from gold. The Vedas never say that they are. The actual, transcendental, nondual reality is Your supremely blissful personal kingdom. To that beautiful abode I offer my obeisances. O Lord Hari, to whom Goddess Indirā always bows down, I also bow to You. Therefore please never release me."
TEXT 37
na yaid"d"maƒa @As$a na BaivaSyad"taAe inaDanaAā,"
@nau imatamantar"A tvaiya ivaBaAita ma{SaEk(r"s$ae
@ta opamaIyatae ‰"ivaNAjaAitaivak(lpapaTaEr,"
ivataTamanaAeivalaAs$ama{taimatyavayantyabauDaA:
na yad idam agra āsa na bhaviṣyad ato nidhanād
anu mitam antarā tvayi vibhāti mṛṣaika-rase
ata upamīyate draviṇa-jāti-vikalpa-pathair
vitatha-mano-vilāsam ṛtam ity avayanty abudhāḥ
na—not; yat—because; idam—this (universe); agre—in the beginning; āsa—existed; na bhaviṣyat—it will not exist; ataḥ—hence; nidhanāt anu—after its annihilation; mitam—deduced; antarā—in the meantime; tvayi—within You; vibhāti—it appears; mṛṣā—false; ekarase—whose experience of spiritual ecstasy is unchanging; ataḥ—thus; upamīyate—it is understood by comparison; draviṇa—of material substance; jāti—in the categories; vikalpa—of the transformations; pathaiḥ—with the varieties; vitatha—contrary to fact; manaḥ—of the mind; vilāsam—fantasy; ṛtam—real; iti—so; avayanti—think; abudhaḥ—the unintelligent.
Since this universe did not exist prior to its creation and will no longer exist after its annihilation, we conclude that in the interim it is nothing more than a manifestation imagined to be visible within You, whose spiritual enjoyment never changes. We liken this universe to the transformation of various material substances into diverse forms. Certainly those who believe that this figment of the imagination is substantially real are less intelligent.
Having thus defeated all attempts of the ritualists to prove the substantial reality of material creation, the personified Vedas now present positive evidence to the contrary—that this world is unreal in that it is temporary. Before the creation of the universe and after its dissolution, only the spiritual reality of the Supreme Lord, along with His abode and entourage, continue to exist. The śrutis confirm this: ātmā va idam eka evāgra āsīt. "Prior to the creation of this universe, only the Self existed." (Aitareya Upaniṣad 1.1) Nāsad āsīn no sad āsīt tadānīm: "At that time neither the subtle nor the gross aspects of matter were present." (Ṛg Veda 10.129.1)
One can understand the relativity of creation by an analogy. When basic materials like clay and metal are processed and shaped into various products, the created objects exist separately from the clay and metal only in name and form. The basic substance remains unchanged. Similarly, when the energies of the Supreme Lord are transformed into the known things of this world, these things exist separately from Him only in name and form. In the Chāndogya Upaniṣad (6.1.4-6), the sage Udālaka explains a similar analogy to his son: yathā saumyaikena mṛtpiṇḍena sarvaṁ mṛn-mayaṁ vijñātam syād vācārambhaṇaṁ vikāro nāmadheyaṁ mṛttikety eva satyam. "For example, my dear boy, by understanding a single lump of clay one can understand everything made from clay. The existence of transformed products is only a creation of language, a matter of assigning designations: the clay alone is real."
In conclusion, there is no convincing evidence that the things of this world are eternal or substantial, while there is overwhelming evidence that they are temporary and conditioned by false designations. Therefore only the ignorant can take the imaginary permutations of matter to be real.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
mukuṭa-kuṇḍala-kaṅkaṇa-kiṅkiṇī-
pariṇataṁ kanakaṁ paramārthataḥ
mahad-ahaṅkṛti-kha-pramukhaṁ tathā
nara-harer na paraṁ paramārthataḥ
"Transformations of gold such as crowns, earrings, bangles and ankle bells are not ultimately separate from gold itself. Similarly, the material elements—headed by the mahat, false ego and ether—are not ultimately separate from Lord Narahari."
TEXT 38
s$a yad"jayaA tvajaAmanauzAyaIta gAuNAAMê jauSana,
Bajaita s$aṝ&pataAM tad"nau ma{tyaumapaetaBagA:
tvamauta jah"Ais$a taAmaih"ir"va tvacamaAÔaBagAAe
mah"is$a mah"Iyas$ae'í"gAuiNAtae'pair"maeyaBagA:
sa yad ajayā tv ajām anuśayīta guṇāṁś ca juṣan
bhajati sarūpatāṁ tad anu mṛtyum apeta-bhagaḥ
tvam uta jahāsi tām ahir iva tvacam ātta-bhago
mahasi mahīyase 'ṣṭa-guṇite 'parimeya-bhagaḥ
saḥ—he (the individual living entity); yat—because; ajayā—by the influence of the material energy; tu—but; ajām—that material energy; anuśayīta—lies down next to; guṇān—her qualities; ca—and; juṣan—assuming; bhajati—he takes on; sa-rūpatām—forms resembling (the qualities of nature); tat-anu—following that; mṛtyum—death; apeta—deprived; bhagaḥ—of his assets; tvam—You; uta—on the other hand; jahāsi—leave aside; tām—her (the material energy); ahiḥ—a snake; iva—as if; tvacam—its (old, discarded) skin; ātta-bhagaḥ—endowed with all assets; mahasi—in Your spiritual powers; mahīyase—You are glorified; aṣṭa-guṇite—eightfold; aparimeya—unlimited; bhagaḥ—whose greatness.
The illusory material nature attracts the minute living entity to embrace her, and as a result he assumes forms composed of her qualities. Subsequently, he loses all his spiritual qualities and must undergo repeated deaths. You, however, avoid the material energy in the same way that a snake abandons its old skin. Glorious in Your possession of eight mystic perfections, You enjoy unlimited opulences.
Although the jīva is pure spirit, qualitatively equal with the Supreme Lord, he is prone to being degraded by embracing the ignorance of material illusion. When he becomes entranced by the allurements of Māyā, he accepts bodies and senses that are designed to let him indulge in forgetfulness. Produced from the raw material of Māyā's three modes—goodness, passion and nescience—these bodies envelop the spirit soul in varieties of unhappiness, culminating in death and rebirth.
The Supreme Soul and the individual soul share the same spiritual nature, but the Supreme Soul cannot be entrapped by ignorance like His infinitesimal companion. Smoke may engulf the glow of a small molten sphere of copper, covering its light in darkness, but the vast globe of the sun will never suffer the same kind of eclipse. Māyā, after all, is the Personality of Godhead's faithful maidservant, the outward expansion of His internal, Yogamāyā potency. Śrī Nārada Pañcarātra thus states, in a conversation between Śruti and Vidyā,
asyā āvarika-śaktir
mahā-māyākhileśvarī
yayā mugdhaṁ jagat sarvaṁ
sarve dehābhimāninaḥ
"The covering potency derived from her is Mahā-māyā, the regulator of everything material. The entire universe becomes bewildered by her, and thus every living being falsely identifies with his material body."
Just as a snake casts aside his old skin, knowing that it is not part of his essential identity, so the Supreme Lord always avoids His external, material energy. There is no insufficiency or limit to any of His eightfold mystic opulences, consisting of aṇimā (the power to become infinitesimal), mahimā (the ability to become infinitely large) and so on. Therefore, the shadow of material darkness has no scope for entering the domain of His unequaled, resplendent glories.
For the sake of those whose realization of spiritual life is only gradually awakening, the Upaniṣads sometimes speak in general terms of ātmā or Brahman, not openly distinguishing the difference between the superior and inferior souls, the Paramātmā and jīvātma. But often enough they describe this duality in unequivocal terms:
dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyā
samānaṁ vṛkṣaṁ pariṣasvajāte
tayor anyaḥ pippalaṁ svādv atty
anaśnann anyo 'bhicākaśīti
"Two companion birds sit together in the shelter of the same pippala tree. One of them is relishing the taste of the tree's berries, while the other refrains from eating and instead watches over His friend." (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 4.6) In this analogy the two birds are the soul and the Supersoul, the tree is the body, and the taste of the berries are the varieties of sense pleasure.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
nṛtyantī tava vīkṣaṇāṅgaṇa-gatā kāla-svabhāvādibhir
bhāvān sattva-rajas-tamo-guṇa-mayān unmīlayantī bahūn
mām ākramya padā śirasy ati-bharaṁ sammardayanty āturaṁ
māyā te śaraṇaṁ gato 'smi nṛ-hare tvām eva tāṁ vāraya
"The glance You cast upon Your consort comprises time, the material propensities of the living entities, and so on. This glance dances upon her face, thus awakening the multitude of created entities, who take birth in the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. O Lord Nṛhari, Your Māyā has put her foot on my head and is pressing down extremely hard, causing me great distress. Now I have come to You for shelter. Please make her desist."
TEXT 39
yaid" na s$amauŪ"r"inta yatayaAe ô$id" k(Amajaq%A
āu"r"iDagAmaAe's$ataAM ô$id" gAtaAe'sma{tak(NQ&maiNA:
@s$auta{payaAeigAnaAmauBayataAe'pyas$auKaM BagAvaªa,
@napagAtaAntak(Ad"naiDaṝ&X#pad"Aṁ"vata:
yadi na samuddharanti yatayo hṛdi kāma-jaṭā
duradhigamo 'satāṁ hṛdi gato 'smṛta-kaṇṭha-maṇiḥ
asu-tṛpa-yoginām ubhayato 'py asukhaṁ bhagavann
anapagatāntakād anadhirūḍha-padād bhavataḥ
yadi—if; na samuddharanti—they do not uproot; yatayaḥ—persons in the renounced order of life; hṛdi—in their hearts; kāma—of material desire; jaṭāḥ—the traces; duradhigamaḥ—impossible to be realized; asatām—for the impure; hṛdi—in the heart; gataḥ—having entered; asmṛta—forgotten; kaṇṭha—on one's neck; maṇiḥ—a jewel; asu—their life airs; tṛpa—who gratify; yoginām—for practitioners of yoga; ubhayataḥ—in both (worlds); api—even; asukham—unhappiness; bhagavan—O Personality of Godhead; anapagata—not gone away; antakāt—from death; anadhirūḍha—unobtained; padāt—whose kingdom; bhavataḥ—from You.
Members of the renounced order who fail to uproot the last traces of material desire in their hearts remain impure, and thus You do not allow them to understand You. Although You are present within their hearts, for them You are like a jewel worn around the neck of a man who has totally forgotten it is there. O Lord, those who practice yoga only for sense gratification must suffer punishment both in this life and the next: from death, who will not release them, and from You, whose kingdom they cannot reach.
A mere show of renunciation is not sufficient to gain a person entrance into the kingdom of God. One must undergo a thorough change of heart, symptomized by a complete lack of interest in the self-destructive habits of sense gratification, both gross and subtle. Not only must the true sage refrain from even thinking of illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling, but he must also give up his desires for reputation and position. All together these demands add up to a formidable challenge but the fruits of true renunciation in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are well worth a lifetime of endeavor.
The Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (3.2.2) confirms the statements of this verse: kāmān yaḥ kāmayate manyamānaḥ sa karmabhir jāyate tatra tatra. "Even a thoughtful renunciant, if he maintains any worldly desires, will be forced by his karmic reactions to take birth again and again in various circumstances." Philosophers and yogīs work hard to become free from birth and death, but because they are unwilling to surrender their proud independence, their meditations are devoid of devotion to the Supreme Lord, and thus they fall short of the perfection of renunciation—pure love of God. This pure love is the only goal of a sincere Vaiṣṇava, and therefore he must vigilantly resist the natural temptations of profit, adoration and distinction, and also the impulse to merge into an all-consuming impersonal oblivion. As Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī states in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11),
anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ
jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam
ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā
 [Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"When first-class devotional service develops, one must be devoid of all material desires, knowledge obtained by monistic philosophy, and fruitive action. The devotee must constantly serve Kṛṣṇa favorably, as Kṛṣṇa desires."
For those who undergo rigorous yoga discipline only to please their senses, prolonged suffering is inevitable. Hunger, disease, the degeneration of old age, injury from accident, violence from others—these are a few of the limitless varieties of suffering one can experience to varying degrees in this world. And ultimately, death awaits, followed by painful punishment for sinful activities. Especially those who have freely indulged in sensual enjoyments at the cost of others' lives can expect punishment so severe it is unimaginable. But the greatest pain of material existence is not misfortune in this life or being sent to hell after death: it is the emptiness of having forgotten one's eternal relationship with the Personality of Godhead.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
dambha-nyāsa-miṣeṇa vañcita-janaṁ bhogaika-cintāturaṁ
sammuhyantam ahar-niśaṁ viracitodyoga-klamair ākulam
ājñā-laṅghinam ajñam ajña-janatā-sammānanāsan-madaṁ
dīnānātha dayā-nidhāna paramānanda prabho pāhi mām
"The hypocrite who cheats himself by a pretense of renunciation thinks only of sense enjoyment and thus suffers constantly. Bewildered day and night, he is overwhelmed by the exhausting endeavors he contrives for himself. This fool disobeys Your laws and is corrupted by greed for respect from other fools. O protector of the fallen, O bestower of mercy, O supremely blissful master, please save that person, myself."
TEXT 40
tvad"vagAmaI na vaeiÔa Bavaāu"tTazAuBaAzAuBayaAer,"
gAuNAivagAuNAAnvayaAMstaihR" de"h"Ba{taAM ca igAr":
@nauyaugAmanvahM" s$agAuNA gAItapar"mpar"yaA
™avaNABa{taAe yatastvamapavagARgAitamaRnaujaE:
tvad avagamī na vetti bhavad-uttha-śubhāśubhayor
guṇa-viguṇānvayāṁs tarhi deha-bhṛtāṁ ca giraḥ
anu-yugam anv-ahaṁ sa-guṇa gīta-paramparayā
śravaṇa-bhṛto yatas tvam apavarga-gatir manu-jaiḥ
tvat—You; avagamī—one who understands; na vetti—does not pay regard; bhavat—from You; uttha—rising; śubha-aśubhayoḥ—of the auspiciousness and inauspiciousness; guṇa-viguṇa—of good and bad; anvayān—to the attributions; tarhi—consequently; deha-bhṛtām—of embodied living beings; ca—also; giraḥ—the words; anu-yugam—in every age; anu-aham—every day; sa-guṇa—O You who are endowed with qualities; gīta—of recitation; paramparayā—by the chain of succession; śravaṇa—through hearing; bhṛtaḥ—carried; yataḥ—because of this; tvam—You; apavarga—of liberation; gatiḥ—the ultimate goal; manujaiḥ—by human beings, descendants of Manu.
When a person realizes You, he no longer cares about his good and bad fortune arising from past pious and sinful acts, since it is You alone who control this good and bad fortune. Such a realized devotee also disregards what ordinary living beings say about him. Every day he fills his ears with Your glories, which are recited in each age by the unbroken succession of Manu's descendants, and thus You become his ultimate salvation.
Text 39 clearly states that impersonalistic renunciants will continue to suffer birth after birth. One may ask if this suffering is justified, since a renunciant's status should exempt him from suffering, whether or not he has a devotional attitude. As the śruti-mantra states, eṣa nityo mahimā brāhmaṇasya na karmaṇā vardhate no kanīyān: "The perpetual glory of a brāhmaṇa is never increased or diminished as a result of any of his activities." (Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.4.28) To counter the objection thus raised, the personified Vedas offer this prayer.
Impersonalistic jñanīs and yogīs do not qualify for full relief from the reactions of karma—a privilege reserved only for those who are tvad-avagamī, pure devotees constantly engaged in hearing and chanting topics concerning the Personality of Godhead. The devotees hold firm to the Supreme Lord's lotus feet by their unrelenting Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and so they need not strictly adhere to the ritual commands and prohibitions of the Vedas. They can fearlessly ignore the apparent good and bad reactions of the work they do only for the Supreme Lord's pleasure, and they can equally ignore whatever others may say about them, whether praise or condemnation. A humble Vaiṣṇava absorbed in the pleasure of saṅkīrtana, glorification of the Lord, pays little heed to praise of himself, which he assumes mistaken, and happily accepts all criticism, which he deems appropriate.
One receives the authorized chanting of the Supreme Lord's glories by faithfully hearing from "the sons of Manu," the disciplic succession of saintly Vaiṣṇavas coming down through the ages. These sages emulate well the example of Svāyambhuva Manu, the forefather of mankind:
ayāta-yāmās tasyāsan
yāmāḥ svāntara-yāpanāḥ
śṛṇvato dhyāyato viṣṇoḥ
kurvato bruvataḥ kathāḥ
"Although Svāyambhuva's life gradually came to an end, his long life, consisting of a manv-antara era, was not spent in vain, since he always engaged in hearing, contemplating, writing down and chanting the pastimes of the Lord." (SB 3.22.35)
Even if a neophyte devotee falls from the standards of proper behavior by the force of his past bad habits, the all-merciful Lord will not reject him. As Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa states,
tair ahaṁ pūjanīyo vai
bhadrakṛṣṇa-nivāsibhiḥ
tad-dharma-gati-hīnā ye
tasyāṁ mayi parāyaṇāḥ
kalinā grasitā ye vai
tesāṁ tasyām avasthitiḥ
yathā tvaṁ saha putraiś ca
yathā rudro gaṇaiḥ saha
yathā śrīyābhiyukto 'haṁ
tathā bhakto mama priyaḥ
"For those who live in Bhadrakṛṣṇa [the district of Mathurā], I am the object of all worship. Even if the residents of that place fail to properly cultivate the religious principles that one should observe in the holy land, they still become devoted to Me just by virtue of living there. Even if Kali [the present age of quarrel] has them in his grip, they still get credit for living in this place. My devotee who lives in Mathurā is just as dear to Me as you [Brahmā] and your sons—Rudra and his followers—and Goddess Śrī and My own self."
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
avagamaṁ tava me diśa mādhava
sphurati yan na sukhāsukha-saṅgamaḥ
śravaṇa-varṇana-bhāvam athāpi vā
na hi bhavāmi yathā vidhi-kiṅkaraḥ
"O Mādhava, please let Me understand You so that I will no longer experience the entanglement of material pleasure and pain. Or else, just as good, please give me a taste for hearing and chanting about You. In that way I will no longer be a slave to ritual injunctions."
TEXT 41
âupataya Wva tae na yayaur"ntamanantatayaA
tvamaipa yad"ntar"ANx"inacayaA nanau s$aAvar"NAA:
Ka wva r"jaAMis$a vaAinta vayas$aA s$ah" yacC_$tayas$a,
tvaiya ih" P(lantyataiªar"s$anaena BavaiªaDanaA:
dyu-pataya eva te na yayur antam anantatayā
tvam api yad-antarāṇḍa-nicayā nanu sāvaraṇāḥ
kha iva rajāṁsi vānti vayasā saha yac chrutayas
tvayi hi phalanty atan-nirasanena bhavan-nidhanāḥ
dyu—of heaven; patayaḥ—the masters; eva—even; te—Your; na yayuḥ—cannot reach; antam—the end; anantatayā—because of being unlimited; tvam—You; api—even; yat—whom; antara—within; aṇḍa—of universes; nicayāḥ—multitudes; nanu—indeed; sa—along with; āvaranāḥ—their outer shells; khe—in the sky; iva—as; rajāṁsi—particles of dust; vānti—blow about; vayasā saha—with the wheel of time; yat—because; śrutayaḥ—the Vedas; tvayi—in You; hi—indeed; phalanti—bear fruit; atat—of that which is distinct from the Absolute Truth; nirasanena—by the elimination; bhavat—in You; nidhanāḥ—whose ultimate conclusion.
Because You are unlimited, neither the lords of heaven nor even You Yourself can ever reach the end of Your glories. The countless universes, each enveloped in its shell, are compelled by the wheel of time to wander within You, like particles of dust blowing about in the sky. The śrutis, following their method of eliminating everything separate from the Supreme, become successful by revealing You as their final conclusion.
Now, in their last prayer, the personified Vedas draw the conclusion that all śrutis, by their various literal and metaphorical references, ultimately describe the Supreme Personality of Godhead's identity, personal qualities and powers. The Upaniṣads glorify Him without end: yad ūrdhvaṁ gārgi divo yad arvāk pṛthivyā yad antarā dyāvā-pṛthivī ime yad bhūtaṁ bhavac ca bhaviṣyac ca. "My dear daughter of Garga, His greatness encompasses everything above us in heaven, everything below the surface of the earth, everything in between heaven and earth, and everything that has ever existed, exists now or will ever exist." (Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 3.8.4)
To illuminate the meaning of this final prayer by the śrutis, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura presents the following conversation between Lord Nārāyaṇa and the personified Vedas: The Vedas said, "Lord Brahmā and the other rulers of the heavenly planets have not yet reached the end of Your glories. What can we do, then, since we are insignificant in comparison to these great demigods?"
Lord Nārāyaṇa replied, "No, you śrutis are gifted with more sublime vision than the demigods who rule this universe. You will be able to reach the end of My glories if you do not stop now."
"But even You cannot find Your own limit!"
"If that is the case, what do you mean when you call Me omniscient and omnipotent?"
"We conclude that You possess these features from the very fact that You are limitless. Certainly if one is ignorant of something that does not even exist, like a rabbit's horn, that does not detract from his omniscience, and if one fails to find such a nonentity, that does not limit his omnipotence. You are so vast that multitudes of universes float within You. Each of these universes is surrounded by seven shells composed of the material elements and each of these concentric shells is ten times larger than the one within it. Although we can never fully describe the truth about You, we perfect our existence by declaring that You are the true topic of the Vedas."
"But why do you seem dissatisfied?"
"Because in the Vedas Śrīla Vyāsadeva has described the transcendental existence of Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān only briefly. When he saw the need to elaborate on his description of the Supreme, he chose to concentrate on the subject of Brahman, the impersonal aspect of the Supreme known as tat ("that") explaining Brahman by negating whatever is different from it. Just as in a field where a chest of jewels has been accidentally spilled the jewels can be recovered by removing unwanted stones, twigs and refuse, so within the visible realm of Māyā and her creations the Absolute Truth can be found by a process of elimination. Since we Vedas cannot possibly enumerate every material category, individual entity, quality and motion in the universe from the beginning to the end of time, and since the truth concerning Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān would still remain untouched even if we described all these things and then discarded them, by this means of investigation we never expect to reach a final definition of You. Only by Your mercy can we make some attempt to approach You, the supremely inaccessible Absolute Truth."
There are many statements of śruti that carry on the work of atan-nirasanam, the process of distinguishing the Supreme from everything inferior. The Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (3.8.8), for example, states, asthūlam anaṇu ahrasvam adīrgham alohitam asneham acchāyam atamo 'vāyv anākāśam asaṅgam arasam agandham acakṣuṣkam aśrotram agamano 'tejaskam aprāṇam asukham amātram anantaram abāhyam. "It is neither big nor small, short nor long, hot nor cool, in shadow nor in darkness. Nor is it the wind or the ether. It is not in contact with anything, and it has no taste, smell, eyes, ears, motion, potency, life air, pleasure, measurement, inside or outside. "The Kena Upaniṣad (3) declares, anyad eva tad viditād atho aviditād adhi: "Brahman is distinct from what is known and also from what is yet to be known." And the Kaṭha Upaniṣad (2.14) says, anyatra dharmād anyatrādharmād anyatrāsmāt kṛtākṛtāt: "Brahman is outside the scope of religion and irreligion, pious and impious action."
According to the rules of linguistics and logic, a negation cannot be unbounded: there must be some positive counterpart of which it is the negation. In the case of the Vedas' exhaustive atan-nirasanam, their denial that anything material is absolutely real, the counterpart is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī prays,
dyu-patayo vidur antam ananta te
na ca bhavān na giraḥ śruti-maulayaḥ
tvayi phalanti yato nama ity ato
jaya jayeti bhaje tava tat-padam
"The gods of heaven do not know Your limit, O endless Lord, and even You do not know it. Because the transcendental words of the topmost śrutis become fruitful by revealing You, I offer You my obeisances. Thus I worship You as the Absolute Truth, saying 'All glories to You! All glories to You!'"



Song Glorification of Krsna & Arjuna by Maha visnu
TEXT 58
iã"jaAtmajaA mae yauvayaAeidR"ā{"ºauNAA
mayaAepanaItaA Bauiva DamaRgAuæayae
k(laAvataINAARvavanaeBaRr"As$aur"Ana,
h"tvaeh" BaUyastvar"yaetamainta mae
dvijātmajā me yuvayor didṛkṣuṇā
mayopanītā bhuvi dharma-guptaye
kalāvatīrṇāv avaner bharāsurān
hatveha bhūyas tvarayetam anti me
dvija—of the brāhmaṇa; ātma-jāḥ—the sons; me—My; yuvayoḥ—you two; didṛkṣuṇā—who wanted to see; mayā—by Me; upanītāḥ—brought; bhuvi—on the earth; dharma—of the principles of religion; guptaye—for the protection; kalā—(as My) expansions; avatīrṇau—descended; avaneḥ—of the earth; bhara—who are burdens; asurān—the demons; hatvā—after killing; iha—here; bhūyaḥ—again; tvarayā—quickly; itam—come; anti—to the proximity; me—My.
[Lord Mahā-Viṣṇu said:] I brought the brāhmaṇa's sons here because I wanted to see the two of you, My expansions, who have descended to the earth to save the principles of religion. As soon as you finish killing the demons who burden the earth, quickly come back here to Me.
As explained by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, the secret import of these words spoken for Arjuna's edification is as follows: "You two, who have descended along with your kalās, your personal energies, should kindly return to Me after killing the demons who burden the earth. Please quickly send these demons here to Me for the sake of their liberation." It is stated in Śrī Hari-vaṁśa and in the Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that the path of gradual liberation passes through the intermediate station of Lord Mahā-Viṣṇu's abode, outside the eighth shell of the universe.
TEXT 59
paUNARk(AmaAvaipa yauvaAM
nar"naAr"AyaNAAva{SaI
DamaRmaAcar"taAM isTatyaE
[%SaBaAE laAek(s$aÍḷh"ma,
pūrṇa-kāmāv api yuvāṁ
nara-nārāyaṇāv ṛṣī
dharmam ācaratāṁ sthityai
ṛṣabhau loka-saṅgraham
pūrṇa—full; kāmau—in all desires; api—although; yuvām—you two; nara-nārāyaṇau ṛṣī—as the sages Nara and Nārāyaṇa; dharmam—the principles of religion; ācaratām—should execute; sthityai—for its maintenance; ṛṣabhau—the best of all persons; loka-saṅgraham—for the benefit of the general populace.
Although all your desires are completely fulfilled, O best of exalted personalities, for the benefit of the people in general you should continue to exemplify religious behavior as the sages Nara and Nārāyaṇa.

Song Summarization of the Glories of Lord Krsna by Srila Sukadeva Gosvami 
TEXT 47
taITa< ca‚e( na{paAenaM yad"jaina yaāu"Sau sva:s$air"tpaAd"zAAEcaM
ivaiã"q%.iµagDaA: svaṝ&paM yayaur"ijatapar" ™aIyaRd"TaeR'nyaya¥a:
yaªaAmaAmaṆḷla£aM ™autamaTa gAid"taM yatk{(taAe gAAe‡aDamaR:
k{(SNAsyaEtaªa ica‡aM iºaitaBar"h"r"NAM k(Alaca‚(AyauDasya
tīrthaṁ cakre nṛponaṁ yad ajani yaduṣu svaḥ-sarit pāda-śaucaṁ
vidviṭ-snigdhāḥ svarūpaṁ yayur ajita-para śrīr yad-arthe 'nya-yatnaḥ
yan-nāmāmaṅgala-ghnaṁ śrutam atha gaditaṁ yat-kṛto gotra-dharmaḥ
kṛṣṇasyaitan na citraṁ kṣiti-bhara-haraṇaṁ kāla-cakrāyudhasya
tīrtham—sacred place of pilgrimage; cakre—made; nṛpa—O King (Parīkṣit); ūnam—lesser; yat—which (glories of Lord Kṛṣṇa); ajani—He took birth; yaduṣu—among the Yadus; svaḥ—of heaven; sarit—the river; pāda—whose feet; śaucam—(the water) which washes; vidviṭ—enemies; snigdhāḥ—and loved ones; svarūpam—whose personal form; yayuḥ—attained; ajita—who is undefeated; parā—and supremely perfect; śrīḥ—the goddess of fortune; yat—whose; arthe—for the sake; anya—of others; yatnaḥ—endeavor; yat—whose; nāma—name; amaṅgala—inauspiciousness; ghnam—which destroys; śrutam—heard; atha—or else; gaditam—chanted; yat—by whom; kṛtaḥ—created; gotra—among the lines of descent (of various sages); dharmaḥ—the religious principles; kṛṣṇasya—for Lord Kṛṣṇa; etat—this; na—not; citram—wonderful; kṣiti—the earth's; bhara—of the burden; haraṇam—the removal; kāla—of time; cakra—the wheel; āyudhasya—whose weapon.
The heavenly Ganges is a holy place of pilgrimage because her waters wash Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet. But when the Lord descended among the Yadus, His glories eclipsed the Ganges as a holy place. Both those who hated Kṛṣṇa and those who loved Him attained eternal forms like His in the spiritual world. The unattainable and supremely self-satisfied goddess of fortune, for the sake of whose favor everyone else struggles, belongs to Him alone. His name destroys all inauspiciousness when heard or chanted. He alone has set forth the principles of the various disciplic successions of sages. What wonder is it that He, whose personal weapon is the wheel of time, relieved the burden of the earth?
From beginning to end, the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam has been exclusively dedicated to reciting the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, Mathurā and Dvārakā. As Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī points out, this verse sums up the Tenth Canto by mentioning five special glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa that even His expansions, plenary portions and incarnations do not display.
First, Lord Kṛṣṇa's reputation eclipsed that of the holy Ganges when He descended into the Yadu dynasty. Previous to this, mother Ganges was the most sacred of all tīrthas, being the water that had bathed Lord Vāmanadeva's lotus feet. Another river, the Yamunā, became even greater than the Ganges by contacting the dust from Śrī Kṛṣṇa's feet in the districts of Vraja and Mathurā:
gaṅgā-śata-guṇā prāyo
māthure mama maṇḍale
yamunā viśrutā devi
nātra kāryā vicāraṇā
"The renowned Yamunā in My domain of Mathurā is hundreds of times greater than the Ganges. About this there can be no dispute, O goddess." (Varāha Purāṇa)
Second, Lord Kṛṣṇa gave liberation not only to His surrendered devotees but also to those who considered themselves His enemies. Devotees like the cowherd girls of Vraja and others attained His personal association by entering into His eternal pleasure pastimes in the spiritual world, while inimical demons killed by Him attained the sāyujya-mukti of merging into His divine form. When He was present on this earth, Lord Kṛṣṇa's compassion extended to His family, friends and servants, and also to His enemies and their families, friends and servants. Great authorities like Lord Brahmā have mentioned this fact: sad-veṣād iva pūtanāpi sa-kulā tvām eva devāpitā. "My Lord, You have already given Yourself to Pūtanā and her family members simply because she dressed herself as a devotee." (SB 10.14.35)
Third, Goddess Lakṣmī, Lord Nārāyaṇa's constant companion, whom great demigods serve menially to win her slight favor, was unable to win the privilege of joining the intimate company of Lord Kṛṣṇa's devotees in Vraja. Despite her eagerness to participate in the rāsa dance and other pastimes enacted by Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and despite the severe austerities she underwent to achieve that end, she could not transcend her natural mood of reverence. The sweetness and intimacy Lord Kṛṣṇa manifested in Vṛndāvana constitute a unique kind of opulence found nowhere else, even in Vaikuṇṭha. As Śrī Uddhava says,
yan martya-līlaupayikaṁ sva-yoga-
māyā-balaṁ darśayatā gṛhītam
vismāpanaṁ svasya ca saubhagarddheḥ
paraṁ padaṁ bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇāṅgam
"To exhibit the strength of His spiritual potency, Lord Kṛṣṇa manifested a form just suitable for His humanlike pastimes in the material world. This form was wonderful even for Him and was the supreme abode of the wealth of good fortune. Its limbs were so beautiful that they increased the beauty of the ornaments worn on different parts of His body." (SB 3.2.12)
Fourth, the name Kṛṣṇa is superior to the name Nārāyaṇa and to those of all of Lord Kṛṣṇa's other expansions. These two syllables—kṛṣ and ṇa—combine together to destroy all inauspiciousness and illusion. When recited, the name Kṛṣṇa becomes śruta-matha; that is to say, the recitation of Kṛṣṇa's name totally crushes (mathnāti) the excellence of all other spiritual practices described in the revealed scriptures (śruta). In the words of the Brahmāṇda Purāṇa,
sahasra-nāmnāṁ puṇyānāṁ
trir āvṛttyā tu yat phalam
ekāvṛttyā tu kṛṣṇasya
nāmaikaṁ tat prayacchati
"By uttering the single name of Kṛṣṇa just once, one attains the same benefit as that gained by reciting Lord Viṣṇu's thousand names three times."
Fifth, Lord Kṛṣṇa solidly reinstated dharma, the bull of religion, on his four legs of compassion, austerity, cleanliness and truth. Thus dharma could once again become go-tra, the protector of the earth. Śrī Kṛṣṇa also established the religious function of Govardhana-pūjā to honor His favorite hill, the cows and the brāhmaṇas. He also became the hill (gotra) Himself, assuming its form to accept the cowherds' offerings. Moreover, He cultivated the dharma, or loving nature, of Vraja's divine cowherds (gotras), whose love for Him has never been equaled.
These are just a few of the wonderful features of Lord Kṛṣṇa's unique personality.
TEXT 48
jayaita janainavaAs$aAe de"vak(LjanmavaAd"Ae
yaāu"var"pair"SatsvaEd"AeRiBaRr"syaªaDamaRma,
isTar"car"va{ijana£a: s$auismata™aImauKaena
˜ajapaur"vainataAnaAM vaDaRyana, k(Amade"vama,
jayati jana-nivāso devakī-janma-vādo
yadu-vara-pariṣat svair dorbhir asyann adharmam
sthira-cara-vṛjina-ghnaḥ su-smita-śrī-mukhena
vraja-pura-vanitānāṁ vardhayan kāma-devam
jayati—eternally lives gloriously; jana-nivāsaḥ—He who lives among human beings like the members of the Yadu dynasty and is the ultimate resort of all living entities; devakī-janma-vādaḥ—known as the son of Devakī (No one can actually become the father or mother of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore devakī-janma-vada means that He is known as the son of Devakī. Similarly, He is also known as the son of Mother Yaśodā, Vasudeva and Nanda Mahārāja.); yadu-vara-pariṣat—served by the members of the Yadu dynasty or the cowherd men of Vṛndāvana (all of whom are constant associates of the Supreme Lord and are the Lord's eternal servants); svaiḥ dorbhiḥ—by His own arms, or by His devotees like Arjuna who are just like His own arms; asyan—killing; adharmam—demons or the impious; sthira-cara-vṛjina-ghnaḥ—the destroyer of all the ill fortune of all living entities, moving and not moving; su-smita—always smiling; śrī-mukhena—by His beautiful face; vraja-pura-vanitānām—of the damsels of Vṛndāvana; vardhayan—increasing; kāma-devam—the lusty desires.
Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is He who is known as jana-nivāsa, the ultimate resort of all living entities, and who is also known as Devakīnandana or Yaśodā-nandana, the son of Devakī and Yaśodā. He is the guide of the Yadu dynasty, and with His mighty arms He kills everything inauspicious, as well as every man who is impious. By His presence He destroys all things inauspicious for all living entities, moving and inert. His blissful smiling face always increases the lusty desires of the gopīs of Vṛndāvana. May He be all glorious and happy!
The translation and word meanings for this verse are taken from Śrīla Prabhupāda's English rendering of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 13.79). 
According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī has composed this beautiful verse to console those who lament the fact that Lord Kṛṣṇa did not continue to manifest His intimate pastimes down to the present time. Here Śrī Śukadeva reminds his listeners that the Lord is eternally present in this world—in His holy abode, His name and the recitation of His glories. This idea is expressed by the word jayati ("He is victorious"), which is in the present tense rather than the past.
Śrīla Prabhupāda explains this verse as follows in Kṛṣṇa: "Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī thus concludes his description of the superexalted position of Lord Kṛṣṇa by glorifying Him in the following way: 'O Lord Kṛṣṇa, all glories unto You. You are present in everyone's heart as Paramātmā. Therefore You are known as Jananivāsa, one who lives in everyone's heart.' As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati: 'The Supreme Lord in His Paramātmā feature lives within everyone's heart.' This does not mean, however, that Kṛṣṇa has no separate existence as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Māyāvādī philosophers accept the all-pervading feature of Para-brahman, but when Para-brahman, or the Supreme Lord, appears, they think that He appears under the control of material nature. Because Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared as the son of Devakī, the Māyāvādī philosophers accept Kṛṣṇa to be an ordinary living entity who takes birth within this material world. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī warns them: devakī-janma-vāda, which means that although Kṛṣṇa is famous as the son of Devakī, actually He is the Supersoul, or the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead. The devotees, however, take this word devakī-janma-vāda in a different way. The devotees understand that actually Kṛṣṇa was the son of Mother Yaśodā. Although Kṛṣṇa first appeared as the son of Devakī, He immediately transferred Himself to the lap of Mother Yaśodā, and His childhood pastimes were blissfully enjoyed by Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja. This fact was admitted by Vasudeva himself when he met Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā at Kurukṣetra. He admitted that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were actually the sons of Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja. Vasudeva and Devakī were only Their official father and mother. Their actual father and mother were Nanda and Yaśodā. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes Lord Kṛṣṇa as devakī-janma-vāda.
"Śukadeva Gosvāmī then glorifies the Lord as one who is honored by the yadu-vara-pariṣat, the assembly house of the Yadu dynasty, and as the killer of different kinds of demons. Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, could have killed all the demons by employing His different material energies, but He wanted to kill them personally, to give them salvation. There was no need of Kṛṣṇa's coming to this material world to kill the demons; simply by His willing, many hundreds and thousands of demons could have been killed without His personal endeavor. But actually He descended for His pure devotees, to play as a child with Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja and to give pleasure to the inhabitants of Dvārakā. By killing the demons and giving protection to the devotees, Lord Kṛṣṇa established the real religious principle, which is simply love of God. By following the factual religious principle of love of God, even the living entities known as sthira-cara were also delivered of all material contamination and transferred to the spiritual kingdom. Sthira means the trees and plants, which cannot move, and cara means the moving animals, especially the cows. When Kṛṣṇa was present, He delivered all the trees, monkeys and other plants and animals who happened to see Him and serve Him, both in Vṛndāvana and in Dvārakā.
"Lord Kṛṣṇa is especially glorified for giving pleasure to the gopīs and the queens of Dvārakā. Śukadeva Gosvāmī glorifies Lord Kṛṣṇa for His enchanting smile, by which He enchanted not only the gopīs of Vṛndāvana but also the queens of Dvārakā. The exact words used in this connection are vardhayan kāma-devam. In Vṛndāvana, as the boyfriend of many gopīs, and in Dvārakā, as the husband of many queens, Kṛṣṇa increased their lusty desires to enjoy with Him. For God realization or self-realization, one generally has to undergo severe austerities and penances for many, many thousands of years, and then it may be possible to realize God. But the gopīs and the queens of Dvārakā, simply by enhancing their lusty desires to enjoy Kṛṣṇa as their boyfriend or husband, received the highest type of salvation."
In this way Śrīla Prabhupāda wonderfully illuminates the meaning of this verse by Śukadeva Gosvāmī, which summarizes Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes.
TEXT 49
wtTaM par"sya inajavatmaRir"r"ºayaAÔa-
laIlaAtanaAestad"nauṝ&paivax"mbanaAina
k(maARiNA k(maRk(SaNAAina yaāU"Ôamasya
™aUyaAd"mauSya pad"yaAer"nauva{iÔaimacC$na,
itthaṁ parasya nija-vartma-rirakṣayātta-
līlā-tanos tad-anurūpa-viḍambanāni
karmāṇi karma-kaṣaṇāni yadūttamasya
śrūyād amuṣya padayor anuvṛttim icchan
ittham—(described) in this manner; parasya—of the Supreme; nija—His own; vartma—path (of devotional service); rirakṣayā—with the desire of protecting; ātta—who has assumed; līlā—for pastimes; tanoḥ—various personal forms; tat—to each of these; anurūpa—suitable; viḍambanāni—imitating; karmāṇi—activities; karma—the reactions of material work; kaṣaṇāni—which destroy; yadu-uttamasya—of the best of the Yadus; śrūyāt—one should hear; amuṣya—His; padayoḥ—of the feet; anuvṛttim—the privilege of following; icchan—desiring.
To protect the principles of devotional service to Himself, Lord Kṛṣṇa, the best of the Yadus, accepts the pastime forms that have been glorified here in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. One who desires to faithfully serve His lotus feet should hear of the activities He performs in each of these incarnations—activities that suitably imitate those of the forms He assumes. Hearing narrations of these pastimes destroys the reactions to fruitive work.
TEXT 50
matyaRstayaAnaus$avamaeiDatayaA mauku(nd"
™aImatk(TaA™avaNAk(LtaRnaicantayaEita
taŪ"Ama āu"star"k{(taAntajavaApavagA<
ƒaAmaAã"naM iºaitaBaujaAe'ipa yayauyaRd"TaAR:
martyas tayānusavam edhitayā mukunda-
śrīmat-kathā-śravaṇa-kīrtana-cintayaiti
tad dhāma dustara-kṛtānta-javāpavargaṁ
grāmād vanaṁ kṣiti-bhujo 'pi yayur yad-arthāḥ
martyaḥ—a mortal; tayā—by such; anusavam—constantly; edhitayā—increasing; mukunda—about Lord Kṛṣṇa; śrīmat—beautiful; kathā—of the topics; śravaṇa—by hearing; kīrtana—chanting; cintayā—and meditating; eti—goes; tat—His; dhāma—to the abode; dustara—unavoidable; kṛta-anta—of death; java—of the force; apavargam—the place of cessation; grāmāt—from one's mundane home; vanam—to the forest; kṣiti-bhujaḥ—kings (like Priyavrata); api—even; yayuḥ—went; yat—whom; arthāḥ—for the sake of obtaining.
By regularly hearing, chanting and meditating on the beautiful topics of Lord Mukunda with ever-increasing sincerity, a mortal being will attain the divine kingdom of the Lord, where the inviolable power of death holds no sway. For this purpose, many persons, including great kings, abandoned their mundane homes and took to the forest.
For the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam's Tenth Canto, this verse is the phala-śruti, the promise of success given to one who hears it. The process of devotional service begins with hearing topics about the Supreme Lord. When one has heard these topics properly, he can then proceed to chant them for others' benefit and reflect on their significance. This leads to faithful adherence to the principles of devotional service, which culminates in absolute faith in Lord Kṛṣṇa. Such perfect faith gives one the right to enter the Lord's intimate service and, in due course of time, return to one's eternal, spiritual life in one of the Lord's personal domains.
Humbly offering his comments on the Tenth Canto at the lotus feet of his worshipable Lord, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī prays,
mad-gavīr api gopālaḥ
svī-kuryāt kṛpayā yadi
tadaivāsāṁ payaḥ pītvā
hṛṣyeyus tat-priyā janāḥ
"If Lord Gopāla mercifully accepts the cows of my words, then His dear devotees may enjoy the pleasure of drinking their milk—the nectar produced by hearing them."
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda to the Tenth Canto, Ninetieth Chapter, of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Summary of Lord Kṛṣṇa's Glories."
The Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was completed on December 27, 1988, the anniversary of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's disappearance.

Part Canto 11




Song Demigods offer Prayers to Nara Narayana Rsi
TEXT 10
tvaAM s$aevataAM s$aur"k{(taA bah"vaAe'ntar"AyaA:
svaAEk(Ae ivalaÎḷYa par"maM ˜ajataAM padM" tae
naAnyasya baihR"iSa balaInd"d"ta: svaBaAgAAna,
DaÔae padM" tvamaivataA yaid" iva£amaUi©aR
tvāṁ sevatāṁ sura-kṛtā bahavo 'ntarāyāḥ
svauko vilaṅghya paramaṁ vrajatāṁ padaṁ te
nānyasya barhiṣi balīn dadataḥ sva-bhāgān
dhatte padaṁ tvam avitā yadi vighna-mūrdhni
tvām—You; sevatām—for those who are serving; sura-kṛtāḥ—made by the demigods; bahavaḥ—many; antarāyāḥ—disturbances; sva-okaḥ—their own abode (the planets of the demigods); vilaṅghya—crossing beyond; paramam—the supreme; vrajatām—who are going; padam—to the abode; te—Your; na—there are not such; anyasya—for another; barhiṣi—in ritual sacrifices; balīn—offerings; dadataḥ—for one who is giving; sva-bhāgān—their own shares (of the demigods); dhatte—(the devotee) places; padam—his foot; tvam—You; avitā—the protector; yadi—because; vighna—of the disturbance; mūrdhni—upon the head.
The demigods place many obstacles on the path of those who worship You to transcend the temporary abodes of the demigods and reach Your supreme abode. Those who offer the demigods their assigned shares in sacrificial performances encounter no such obstacles. But because You are the direct protector of Your devotee, he is able to step over the head of whatever obstacle the demigods place before him.
The demigods, headed by Kāmadeva, or Cupid, recognizing their offense at the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead, Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi, here point out the insignificant position of the demigods in relation to the Supreme Lord. Just as a farmer must pay a specific percentage of his agricultural profit to the king or political head as tax money, all human beings must offer a percentage of their material wealth to the demigods in sacrifice. In the Bhagavad-gītā however, the Lord explains that the demigods are also His servants and it is He Himself who awards all benedictions, through the agency of the demigods. Mayaiva vihitān hi tān. Although a Vaiṣṇava, or devotee of the Lord, has no need to worship the demigods, the demigods, being proud of their exalted material position, sometimes resent the exclusive devotion of the Vaiṣṇava to the Lord and thus try to cause the devotee to fall down, as described in this verse (sura-kṛtā bahavo 'ntarāyāḥ). But the demigods here point out that Kṛṣṇa is directly the protector of His devotees. Therefore, so-called impediments become stimuli for further spiritual advancement for a sincere devotee.
The demigods here state, "We thought, our dear Lord, that we could disturb Your consciousness by our foolish tricks. But by Your mercy even Your devotees pay little regard to us, so why should You take our foolish behavior seriously?" The word yadi here is used to indicate the certainty that Kṛṣṇa is always the protector of His surrendered devotees. Although there may be many obstacles on the path of the sincere devotee who is preaching the glories of the Lord, such obstacles increase the determination of the devotee. Therefore, according to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, the continuous obstacles presented by the demigods form a kind of ladder or stairway upon which the devotee steadily progresses back to the kingdom of God. A similar verse appears in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.33):
tathā na te mādhava tāvakāḥ kvacid
bhraśyanti mārgāt tvayi baddha-sauhṛdāḥ
tvayābhiguptā vicaranti nirbhayā
vināyakānīkapa-mūrdhasu prabho
"O Mādhava, Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord of the goddess of fortune, if devotees completely in love with You sometimes fall from the path of devotion, they do not fall like nondevotees, for You still protect them. Thus they fearlessly traverse the heads of their opponents and continue to progress in devotional service."
TEXT 11
ºauÔa{q%.i‡ak(AlagAuNAmaAś&tajaEḥ"zAEznyaAnaa,
@smaAnapaAr"jalaDaInaitataIyaR ke(icata,
‚(AeDasya yaAinta ivaP(lasya vazAM pade" gAAer,"
maṀainta āu"êr"tapaê va{TaAets$a{jainta
kṣut-tṛṭ-tri-kāla-guṇa-māruta-jaihva-śaiśnyān
asmān apāra-jaladhīn atitīrya kecit
krodhasya yānti viphalasya vaśaṁ pade gor
majjanti duścara-tapaś ca vṛthotsṛjanti
kṣut—hunger; tṛṭ—thirst; tri-kāla-guṇa—the manifestations of the three phases of time (such as heat and cold, rain and so on); māruta—wind; jaihva—enjoyment of the tongue; śaiśnyān—and of the genitals; asmān—ourselves (in all these forms); apāra—limitless; jala-dhīn—oceans; atitīrya—having crossed over; kecit—some persons; krodhasya—of anger; yānti—they come; viphalasya—which is fruitless; vaśam—under the sway; pade—in the foot(print); goḥ—of a cow; majjanti—they drown; duścara—difficult to execute; tapaḥ—their austerities; ca—and; vṛthā—without any good purpose; utsṛjanti—they throw away.
Some men practice severe penances to cross beyond our influence, which is like an immeasurable ocean with endless waves of hunger, thirst, heat, cold and the other conditions brought about by the passing of time, such as the sensuous wind and the urges of the tongue and sex organs. Nevertheless, although crossing this ocean of sense gratification through severe penances, such persons foolishly drown in a cow's hoofprint when conquered by useless anger. Thus they exhaust the benefit of their difficult austerities in vain.
Those who do not accept the devotional service of the Supreme Lord can be considered in two categories. Those engaged in sense gratification are easily conquered by the demigods through various weapons such as hunger, thirst, sexual desire, lamentation for the past and vain hoping for the future. Such materialistic fools, infatuated with the material world, are easily controlled by the demigods, who are the ultimate supplying agents of sense gratification. But according to Śrīdhara Svāmī, persons who attempt to subdue the desires of the material senses and thus avoid the control of the demigods without surrendering to the Supreme Lord are even more foolish than the sense gratifiers. Although crossing the ocean of sense gratification, those who perform severe penances without service to the Lord eventually drown in tiny puddles of anger. One who simply performs material penances does not actually purify his heart. By one's material determination one may restrict the activities of the senses although one's heart is still filled with material desires. The practical result of this is krodha, or anger. We have seen artificial performers of penance who have become very bitter and angry through denial of the senses. Being indifferent to the Supreme Lord, such persons do not achieve ultimate liberation, nor can they enjoy material sense gratification; rather, they become angry, and through cursing others or enjoying false pride they uselessly exhaust the results of their painful austerities. It is understood that when a yogī curses he diminishes the mystic power he has accumulated. Thus, anger gives neither liberation nor material sense gratification but merely burns up all the results of material penances and austerities. Being useless, such anger is compared to a useless puddle found in a cow's hoofprint. Thus after crossing over the ocean of sense gratification the great yogīs who are indifferent to the Supreme Lord drown in puddles of anger. Although the demigods admit that the devotees of the Lord actually conquer the miseries of material life, it is understood here that a similar result is not to be obtained by so-called yogīs who are not interested in devotional service to the Supreme Lord.



Song Brahma & Other Demigods offer Prayers to the Supreme Lord 
TEXT 7
™aIde"vaA Ocau:
nataA: sma tae naATa pad"Ar"ivandM"
bauŪ"Iin‰"ya‘aANAmanaAevacaAeiBa:
yai»antyatae'ntaôR$id" BaAvayau·E(r,"
maumauºauiBa: k(maRmayaAeś&paAzAAta,
śrī-devā ūcuḥ
natāḥ sma te nātha padāravindaṁ
buddhīndriya-prāṇa-mano-vacobhiḥ
yac cintyate 'ntar hṛdi bhāva-yuktair
mumukṣubhiḥ karma-mayoru-pāśāt
śrī-devāḥ ūcuḥ—the demigods said; natāḥ sma—we are bowed down; te—Your; nātha—O Lord; pada-aravindam—to the lotus feet; buddhi—with our intelligence; indriya—senses; prāṇa—vital air; manaḥ—mind; vacobhiḥ—and words; yat—which; cintyate—are meditated upon; antaḥ hṛdi—within the heart; bhāva-yuktaiḥ—who are fixed in yoga practice; mumukṣubhiḥ—by those striving for liberation; karma-maya—of the reactions of fruitive work; uru-pāśāt—from the great bondage.
The demigods began to speak: Our dear Lord, advanced mystic yogis, striving for liberation from the severe bondage of material work, meditate with great devotion upon Your lotus feet within their hearts. Dedicating our intelligence, senses, vital air, mind and power of speech to Your Lordship, we demigods bow down at Your lotus feet.
According to Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī, the word sma in this verse indicates vismaya, "astonishment." The demigods were astonished that although great mystic yogīs are only able to contemplate the lotus feet of the Lord within their hearts, the demigods arriving in the city of Dvārakā were able to see before them the entire body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the powerful demigods fell down like sticks before the Lord. Such full obeisances (called daṇḍavat, "like a stick") are described as follows:
dorbhyāṁ padābhyāṁ jānubhyām
urasā śirasā dṛśā
manasā vacasā ceti
praṇāmo 'ṣṭāṅga īritaḥ
"The obeisances offered with eight limbs are made with the two arms, the two legs, the two knees, the chest, the head, the eyes, the mind and the power of speech.''
The currents of material nature are very powerful, and one should therefore cling tightly to the lotus feet of the Lord. Otherwise, the violent waves of sense gratification and mental speculation will undoubtedly sweep one away from one's eternal, constitutional position as the loving servitor of the Supreme Lord, and one will then fall down into the stringent bondage described here as uru-pāśāt, "a very powerful illusory network."
TEXT 8
tvaM maAyayaA i‡agAuNAyaAtmaina āu"ivaRBaAvyaM
vya·M( s$a{jasyavais$a laumpais$a taṬ"NAsTa:
naEtaEBaRvaAnaijata k(maRiBar"jyatae vaE
yatsvae s$auKae'vyavaih"tae'iBar"taAe'navaâ:
tvaṁ māyayā tri-guṇayātmani durvibhāvyaṁ
vyaktaṁ sṛjasy avasi lumpasi tad-guṇa-sthaḥ
naitair bhavān ajita karmabhir ajyate vai
yat sve sukhe 'vyavahite 'bhirato 'navadyaḥ
tvam—You; māyayā—by the material energy; tri-guṇayā—made up of the three modes of nature; ātmani—within Yourself; durvibhāvyam—inconceivable; vyaktam—the manifest cosmos; sṛjasi—You create; avasi—protect; lumpasi—and destroy; tat—of that material nature; guṇa—within the modes (goodness, passion and ignorance); sthaḥ—situated; na—not; etaiḥ—by these; bhavān—You; ajita—O unconquerable Lord; karmabhiḥ—activities; ajyate—are entangled; vai—at all; yat—because; sve—in Your own; sukhe—happiness; avyavahite—unimpeded; abhirataḥ—You are always absorbed; anavadyaḥ—the unimpeachable Lord.
O unconquerable Lord, You engage Your illusory energy, composed of three modes, to unleash, maintain and devastate the inconceivable manifest cosmos, all within Your own self. As the supreme superintendent of māyā, You appear to be situated in the interaction of the modes of nature; however, You are never affected by material activities. In fact, You are directly engaged in Your own eternal spiritual bliss, and thus You cannot be accused of any material infection.
The word durvibhāvyam is significant here. The ultimate cause of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the material world is certainly inconceivable even for the greatest mundane scientists, who waste their lives in useless and fruitless speculation. Yet Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is the secondary expansion of an expansion of the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, sees the entire cosmos to be like an insignificant atom. So what hope is there for foolish so-called scientists who try to understand Kṛṣṇa by their ridiculous experimental power? Thus the word anavadya is used. No one can find fault or discrepancy in the body, character, activities or instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is never materially ignorant; therefore He never exhibits cruelty, laziness, foolishness, blindness or material intoxication. Similarly, because the Lord is never polluted by material passion, He never exhibits material pride, lamentation, yearning or violence. And since the Lord is free from material goodness, He never attempts to peacefully enjoy the material world with a sublime materialistic mentality.
Lord Kṛṣṇa, as stated here (sve sukhe 'vyavahite 'bhirataḥ), is eternally busy, day and night, in His transcendental abode, relishing the inconceivable loving devotion of His innumerable associates. The Lord is being embraced and is embracing. He is joking and is hearing the joking of His loved ones. The Lord is walking through forests full of fruits and flowers, playing in the nectarean river Yamunā and taking part in His most confidential transcendental loving affairs with the cowherd girls of Vṛndāvana. These pastimes in Kṛṣṇaloka and on other Vaikuṇṭha planets are eternal, faultless and an ocean of spiritual happiness. The Lord never descends to the dry platform of relative material happiness. The infinite Personality of Godhead has nothing to gain from anyone; thus fruitive activity cannot possibly exist within the Lord.
TEXT 9
zAuiŪ"na{RNAAM na tau taTaex"Ya āu"r"AzAyaAnaAM
ivaâA™autaADyayanad"Anatapa:i‚(yaAiBa:
s$aÔvaAtmanaAma{SaBa tae yazAis$a ‘ava{Ū"-
s$acC)$Ū"yaA ™avaNAs$amBa{tayaA yaTaA syaAta,
śuddhir nṛṇāṁ na tu tatheḍya durāśayānāṁ
vidyā-śrutādhyayana-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyābhiḥ
sattvātmanām ṛṣabha te yaśasi pravṛddha-
sac-chraddhayā śravaṇa-sambhṛtayā yathā syāt
śuddhiḥ—purification; nṛṇām—of persons; na—is not; tu—but; tathā—in such a way; īḍya—O worshipable one; durāśayānām—of those whose consciousness is contaminated; vidyā—by ordinary worship; śruta—hearing and obeying the injunctions of the Vedas; adhyayana—study of various śāstras; dāna—charity; tapaḥ—austere penances; kriyābhiḥ—and ritual activities; sattva-ātmanām—of those who are situated in pure goodness; ṛṣabha—O greatest of all; te—Your; yaśasi—in the glories; pravṛddha—fully matured; sat—transcendental; śraddhayā—by faith; śravaṇa-sambhṛtayā—which is reinforced by the process of hearing; yathā—as; syāt—there is.
O worshipable Lord, those whose consciousness is polluted by illusion may try to purify themselves by ordinary worship, study of the Vedas, charity, austerity and ritual activities, but the purification they achieve is never as great as that attained by those pure souls who have developed a powerful transcendental faith in Your glories by regularly hearing them, O greatest of all.
Even if a pure devotee is lacking the above qualifications, such as Vedic study and austerity, if he has unflinching faith in Lord Kṛṣṇa the Lord will save him because of his devotion. On the other hand, if one becomes falsely proud of one's material qualifications, including ordinary piety, but does not devote himself to hearing and chanting the glories of Kṛṣṇa, the result will ultimately be nil. The transcendental spirit soul cannot be purified by any amount of material piety, charity or scholarship. Only the transcendental Supreme Lord can purify the transcendental living entity by bestowing His mercy within the heart. The demigods were astonished at their good fortune. Even by hearing about Kṛṣṇa, one achieves all perfection, but they had entered the Lord's own city and were seeing Him standing before them,
TEXT 10
syaAªastavaAx.~i„ar"zAuBaAzAyaDaUmake(tau:
ºaemaAya yaAe mauinaiBar"A‰R"ô$d"Ae÷maAna:
ya: s$aAtvataE: s$amaivaBaUtaya @Atmavaiṁ"r,"
vyaUhe"'icaRta: s$avanazA: svar"ita‚(maAya
syān nas tavāṅghrir aśubhāśaya-dhūmaketuḥ
kṣemāya yo munibhir ārdra-hṛdohyamānaḥ
yaḥ sātvataiḥ sama-vibhūtaya ātmavadbhir
vyūhe 'rcitaḥ savanaśaḥ svar-atikramāya
syāt—may they be; naḥ—for us; tava—Your; aṅghriḥ—the lotus feet; aśubha-āśaya—of our inauspicious mentality; dhūma-ketuḥ—the annihilating fire; kṣemāya—for achieving real benefit; yaḥ—which; munibhiḥ—by sages; ārdra-hṛdā—with melted hearts; uhyamānaḥ—are being carried; yaḥ—which; sātvataiḥ—by the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sama-vibhūtaye—for gaining opulence like His; ātma-vadbhiḥ—by those who are self-controlled; vyūhe—in the four-handed personal expansions of Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha; arcitaḥ—worshiped; savanaśaḥ—at the three junctions of each day; svaḥ-atikramāya—for crossing beyond the heavenly planets of this world.
Great sages, desiring the highest benefit in life, always cherish Your lotus feet within their hearts, which are melted by love for You. Similarly, Your self-controlled devotees, desiring to cross beyond the material kingdom of heaven to achieve opulence equal to Yours, worship Your lotus feet in the morning, at noon and in the evening. Thus, they meditate upon Your Lordship in Your quadruple expansion. May Your lotus feet become the blazing fire that burns to ashes all our inauspicious desires for material sense gratification.
The conditioned living entity can purify his existence simply by having firm faith in the transcendental glories of the Personality of Godhead. What then can be said of the extraordinary good fortune of the demigods, who were directly seeing Lord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet? Although we are presently afflicted by innumerable material desires, these desires are temporary. The eternal living entity is meant to experience a loving relationship with the supreme living entity, the Personality of Godhead; and the heart of the living entity who renders the Lord pure devotional service is completely satisfied.
The word dhūmaketu in this verse indicates a flaming comet or fire, which represents Lord Śiva. Lord Śiva is the master of the mode of ignorance, and Lord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet are compared to the comet, a symbol of the potency of Śiva, which can destroy all ignorance within the heart. The word sama-vibhūtaye ("for achieving equal opulence") indicates that the pure devotees go back home, back to Godhead, and enjoy the infinite bliss of the spiritual world. Lord Kṛṣṇa is endowed with unlimited opulent paraphernalia for enjoyment, and a liberated soul who goes to Kṛṣṇa's abode is awarded all opulence for serving the Lord. According to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, the word vyūhe in this verse indicates the three puruṣa incarnations, namely Mahā-Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, as well as Vāsudeva. If we can scientifically understand how Kṛṣṇa expands Himself to create the material world, we shall immediately experience that everything is the property of Kṛṣṇa and thus become free from the desire to exploit it for our own selfish purposes. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, the master of everyone and the reservoir of all opulences, and one should remember His lotus feet in the morning, at noon and in the evening. One who always remembers Kṛṣṇa and never forgets Him will experience real, blissful life beyond the pale shadow of material illusion.
TEXT 11
yaiêntyatae ‘ayatapaAiNAiBar"Dvar"A¢aAEE
‡ayyaA inaś&·(ivaiDanaezA h"ivagA{Rh"ItvaA
@DyaAtmayaAegA ota yaAeigAiBar"AtmamaAyaAM
ijaÁaAs$auiBa: par"maBaAgAvataE: par"Ií":
yaś cintyate prayata-pāṇibhir adhvarāgnau
trayyā nirukta-vidhineśa havir gṛhītvā
adhyātma-yoga uta yogibhir ātma-māyāṁ
jijñāsubhiḥ parama-bhāgavataiḥ parīṣṭaḥ
yaḥ—which; cintyate—are meditated upon; prayata-pāṇibhiḥ—by those with folded hands; adhvara-agnau—in the fire of sacrifice; trayyā—of the three Vedas (Ṛg, Yajur and Sāma); nirukta—comprising the essential understanding presented in the Nirukta; vidhinā-by the process; īśa-O Lord; haviḥ—the ghee meant for offering; gṛhītvā—taking; adhyātma-yoge—in that yoga system meant for realization of one's true self; uta—also; yogibhiḥ—by the practitioners of this yoga; ātma-māyām—about Your bewildering material energy; jijñāsubhiḥ—who are inquisitive; parama-bhāgavataiḥ—by the most elevated devotees; parīṣṭaḥ—perfectly worshiped.
Those about to offer oblations into the fire of sacrifice in accordance with the Ṛg, Yajur and Sāma Vedas meditate on Your lotus feet. Similarly, the practitioners of transcendental yoga meditate upon Your lotus feet, hoping for knowledge about Your divine mystic potency, and the most elevated pure devotees perfectly worship Your lotus feet, desiring to cross beyond Your illusory potency.
The words ātma-māyāṁ jijñāsubhiḥ are significant in this verse. The mystic yogīs (adhyātma-yoga uta yogibhiḥ) are eager to acquire knowledge of the Lord's mystic potencies, whereas the pure devotees (parama-bhāgavataiḥ) are eager to cross beyond the kingdom of illusion so that they can serve Lord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet in pure loving ecstasy. In any case, everyone is interested in the potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The atheistic material scientists are also fascinated by the external material potency of the Lord, and the gross sense gratifiers are attracted by the physical body, which is also ātma-māyā, or an expansion of the Lord's potency. Although all of the Lord's potencies are qualitatively one with the Lord, and therefore with each other, the blissful spiritual potency is nevertheless supreme because it establishes relationships between the Lord and the pure living entities on the platform of eternal happiness. Every living entity is originally a loving servitor of the Lord, and the spiritual energy of the Lord engages the living entity in his pure constitutional position beyond illusion.
Our dreaming and waking experiences are both activities of the mind; however, the activities we perform while awake are more valuable because they establish us in our permanent situation. Similarly, at every moment every living entity is experiencing one of the innumerable potencies of the Supreme Lord. However, the experience of the spiritual potency is more significant because it establishes the living entity in his eternal, constitutional position as a faithful servitor of the Personality of Godhead.
The demigods are glorifying the Lord's lotus feet because they are personally very eager to be purified by contact with those feet, as they state in the previous verse: syān nas tavāṅghrir aśubhāśaya-dhūmaketuḥ. When a sincere devotee eagerly desires to attain the shelter of the Lord's lotus feet, the Lord brings him to His personal abode, just as the demigods were brought to Dvārakā by Lord Kṛṣṇa's arrangement.
TEXT 12
payauRí"yaA tava ivaBaAe vanamaAlayaeyaM
s$aMs$paAiDaRnaI BagAvataI ‘aitapai¥avacC)$I:
ya: s$au‘aNAItamamauyaAhR"NAmaAd"d"ªaAe
BaUyaAts$ad"Ax.~i„ar"zAuBaAzAyaDaUmake(tau:
paryuṣṭayā tava vibho vana-mālayeyaṁ
saṁspārdhinī bhagavatī pratipatni-vac chrīḥ
yaḥ su-praṇītam amuyārhaṇam ādadan no
bhūyāt sadāṅghrir aśubhāśaya-dhūmaketuḥ
paryuṣṭayā—worn out; tava—Your; vibho—almighty Lord; vanamālayā—by the flower garland; iyam—she; saṁspārdhinī—feeling competitive; bhagavatī—the female counterpart of the Personality of Godhead; prati-patnī-vat—just like an envious co wife; śrīḥ—Lakṣmīdevī, the goddess of fortune; yaḥ—which Supreme Lord (Yourself); su-praṇītam—perfectly executed; amuyā—by this; arhaṇam—the offering; ādadan—accepting; naḥ—our; bhūyāt—may they be; sadā—always; aṅghriḥ—the lotus feet; aśubha-āśaya—of our impure desires; dhūma-ketuḥ—the fire of destruction.
O almighty Lord, You are so kind to Your servants that You have accepted the withered flower garland that we have placed on Your chest. Since the goddess of fortune makes her abode on Your transcendental chest, she will undoubtedly become agitated, like a jealous co-wife, upon seeing our offering also dwelling there. Yet You are so merciful that You neglect Your eternal consort Lakṣmī and accept our offering as most excellent worship. O merciful Lord, may Your lotus feet always act as a blazing fire to consume the inauspicious desires within our hearts.
In the Bhagavad-gītā (9.26) it is stated:
patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ
yo me bhaktyā prayacchati
tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam
aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ
Lord Kṛṣṇa gratefully and happily accepts even the most meager offering from His loving devotee. Lord Kṛṣṇa is conquered by the love of His pure devotees, just as a father is easily conquered by the most insignificant gift offered by his loving child. Unless a transcendentalist completely gives up the impersonal conception of life, he cannot make such a loving offering to the Lord. The process of meditation upon the Supersoul within the heart, called dhyāna-yoga, is not as pleasing to Kṛṣṇa as bhakti-yoga, or devotional service, because in dhyāna, or meditation, the yogī is trying to satisfy himself (and not the Lord) by attaining mystic powers. Similarly, in order to acquire material benefits from the Lord, ordinary people worship God in temples, churches and mosques. But one who desires actual spiritual perfection must be enlivened to always chant and hear the glories of the Lord. Such devotional enthusiasm is motivated by love of Godhead and is devoid of any selfish expectation.
The Lord is so kind that He neglects His own eternal consort, Lakṣmī, and gives preference to His humble devotee, just as a man will neglect the loving embrace of his wife when his affectionate child approaches him with a gift. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has pointed out that any garland worn by the Lord cannot be faded because all of the Lord's personal paraphernalia is completely transcendental and spiritually opulent. Similarly, there is no possibility that mundane jealousy could appear in the character of the goddess of fortune, who is as transcendental as Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself. Therefore the statements of the demigods are to be understood as humorous words inspired by intense love of Godhead. The demigods enjoy the protection of Lakṣmī and, ultimately, of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, and due to their confidence in their loving relationship with the Lord and His consort they feel free to speak in a joking way.
TEXT 13
ke(tauiṣiva‚(mayautaiṣpatatpataAk(Ae
yastae BayaABayak(r"Ae's$aur"de"vacamvaAe:
svagAARya s$aADauSau KalaeiSvatar"Aya BaUmana,
pad": paunaAtau BagAvana, BajataAmaGaM na:
ketus tri-vikrama-yutas tri-patat-patāko
yas te bhayābhaya-karo 'sura-deva-camvoḥ
svargāya sādhuṣu khaleṣv itarāya bhūman
padaḥ punātu bhagavan bhajatām aghaṁ naḥ
ketuḥ—a flagpole; tri-vikrama—three mighty steps in conquering Bali Mahārāja; yutaḥ—adorned by; tri-patat—falling into each of the three planetary systems; patākaḥ—the flag upon which; yaḥ—which; te—Your (lotus feet); bhaya-abhaya—fear and fearlessness; karaḥ—creating; asura-deva—of the demons and the demigods; camvoḥ—for the respective armies; svargāya—for the attainment of heaven; sādhuṣu—among the saintly demigods and devotees; khaleṣu—among the envious; itarāya—for just the opposite; bhūman—O most powerful Lord; pādaḥ—the lotus feet; punātu—may they purify; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhajatām—who are engaged in worshiping You; agham—the sins; naḥ—of us.
O omnipotent Lord, in Your incarnation as Trivikrama, You raised Your leg like a flagpole to break the shell of the universe, allowing the holy Ganges to flow down, like a banner of victory, in three branches throughout the three planetary systems. By three mighty steps of Your lotus feet, Your Lordship captured Bali Mahārāja, along with his universal kingdom. Your lotus feet inspire fear in the demons by driving them down to hell and fearlessness among Your devotees by elevating them to the perfection of heavenly life. We are sincerely trying to worship You, our Lord; therefore may Your lotus feet kindly free us from all of our sinful reactions.
In order to reclaim for the demigods the universal kingdom seized by Bali Mahārāja, Lord Kṛṣṇa, as described in the Eighth Canto of this great work, appeared as the beautiful dwarf brāhmaṇa Vāmana, who extended His foot upward to the outer limits of the universe. When the Lord's leg breached a hole in the universal shell, the holy Ganges water came flowing into the universe. This scene appeared like an upraised flagpole with a wonderfully flowing victory banner.
As stated in the śruti-mantras, caraṇaṁ pavitraṁ vitataṁ purāṇaṁ yena pūtas tarati duṣkṛtāni: "The lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead are most pure, all-pervading and the oldest of all. One who is purified by them crosses over all previous sinful activities." Throughout the universe the process of worshiping the lotus feet of the Lord is most famous.
TEXT 14
nasyaAetagAAva wva yasya vazAe Bavainta
“aṭAd"yastanauBa{taAe imaTaur"âRmaAnaA:
k(Alasya tae ‘ak{(itapaUś&SayaAe: par"sya
zAM nastanaAetau car"NA: pauś&SaAeÔamasya
nasy ota-gāva iva yasya vaśe bhavanti
brahmādayas tanu-bhṛto mithur ardyamānāḥ
kālasya te prakṛti-pūruṣayoḥ parasya
śaṁ nas tanotu caraṇaḥ puruṣottamasya
nasi—through the nose; ota—strung; gāvaḥ—oxen; iva—as if; yasya—of whose; vaśe—under the control; bhavanti—they exist; brahma-ādayaḥ—Brahmā and all others; tanu-bhṛtaḥ—the embodied living beings; mithuḥ—among each other; ardyamānāḥ—struggling; kālasya—of the force of time; te—of Yourself; prakṛti-pūruṣayoḥ—both the material nature and the living entity; parasya—who is beyond them; śam—transcendental fortune; naḥ—for us; tanotu—may they spread; caraṇaḥ—the lotus feet; puruṣa-uttamasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the transcendental entity who is superior to both material nature and the enjoyer of nature. May Your lotus feet bestow transcendental pleasure upon us. All of the great demigods, beginning with Brahmā, are embodied living entities. Struggling painfully with one another under the strict control of Your time factor, they are just like bulls dragged by ropes tied through their pierced noses.
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī states: nanu yuddhe devāsurādayaḥ parasparaṁ jayanti jīyante ca kim ahaṁ tatrety ata āhuḥ, nasīti. mithur mitho 'rdyamānā yuddhādibhiḥ pīḍyamānā brahmādayo 'pi yasya tava vaśe bhavanti na tu jaye parājaye vā svatantrāḥ. "In the perpetual battles between the demigods, or devotees of the Lord, and the demons, or nondevotees, each side sometimes conquers and is sometimes apparently defeated. One may argue that all this has nothing to do with the Personality of Godhead since it is based on nothing more than the interaction of opposing living entities. But every living entity is, however, strictly under the control of the Personality of Godhead, and victory and defeat are always in the hands of the Lord." This does not contradict the fact of the living entity's free will, since the Lord awards victory and defeat according to the merit of the living entities. In a legal battle neither the prosecution nor the defense can act independently of the legal system presided over by the authorized judge. Victory and defeat in the court are awarded by the judge, but the judge is acting according to the laws, which do not favor or discriminate against either side.
Similarly, the Personality of Godhead is awarding us the results of our previous activities. In order to discredit God, materialists frequently give the argument that oftentimes innocent people suffer whereas impious rogues enjoy life unimpeded. The fact is, however, that the Personality of Godhead is not a fool, as are the materialistic persons who place such arguments. The Lord can see our many previous lives; therefore He may allow one to enjoy or suffer in this life not only as a result of one's present activities, but also as a result of one's previous activities. For example, by working very hard a man may accumulate a fortune. If such a newly rich man then gives up his work and takes to a degenerate life, his fortune does not immediately disappear. On the other hand, one who is destined to become rich may now be working very hard, with discipline and austerity, and yet be without spending money. So a superficial observer might well be confused upon seeing the moral, hard-working man without funds and the degenerate, lazy man in possession of riches. Similarly, a materialistic fool without knowledge of past, present and future is unable to understand the perfect justice of the Personality of Godhead.
The example given in this verse to explain Kṛṣṇa's controlling power is appropriate. Although a bull is extremely powerful, he is easily controlled by a slight tug on a rope strung through his pierced nose. Similarly, even the most powerful politicians, scholars, demigods, etc., may immediately be put into an unbearable situation by the omnipotent Personality of Godhead. Therefore the demigods have not come to Dvārakā to proudly display their universal political and intellectual powers but to humbly surrender at the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 15
@syaAis$a he"tauś&d"yaisTaitas$aMyamaAnaAma,
@vya·(jaIvamah"taAmaipa k(AlamaAḍ":
s$aAe'yaM i‡aNAAiBar"iKalaApacayae ‘ava{Ôa:
k(AlaAe gABaIr"r"ya oÔamapaUś&Sastvama,
asyāsi hetur udaya-sthiti-saṁyamānām
avyakta-jīva-mahatām api kālam āhuḥ
so 'yaṁ tri-ṇābhir akhilāpacaye pravṛttaḥ
kālo gabhīra-raya uttama-pūruṣas tvam
asya—of this (universe); asi—You are; hetuḥ—the cause; udaya—of the creation; sthiti—maintenance; saṁyamānām—and annihilation; avyakta—of the unmanifest material nature; jīva—the individual living beings; mahatām—and of the mahat-tattva, with the manifest elements evolved from it; api—also; kālam—the controlling time factor; āhuḥ—You are said to be; saḥ ayam—this same personality; tri-ṇābhiḥ—appearing as a wheel with circumference divided into three parts (the year divided into four-month seasons); akhila—of everything; apacaye—in effecting the diminution; pravṛttaḥ—engaged; kālaḥ—the time factor; gabhīra—imperceptible; rayaḥ—the movement of which; uttama-pūruṣaḥ—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tvam—You are.
You are the cause of the creation, maintenance and destruction of this universe. As time, You regulate the subtle and manifest states of material nature and control every living being. As the threefold wheel of time You diminish all things by Your imperceptible actions, and thus You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The word gabhīra-rayaḥ, or "imperceptible speed and power," is significant. We observe that by the laws of nature all material things, including our own bodies, gradually disintegrate. Although we can perceive the long-term results of this aging process, we cannot experience the process itself. For example, no one can feel how his hair or fingernails are growing. We perceive the cumulative result of their growth, but from moment to moment we cannot experience it. Similarly, a house gradually decays until it is demolished. From moment to moment we cannot perceive exactly how this is happening, but in the course of longer intervals of time we can actually see the deterioration of the house. In other words, we can experience the results or manifestations of aging and deterioration, but as it is taking place the process itself is imperceptible. This is the wonderful potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form of time.
The word tri-ṇābhiḥ indicates that according to astrological calculation of the sun's movements, the year can be divided into three sections: those represented by Aries, Taurus, Gemini and Cancer; Leo, Virgo, Libra and Scorpio; and Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces.
The word uttama-pūruṣa, or puruṣottama, is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā (15.18):
yasmāt kṣaram atīto 'ham
akṣarād api cottamaḥ
ato 'smi loke vede ca
prathitaḥ puruṣottamaḥ
"Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the infallible, and because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in the world and in the Vedas as that Supreme Person."
TEXT 16
tvaÔa: paumaAna, s$amaiDagAmya yayaAsya vaIya<
DaÔae mah"Antaimava gABaRmamaAeGavaIyaR:
s$aAe'yaM tayaAnaugAta @Atmana @ANx"k(AezAM
hE"maM s$as$ajaR baih"r"Avar"NAEś&paetama,
tvattaḥ pumān samadhigamya yayāsya vīryaṁ
dhatte mahāntam iva garbham amogha-vīryaḥ
so 'yaṁ tayānugata ātmana āṇḍa-kośaṁ
haimaṁ sasarja bahir āvaraṇair upetam
tvattaḥ—from You; pumān—the puruṣa-avatāra, Mahā-Viṣṇu; samadhigamya—obtaining; yayā—along with which (material nature); asya—of this creation; vīryam—the potential seed; dhatte—He impregnates; mahāntam—the mahat-tattva, the raw amalgamation of matter; iva garbham—like an ordinary fetus; amogha-vīryaḥ—He whose semen is never wasted; saḥ ayam—that same (mahat-tattva); tayā—with the material nature; anugataḥ—joined; ātmanaḥ—from itself; āṇḍa-kośam—the primeval egg of the universe; haimam—golden; sasarja—produced; bahiḥ—on its outside; āvaraṇaiḥ—with several coverings; upetam—endowed.
My dear Lord, the original puruṣa-avatāra, Mahā-Viṣṇu, acquires His creative potency from You. Thus with infallible energy He impregnates material nature, producing the mahat-tattva. Then the mahat-tattva, the amalgamated material energy, endowed with the potency of the Lord, produces from itself the primeval golden egg of the universe, which is covered by various layers of material elements.
In the previous verses the supremacy of the Personality of Godhead has been established in relation to the living entity and material nature. In this verse it is clearly stated that Lord Kṛṣṇa is the source of the greatest Viṣṇu incarnation, Mahā-Viṣṇu, and that Mahā-Viṣṇu acquires His creative potency from Lord Kṛṣṇa. It would therefore be foolish to surmise that Lord Kṛṣṇa is an expansion of Viṣṇu. In this regard the opinion of the demigods, headed by Brahmā, can be taken as final.
TEXT 17
taÔasTauSaê jagAtaê BavaAnaDaIzAAee
yanmaAyayaAetTagAuNAivai‚(yayaAepanaItaAna,
@TaARÃauSaªaipa ô$SaIk(patae na ilaæaAe
yae'nyae svata: pair"ô$taAd"ipa ibaByaita sma
tat tasthuṣaś ca jagataś ca bhavān adhīśo
yan māyayottha-guṇa-vikriyayopanītān
arthāñ juṣann api hṛṣīka-pate na lipto
ye 'nye svataḥ parihṛtād api bibhyati sma
tat—therefore; tasthuṣaḥ—of everything stationary; ca—and; jagataḥ—mobile; ca—as well; bhavān—You (are); adhīśaḥ—the ultimate controller; yat—because; māyayā—by material nature; uttha—raised; guṇa—of (nature's) modes; vikriyayā—by the transformation (i.e. by the activity of the sense organs of the living beings); upanītān—gathered together; arthān—the sense objects; juṣan—engaging with; api—even though; hṛṣīka-pate—O master of everyone's senses; na liptaḥ—You are never touched; ye—those who; anye—others; svataḥ—on their own strength; parihṛtāt—on account of (objects of sense gratification); api—even; bibhyati—they fear; sma—indeed.
O Lord, You are the supreme creator of this universe and the ultimate controller of all moving and nonmoving living entities. You are Hṛṣīkeśa, the supreme controller of all sensory activity, and thus You never become contaminated or entangled in the course of Your supervision of the infinite sensory activities within the material creation. On the other hand, other living entities, even yogīs and philosophers, are disturbed and frightened simply by remembering the material objects that they have supposedly renounced in their pursuit of enlightenment.
The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa is within the heart of every conditioned soul and guides the living entity in the pursuit and experience of sense gratification. The disappointing results of such activities gradually convince the conditioned soul to reject material life and surrender again to the Lord within his heart. Lord Kṛṣṇa is never affected by the futile attempts of the living entities to enjoy His illusory energy. For the Personality of Godhead there is no possibility of fear or disturbance, because nothing is ultimately separate from Him.
TEXT 18
smaAyaAvalaAek(lavad"izARtaBaAvah"Air"-
”aUmaNx"la‘aih"tas$aAEr"taman‡azAAENxE":
patnyastau SaAex"zAs$ah"›amanaṆḷbaANAEr,"
yasyaein‰"yaM ivamaiTatauM k(r"NAEnaR ivaBvya:
smāyāvaloka-lava-darśita-bhāva-hāri-
bhrū-maṇḍala-prahita-saurata-mantra-śauṇḍaiḥ
patnyas tu ṣoḍaśa-sahasram anaṅga-bāṇair
yasyendriyaṁ vimathituṁ karaṇair na vibhvyaḥ
smāya—smiling; avaloka—of a glance; lava—by fractions; darśita—having shown; bhāva—their feelings; hāri—enchanting; bhrū-maṇḍala—by which arch of the eyebrows; prahita—launched; saurata—of conjugal love; mantra—messages; śauṇḍaiḥ—by the impudent advances; patnyaḥ—wives; tu—but; ṣoḍaśa-sahasram—sixteen thousand; anaṅga—of Cupid; bāṇaiḥ—by the arrows; yasya—whose; indriyam—senses; vimathitum—to agitate; karaṇaiḥ—with all their devices; na vibhvyaḥ—they were not able.
My Lord, You are living with sixteen thousand exquisitely beautiful, aristocratic wives. By their irresistible coy and smiling glances and by their lovely arching eyebrows, they send You messages of eager conjugal love. But they are completely unable to disturb the mind and senses of Your Lordship.
In the previous verse it was clearly stated that no material object can attract the senses of the Lord. Now in this verse it is demonstrated that the Lord has no desire to enjoy even spiritual sense gratification. Kṛṣṇa is complete in Himself. He is the reservoir of all pleasure, and He does not lust after anything material or spiritual. The argument may by given that Kṛṣṇa, in order to please His wife Satyabhāmā, stole a pārijāta flower from heaven and thus appeared to be a henpecked husband under the control of His loving wife. But although Kṛṣṇa is sometimes conquered by the love of His devotees, He is never influenced by the desire to enjoy like an ordinary, lusty materialistic person. The nondevotees cannot understand the overwhelming loving feelings exchanged between the Lord and His pure devotees. Kṛṣṇa may be conquered by our intense love for Him, and thus pure devotees can control the Lord. For example, the elderly gopīs in Vṛndāvana would clap their hands in different rhythms to make Kṛṣṇa dance, and in Dvārakā Satyabhāmā ordered Kṛṣṇa to bring her a flower as proof of His love for her. As stated in Śrīnivāsa Ācārya's song to the Six Gosvāmīs, gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau muhuḥ: the love between the Lord and His pure devotee is an ocean of spiritual bliss. But at the same time, Kṛṣṇa remains completely self-satisfied. Kṛṣṇa indifferently gave up the company of the incomparable young damsels of Vraja-bhūmi, the gopīs, and went to Mathurā at the request of His uncle, Akrūra. Thus neither the gopīs of Vṛndāvana nor the queens of Dvārakā could arouse an enjoying spirit in Kṛṣṇa. When all is said and done, pleasure in this world means sex. But this mundane sexual attraction is simply a perverted reflection of the transcendental loving affairs between Kṛṣṇa and His eternal associates in the spiritual world. The gopīs of Vṛndāvana are unsophisticated village girls, whereas the queens in Dvārakā are aristocratic young ladies. But both the gopīs and the queens are overwhelmed with love for Kṛṣṇa. As the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa displays the highest perfection of beauty, strength, wealth, fame, knowledge and renunciation and is thus completely satisfied by His own supreme position. He reciprocates spiritual loving affairs with the gopīs and queens simply for their sake. Only fools think that Lord Kṛṣṇa could be attracted by the perverted illusory pleasures to which we poor conditioned souls are so blindly attached. Therefore everyone should recognize the supreme transcendental position of the Personality of Godhead and surrender to Him. That is the clear implication of this statement by the demigods.
TEXT 19
ivaBvyastavaAma{tak(TaAed"vah"AiṣlaAefyaA:
paAd"Avanaejas$air"ta: zAmalaAina h"ntauma,
@Anau™avaM ™auitaiBar"x.~i„ajamaṆḷs$aṆEḷs$a,
taITaRã"yaM zAuicaSad"sta opas$pa{zAinta
vibhvyas tavāmṛta-kathoda-vahās tri-lokyāḥ
pādāvane-ja-saritaḥ śamalāni hantum
ānuśravaṁ śrutibhir aṅghri-jam aṅga-saṅgais
tīrtha-dvayaṁ śuci-ṣadas ta upaspṛśanti
vibhvyaḥ—are able; tava—Your; amṛta—nectarean; kathā—of the topics; uda-vahāḥ—the water-bearing rivers; tri-lokyāḥ—of the three worlds; pāda-avane—from the bathing of Your lotus feet; ja—born; saritaḥ—rivers; śamalāni—all contamination; hantum—to destroy; ānuśravam—consisting of the process of hearing from bona fide authority; śrutibhiḥ—with the ears; aṅghri-jam—consisting of (the holy rivers) generated from Your lotus feet; aṅga-saṅgaiḥ—by direct physical contact; tīrtha-dvayam—these two kinds of holy places; śuci-ṣadaḥ—those who are striving for purification; te—Your; upaspṛśanti—they approach to associate with.
The nectar-bearing rivers of discussions about You, and also the holy rivers generated from the bathing of Your lotus feet, are able to destroy all contamination within the three worlds. Those who are striving for purification associate with the holy narrations of Your glories by hearing them with their ears, and they associate with the holy rivers flowing from Your lotus feet by physically bathing in them.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura states, ānuśravaṁ guror uccāraṇam anuśrūyante: "One should hear about Kṛṣṇa by hearing from the spiritual master." The bona fide spiritual master describes the pastimes, potencies and incarnations of the Personality of Godhead to his disciple. If the spiritual master is bona fide and if the disciple is sincere and obedient, then the communication between guru and disciple is just like nectar, both for the guru and the disciple. Ordinary persons cannot even imagine the special pleasure experienced by the devotees of the Lord. Such nectarean speaking and hearing destroys all contamination within the heart of a conditioned soul, the primary contamination being the desire to live without serving Kṛṣṇa.
The other nectar described here is caraṇāmṛta, the nectarean waters that bathe the Lord's feet. Lord Vāmanadeva bathed His own lotus foot by kicking a hole in the universal covering so that the sacred Ganges water washed His toes and fell into the universe. The Yamunā River also washed Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet when the Lord appeared on this planet five thousand years ago. Kṛṣṇa sported daily with His boyfriends and girlfriends in the Yamunā River, and consequently that river is also caraṇāmṛta. One should therefore try to take bath in the Ganges or Yamunā.
Every morning in ISKCON temples, the lotus feet of the Deity of Kṛṣṇa are bathed, and the water thus sanctified is also called caraṇāmṛta, the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet. Śrīla Prabhupāda taught his disciples and followers to come before the Deities each morning and drink three drops of the caraṇāmṛta from the Deities' bathing.
In all these ways one can purify his heart and relish spiritual bliss. When one is fixed on the platform of spiritual bliss, then one does not take another birth in the material world. In this verse the word śuci-ṣadaḥ is significant: one must engage in the purified activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One must learn to serve the Lord from the bona fide spiritual master, whose instructions one should accept without speculation. Those who are attached to the phantasmagoria of this world sometimes concoct their own whimsical concepts of God. But only from the bona fide spiritual master can we get perfect and pure knowledge about the Supreme Personality of Godhead and devotional service to Him. Such knowledge may be found in all the books of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda.



Song Srila Sukadeva Gosvami offers Prayers to Krsna
TEXT 49
BavaBayamapah"ntauM ÁaAnaivaÁaAnas$aArM"
inagAmak{(āu"pajaœe" Ba{"Ṇḷvaãe"d"s$aAr"ma,
@ma{tamaud"iDataêApaAyayaṁ{"tyavagAARna,
pauś&Sama{SaBamaAâM k{(SNAs$aMÁaM nataAe'isma
bhava-bhayam apahantuṁ jñāna-vijñāna-sāraṁ
nigama-kṛd upajahre bhṛṅga-vad veda-sāram
amṛtam udadhitaś cāpāyayad bhṛtya-vargān
puruṣam ṛṣabham ādyaṁ kṛṣṇa-saṁjñaṁ nato 'smi
bhava—of material life; bhayam—the fear; apahantum—in order to take away; jñāna-vijñāna—of knowledge and self-realization; sāram—the essence; nigama—of the Vedas; kṛt—the author; upajahre—delivered; bhṛṅga-vat—like a bee; veda-sāram—the essential meaning of the Vedas; amṛtam—the nectar; udadhitaḥ—from the ocean; ca—and; apāyayat—made to drink; bhṛtya-vargān—His many devotees; puruṣam—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣabham—the greatest; ādyam—the first of all beings; kṛṣṇa-saṁjñam—named Lord Kṛṣṇa; nataḥ—bowed down; asmi—I am.
I offer my obeisances to that Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original and greatest of all beings, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He is the author of the Vedas, and just to destroy His devotees' fear of material existence, like a bee He has collected this nectarean essence of all knowledge and self-realization. Thus He has awarded to His many devotees this nectar from the ocean of bliss, and by His mercy they have drunk it.
Just as a bee extracts nectar from a flower without harming the flower, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa extracts the essence of all Vedic knowledge without disturbing the elaborate system of Vedic advancement. In other words, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa establishes Himself as the goal of Vedic knowledge without destroying preliminary, inferior processes that may be applicable to grossly materialistic men. Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī thus concludes by offering his obeisances to the spiritual master of the entire universe, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda to the Eleventh Canto, Twenty-ninth Chapter, of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatamm, entitled "Bhakti-yoga."





Song Prayers by Daruka to Lord Krsna
TEXT 43
@pazyatastva»ar"NAAmbaujaM ‘aBaAe
ā{"ií": ‘aNAí"A tamais$a ‘aivaí"A
id"zAAe na jaAnae na laBae ca zAAintaM
yaTaA inazAAyaAmaux"]pae ‘aNAíe"
apaśyatas tvac-caraṇāmbujaṁ prabho
dṛṣṭiḥ praṇaṣṭā tamasi praviṣṭā
diśo na jāne na labhe ca śāntiṁ
yathā niśāyām uḍupe praṇaṣṭe
apaśyataḥ—of me, who am not seeing; tvat—Your; caraṇa-ambujam—lotus feet; prabho—O master; dṛṣṭiḥ—the power of vision; praṇaṣṭā—is destroyed; tamasi—into darkness; praviṣṭā—having entered; diśaḥ—the directions; na jāne—I do not know; na labhe—I cannot obtain; ca—and; śāntim—peace; yathā—just as; niśāyām—in the night; uḍupe—when the moon; praṇaṣṭe—has become new.
Dāruka said: Just as on a moonless night people are merged into darkness and cannot find their way, now that I have lost sight of Your lotus feet, my Lord, I have lost my vision and am wandering blindly in darkness. I cannot tell my direction, nor can I find any peace.

Part Canto 12

Song Prayers by Markandeya Rsi to Nara Narayana Rsi
TEXT 40
™aImaAkR(Nxe"ya ovaAca
ikM( vaNARyae tava ivaBaAe yaāu"d"Iir"taAe's$au:
s$aMs$pand"tae tamanau vaAx.~manawin‰"yaAiNA
s$pand"inta vaE tanauBa{taAmajazAvaRyaAeê
svasyaApyaTaAipa BajataAmais$a BaAvabanDau:
śrī-mārkaṇḍeya uvāca
kiṁ varṇaye tava vibho yad-udīrito 'suḥ
saṁspandate tam anu vāṅ-mana-indriyāṇi
spandanti vai tanu-bhṛtām aja-śarvayoś ca
svasyāpy athāpi bhajatām asi bhāva-bandhuḥ
śrī-mārkaṇḍeyaḥ uvāca—Śrī Mārkaṇḍeya said; kim—what; varṇaye—shall I describe; tava—about You; vibho—O almighty Lord; yat—by whom; udīritaḥ—moved; asuḥ—the vital air; saṁspandate—comes to life; tam anu—following it; vāk—the power of speech; manaḥ—the mind; indriyāṇi—and the senses; spandanti—begin to act; vai—indeed; tanu-bhṛtām—of all embodied living beings; aja-śarvayoḥ—of Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva; ca—as well; svasya—of myself; api—also; atha api—nevertheless; bhajatām—for those who are worshiping; asi—You become; bhāva-bandhuḥ—the intimate loving friend.
Śrī Mārkaṇḍeya said: O almighty Lord, how can I possibly describe You? You awaken the vital air, which then impels the mind, senses and power of speech to act. This is true for all ordinary conditioned souls and even for great demigods like Brahmā and Śiva. So it is certainly true for me. Nevertheless, You become the intimate friend of those who worship You.
TEXT 41
maUtaI= wmae BagAvataAe BagAvaMiṣlaAefyaA:
ºaemaAya taApaivar"maAya ca ma{tyauijatyaE
naAnaA ibaBaSyaRivataumanyatanaUyaRTaedM"
s$a{"î"A paunaƒaRs$ais$a s$avaRimavaAeNARnaAiBa:
mūrtī ime bhagavato bhagavaṁs tri-lokyāḥ
kṣemāya tāpa-viramāya ca mṛtyu-jityai
nānā bibharṣy avitum anya-tanūr yathedaṁ
sṛṣṭvā punar grasasi sarvam ivorṇanābhiḥ
mūrtī—the two personal forms; ime—these; bhagavataḥ—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhagavan—O Lord; tri-lokyāḥ—of all the three worlds; kṣemāya—for the ultimate benefit; tāpa—of material misery; viramāya—for the cessation; ca—and; mṛtyu—of death; jityai—for the conquest; nānā—various; bibharṣi—You manifest; avitum—for the purpose of protecting; anya—other; tanūḥ—transcendental bodies; yathā—just as; idam—this universe; sṛṣṭvā—having created; punaḥ—once again; grasasi—You swallow up; sarvam—entirely; iva—just like; ūrṇa-nābhiḥ—a spider.
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, these two personal forms of Yours have appeared in order  to bestow the ultimate benefit for the three worlds—the cessation of material misery and the conquest of death. My Lord, although You create this universe and then assume many transcendental forms to protect it, You also swallow it up, just like a spider who spins and later withdraws its web.
TEXT 42
tasyaAivatau: isTar"care"izAtaur"x.~i„amaUlaM
yatsTaM na k(maRgAuNAk(Alar"ja: s$pa{zAinta
yaãE" stauvainta inanamainta yajantyaBaIºNAM
DyaAyainta vaed"ô$d"yaA maunayastad"AptyaE
tasyāvituḥ sthira-careśitur aṅghri-mūlaṁ
yat-sthaṁ na karma-guṇa-kāla-rajaḥ spṛśanti
yad vai stuvanti ninamanti yajanty abhīkṣṇaṁ
dhyāyanti veda-hṛdayā munayas tad-āptyai
tasya—of Him; avituḥ—the protector; sthira-cara—of the stationary and moving living beings; īśituḥ—the supreme controller; aṅghri-mūlam—the soles of His lotus feet; yat-stham—one who is situated at which; na—do not; karma-guṇa-kāla—of material work, material qualities and time; rajaḥ—the contamination; spṛśanti—touch; yat—whom; vai—indeed; stuvanti—praise; ninamanti—bow down to; yajanti—worship; abhīkṣṇam—at every moment; dhyāyanti—meditate upon; veda-hṛdayāḥ—who have assimilated the essence of the Vedas; munayaḥ—sages; tat-āptyai—for the purpose of achieving Him.
Because You are the protector and the supreme controller of all moving and nonmoving beings, anyone who takes shelter of Your lotus feet can never be touched by the contamination of material work, material qualities or time. Great sages who have assimilated the essential meaning of the Vedaṣ offer their prayers to You. To gain Your association, they bow down to You at every opportunity and constantly worship You and meditate upon You.
TEXT 43
naAnyaM tavaAx.~„yaupanayaAd"pavagARmaUtaeR:
ºaemaM janasya pair"taAeiBaya wRzA ivaá:
“aṭA ibaBaetyalamataAe iã"par"ADaRiDaSNya:
k(Alasya tae ik(mauta tatk{(taBaAEitak(AnaAma,
nānyaṁ tavāṅghry-upanayād apavarga-mūrteḥ
kṣemaṁ janasya parito-bhiya īśa vidmaḥ
brahmā bibhety alam ato dvi-parārdha-dhiṣṇyaḥ
kālasya te kim uta tat-kṛta-bhautikānām
na anyam—no other; tava—Your; aṅghri—of the lotus feet; upanayāt—than the attainment; apavarga-mūrteḥ—who are liberation personified; kṣemam—benefit; janasya—for the person; paritaḥ—on all sides; bhiyaḥ—who is fearful; īśa—O Lord; vidmaḥ—do we know; brahmā—Lord Brahmā; bibheti—is afraid; alam—very much; ataḥ—on account of this; dvi-parārdha—the entire duration of the universe; dhiṣṇyaḥ—the period of whose reign; kālasya—because of time; te—Your feature; kim uta—then what to speak; tat-kṛta—created by him, Brahmā; bhautikānām—of the mundane creatures.
My dear Lord, even Lord Brahmā, who enjoys his exalted position for the entire duration of the universe, fears the passage of time. Then what to speak of those whom Brahmā creates, the conditioned souls. They encounter fearful dangers at every step of their lives. I do not know of any relief from this fear except shelter at Your lotus feet, which are the very form of liberation.
TEXT 44
taãE" BajaAmya{taiDayastava paAd"maUlaM
ih"tvaed"maAtmacC$id" caAtmagAur"Ae: par"sya
de"h"AâpaATaRmas$ad"ntyamaiBaÁamaA‡aM
ivande"ta tae taihR" s$avaRmanaIiSataATaRma,
tad vai bhajāmy ṛta-dhiyas tava pāda-mūlaṁ
hitvedam ātma-cchadi cātma-guroḥ parasya
dehādy apārtham asad antyam abhijña-mātraṁ
vindeta te tarhi sarva-manīṣitārtham
tat—therefore; vai—indeed; bhajāmi—I worship; ṛta-dhiyaḥ—of Him whose intelligence always perceives the truth; tava—of You; pāda-mūlam—the soles of the lotus feet; hitvā—giving up; idam—this; ātma-chadi—covering of the self; ca—and; ātma-guroḥ—of the master of the soul; parasya—who is the Supreme Truth; deha-ādi—the material body and other false designations; apārtham—useless; asat—insubstantial; antyam—temporary; abhijña-mātram—only imagined to have a separate existence; vindeta—one obtains; te—from You; tarhi—then; sarva—all; manīṣita—desired; artham—objects.
Therefore I worship Your lotus feet, having renounced my identification with the material body and everything else that covers my true self. These useless, insubstantial and temporary coverings are merely presumed to be separate from You, whose intelligence encompasses all truth. By attaining You—the Supreme Godhead and the master of the soul—one attains everything desirable.
One who falsely identifies himself as the material body or mind automatically feels entitled to exploit the material world. But when we realize our eternal spiritual nature and Lord Kṛṣṇa's supreme proprietorship over all that be, we renounce our false enjoying propensity by the strength of spiritual knowledge.
TEXT 45
s$aÔvaM r"jastama wtaIzA tavaAtmabanDaAe
maAyaAmayaA: isTaitalayaAed"yahe"tavaAe'sya
laIlaA Da{taA yad"ipa s$aÔvamayaI ‘azAAntyaE
naAnyae na{NAAM vyas$anamaAeh"iBayaê yaAByaAma,
sattvaṁ rajas tama itīśa tavātma-bandho
māyā-mayāḥ sthiti-layodaya-hetavo 'sya
līlā dhṛtā yad api sattva-mayī praśāntyai
nānye nṛṇāṁ vyasana-moha-bhiyaś ca yābhyām
sattvam—goodness; rajaḥ—passion; tamaḥ—ignorance; iti—the modes of nature thus termed; īśa—O Lord; tava—Your; ātma-bandho—O supreme friend of the soul; māyā-mayāḥ—produced from Your personal energy; sthiti-laya-udaya—of maintenance, destruction and creation; hetavaḥ—the causes; asya—of this universe; līlāḥ—as pastimes; dhṛtāḥ—assumed; yat api—although; sattva-mayī—that which is in the mode of goodness; praśāntyai—for liberation; na—not; anye—the other two; nṛṇām—for persons; vyasana—danger; moha—bewilderment; bhiyaḥ—and fear; ca—also; yābhyām—from which.
O my Lord, O supreme friend of the conditioned soul, although for the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this world You accept the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance, which constitute Your illusory potency, You specifically employ the mode of goodness to liberate the conditioned souls. The other two modes simply bring them suffering, illusion and fear.
The words līlā dhṛtāḥ indicate that the creative activities of Lord Brahmā, the destructive activities of Lord Śiva and the sustaining functions of Lord Viṣṇu are all pastimes of the Absolute Truth, Lord Kṛṣṇa. But ultimately only Lord Viṣṇu can award liberation from the clutches of material illusion, as indicated by the words sattva-mayī praśāntyai.
Our passionate and ignorant activities cause great suffering, illusion and fear for us and others; therefore they should be given up. One should become firmly situated in the mode of goodness and live peacefully on the spiritual platform. The essence of goodness is to renounce selfish interest in all one's activities and thus dedicate one's entire being to the Supreme Being, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is the source of our existence.
TEXT 46
tasmaAÔavaeh" BagAvaªaTa taAvak(AnaAM
zAuflaAM tanauM svad"iyataAM ku(zAlaA Bajainta
yats$aAtvataA: pauś&Saṝ&pamauzAinta s$aÔvaM
laAek(Ae yataAe'BayamautaAtmas$auKaM na caAnyata,
tasmāt taveha bhagavann atha tāvakānāṁ
śuklāṁ tanuṁ sva-dayitāṁ kuśalā bhajanti
yat sātvatāḥ puruṣa-rūpam uśanti sattvaṁ
loko yato 'bhayam utātma-sukhaṁ na cānyat
tasmāt—therefore; tava—Your; iha—in this world; bhagavan—O Supreme Lord; atha—and; tāvakānām—of Your devotees; śuklām—transcendental; tanum—the personal form; sva-dayitām—most dear to them; kuśalāḥ—those who are expert in spiritual knowledge; bhajanti—worship; yat—because; sātvatāḥ—the great devotees; puruṣa—of the original Personality of Godhead; rūpam—the form; uśanti—consider; sattvam—the mode of goodness; lokaḥ—the spiritual world; yataḥ—from which; abhayam—fearlessness; uta—and; ātma-sukham—the happiness of the soul; na—not; ca—and; anyat—any other.
O Lord, because fearlessness, spiritual happiness and the kingdom of God are all achieved through the mode of pure goodness, Your devotees consider this mode, but never passion and ignorance, to be a direct manifestation of You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Intelligent persons thus worship Your beloved transcendental form, composed of pure goodness, along with the spiritual forms of Your pure devotees.
Intelligent persons do not worship the demigods, who represent the modes of passion and ignorance. Lord Brahmā represents passion, Lord Śiva represents ignorance, and demigods such as Indra also represent the modes of material nature. But Lord Viṣṇu, or Nārāyaṇa, represents pure spiritual goodness, which brings one realization of the spiritual world, freedom from fear, and spiritual bliss. Such benefits can never be derived from impure, material goodness, for it is always mixed with the modes of passion and ignorance. As clearly indicated in this verse, the transcendental form of God is fully constituted of eternal spiritual goodness and thus has no tinge of the material mode of goodness, passion or ignorance.
TEXT 47
tasmaE namaAe BagAvatae pauś&SaAya BaU°ae
ivaṅAya ivaṅgAur"vae par"dE"vataAya
naAr"AyaNAAya [%Sayae ca nar"AeÔamaAya
hM"s$aAya s$aMyataigAre" inagAmaeṅr"Aya
tasmai namo bhagavate puruṣāya bhūmne
viśvāya viśva-gurave para-daivatāya
nārāyaṇāya ṛṣaye ca narottamāya
haṁsāya saṁyata-gire nigameśvarāya
tasmai—to Him; namaḥ—my obeisances; bhagavate—to the Godhead; puruṣāya—the Supreme Person; bhūmne—the all-pervading one; viśvāya—the all-inclusive manifestation of the universe; viśva-gurave—the spiritual master of the universe; para-daivatāya—the supremely worshipable Deity; nārāyaṇāya—to Lord Nārāyaṇa; ṛṣaye—the sage; ca—and; nara-uttamāya—to the best of human beings; haṁsāya—situated in perfect purity; saṁyata-gire—who has controlled his speech; nigama-īśvarāya—the master of the Vedic scriptures.
I offer my humble obeisances to Him, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the all-pervading and all-inclusive form of the universe, as well as its spiritual master. I bow down to Lord Nārāyaṇa, the supremely worshipable Deity appearing as a sage, and also to the saintly Nara, the best of human beings, who is fixed in perfect goodness, fully in control of his speech, and the propagator of the Vedic literatures.
TEXT 48
yaM vaE na vaed" ivataTaAºapaTaE”aRmaŪ"I:
s$antaM svake(Svas$auSau ô$âipa ā{"fpaTaeSau
tanmaAyayaAva{tamaita: s$a o Wva s$aAºaAā,"
@AâstavaAiKalagAur"Aeś&pas$aAâ vaed"ma,
yaṁ vai na veda vitathākṣa-pathair bhramad-dhīḥ
santaṁ svakeṣv asuṣu hṛdy api dṛk-patheṣu
tan-māyayāvṛta-matiḥ sa u eva sākṣād
ādyas tavākhila-guror upasādya vedam
yam—whom; vai—indeed; na veda—does not recognize; vitatha—deceptive; akṣa-pathaiḥ—by methods of empirical perception; bhramat—becoming diverted; dhīḥ—whose intelligence; santam—present; svakeṣu—within one's own; asuṣu—senses; hṛdi—within the heart; api—even; dṛk-patheṣu—among perceived objects of the external world; tat-māyayā—by His illusory potency; āvṛta—covered over; matiḥ—his understanding; saḥ—he; u—even; eva—indeed; sākṣāt—directly; ādyaḥ—originally (in ignorance); tava—of You; akhila-guroḥ—the spiritual master of all living beings; upasādya—obtaining; vedam—the knowledge of the Vedas.
A materialist, his intelligence perverted by the action of his deceptive senses, cannot recognize You at all, although You are always present within his own senses and heart and also among the objects of his perception. Yet even though one's understanding has been covered by Your illusory potency, if one obtains Vedic knowledge from You, the supreme spiritual master of all, he can directly understand You.
TEXT 49
yaÚ"zARnaM inagAma @Atmar"h":‘ak(AzAM
mau÷inta ya‡a k(vayaAe'japar"A yatanta:
taM s$avaRvaAd"ivaSaya‘aitaṝ&pazAIlaM
vande" mah"Apauś&SamaAtmainagAUX#baAeDama,
yad-darśanaṁ nigama ātma-rahaḥ-prakāśaṁ
muhyanti yatra kavayo 'ja-parā yatantaḥ
taṁ sarva-vāda-viṣaya-pratirūpa-śīlaṁ
vande mahā-puruṣam ātma-nigūḍha-bodham
yat—of whom; darśanam—the vision; nigame—in the Vedas; ātma—of the Supreme Soul; rahaḥ—the mystery; prakāśam—which reveals; muhyanti—become bewildered; yatra—about which; kavayaḥ—great learned authorities; aja-parāḥ—headed by Brahmā; yatantaḥ—endeavoring; tam—to Him; sarva-vāda—of all different philosophies; viṣaya—the subject matter; pratirūpa—adjusting itself as suitable; śīlam—whose personal nature; vande—I offer my homage; mahā-puruṣam—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātma—from the spirit soul; nigūḍha—hidden; bodham—understanding.
My dear Lord, the Vedic literatures alone reveal confidential knowledge of Your supreme personality, and thus even such great scholars as Lord Brahmā himself are bewildered in their attempt to understand You through empirical methods. Each philosopher understands You according to his particular speculative conclusions. I worship that Supreme Person, knowledge of whom is hidden by the bodily designations covering the conditioned soul's spiritual identity.
Even great demigods like Brahmā are bewildered in their speculative attempts to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Each philosopher is covered by a unique combination of the modes of nature and thus describes the Supreme Truth according to his own material conditioning. Therefore even strenuous empirical endeavor will never bring one to the conclusion of all knowledge. The highest knowledge is Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and one can understand Him only by fully surrendering to Him and serving Him with love. This is why Mārkaṇḍeya Ṛṣi states here, vande mahā-puruṣam: "I simply worship that Supreme Personality." Those who try to worship God but at the same time continue speculating or acting fruitively will attain only mixed and bewildering results. To be pure a devotee must give up all fruitive activity and mental speculation; in that way his loving service to the Lord will yield perfect knowledge of the Supreme. Only this perfection can satisfy the eternal soul.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda to the Twelfth Canto, Eighth Chapter, of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Mārkaṇḍeya's Prayers to Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi."


Song Prayers by Markandeya Rsi
TEXT 2
™aImaAkR(Nxe"ya ovaAca
‘apaªaAe'smyax.~i„amaUlaM tae
‘apaªaABayadM" h"re"
yanmaAyayaAipa ivabauDaA
mau÷inta ÁaAnak(AzAyaA
śrī-mārkaṇḍeya uvāca
prapanno 'smy aṅghri-mūlaṁ te
prapannābhaya-daṁ hare
yan-māyayāpi vibudhā
muhyanti jñāna-kāśayā
śrī-mārkaṇḍeyaḥ uvāca—Śrī Mārkaṇḍeya said; prapannaḥ—surrendered; asmi—I am; aṅghri-mūlam—to the soles of the lotus feet; te—Your; prapanna—of those who surrender; abhaya-dam—the giver of fearlessness; hare—O Lord Hari; yat-māyayā—by whose illusory potency; api—even; vibudhāḥ—intelligent demigods; muhyanti—become bewildered; jñāna-kāśayā—which falsely appears as knowledge.
Śrī Mārkaṇḍeya said: O Lord Hari, I take shelter of the soles of Your lotus feet, which bestow fearlessness upon all who surrender to them. Even the great demigods are bewildered by Your illusory energy, which appears to them in the guise of knowledge.
Conditioned souls are attracted to material sense gratification, and thus they meticulously study the workings of nature. Although they appear to be advancing in scientific knowledge, they become increasingly entangled in their false identification with the material body and therefore increasingly merge into ignorance.


Song Prayers by Markandeya Rsi to Lord Siva
TEXT 16
@Ah" tvaAtmaAnauBaAvaena
paUNARk(Amasya tae ivaBaAe
k(r"vaAma ik(maIzAAna
yaenaedM" inava{RtaM jagAta,
āha tv ātmānubhāvena
pūrṇa-kāmasya te vibho
karavāma kim īśāna
yenedaṁ nirvṛtaṁ jagat
āha—Mārkaṇḍeya said; tu—indeed; ātma-anubhāvena—by your own experience of ecstasy; pūrṇa-kāmasya—who is satisfied in all respects; te—for you; vibho—O mighty one; karavāma—I can do; kim—what; īśāna—O lord; yena—by whom; idam—this; nirvṛtam—is made peaceful; jagat—the entire world.
Mārkaṇḍeya said: O mighty lord, what can I possibly do for you, who are fully satisfied by your own ecstasy? Indeed, by your mercy you satisfy this entire world.
TEXT 17
nama: izAvaAya zAAntaAya
s$aÔvaAya ‘ama{x"Aya ca
r"jaAejauSae'Ta GaAer"Aya
namastauByaM tamaAejauSae
namaḥ śivāya śāntāya
sattvāya pramṛḍāya ca
rajo-juṣe 'tha ghorāya
namas tubhyaṁ tamo-juṣe
namaḥ—obeisances; śivāya—to the all-auspicious; śāntāya—peaceful; sattvāya—the personification of material goodness; pramṛḍāya—the giver of pleasure; ca—and; rajaḥ-juṣe—to him who is in contact with the mode of passion; atha—also; ghorāya—terrible; namaḥ—obeisances; tubhyam—to you; tamaḥ-juṣe—who associates with the mode of ignorance.
Again and again I offer my obeisances unto you, O all-auspicious transcendental personality. As the lord of goodness you give pleasure, in contact with the mode of passion you appear most fearful, and you also associate with the mode of ignorance.

Song Prayers by Markandeya Rsi to Lord Siva 
TEXT 28
™aImaAkR(Nxe"ya ovaAca
@h"Ae wRṅr"laIlaeyaM
āu"ivaRBaAvyaA zAr"Iir"NAAma,
yaªamantaIizAtavyaAina
stauvainta jagAd"Iṅr"A:
śrī-mārkaṇḍeya uvāca
aho īśvara-līleyaṁ
durvibhāvyā śarīriṇām
yan namantīśitavyāni
stuvanti jagad-īśvarāḥ
śrī-mārkaṇḍeyaḥ uvāca—Śrī Mārkaṇḍeya said; aho—ah; īśvara—of the great lords; līlā—the pastime; iyam—this; durvibhāvyā—inconceivable; śarīriṇām—for embodied souls; yat—since; namanti—they offer obeisances; īśitavyāni—to those who are controlled by them; stuvanti—they praise; jagat-īśvarāḥ—the rulers of the universe.
Śrī Mārkaṇḍeya said: It is indeed most difficult for embodied souls to understand the pastimes of the universal controllers, for such lords bow down to and offer praise to the very living beings they rule.
In the material world, conditioned souls strive to lord it over one another. Therefore they cannot understand the pastimes of the actual lords of the universe. Such bona fide lords have a wonderfully magnanimous mentality and thus sometimes bow down to the most qualified and saintly among their own subjects.
TEXT 29
Dama< ƒaAh"iyatauM ‘aAya:
‘ava·(Ar"ê de"ih"naAma,
@Acar"ntyanaumaAed"ntae
i‚(yamaANAM stauvainta ca
dharmaṁ grāhayituṁ prāyaḥ
pravaktāraś ca dehinām
ācaranty anumodante
kriyamāṇaṁ stuvanti ca
dharmam—religion; grāhayitum—to cause the acceptance of; prāyaḥ—for the most part; pravaktāraḥ—the authorized speakers; ca—and; dehinām—for ordinary embodied souls; ācaranti—they act; anumodante—they encourage; kriyamāṇam—one who is executing; stuvanti—they praise; ca—also.
Generally it is to induce embodied souls to accept religious principles that the authorized teachers of religion exhibit ideal behavior while encouraging and praising the proper behavior of others.
TEXT 30
naEtaAvataA BagAvata:
svamaAyaAmayava{iÔaiBa:
na āu"SyaetaAnauBaAvastaEr,"
maAiyana: ku(h"kM( yaTaA
naitāvatā bhagavataḥ
sva-māyā-maya-vṛttibhiḥ
na duṣyetānubhāvas tair
māyinaḥ kuhakaṁ yathā
na—not; etāvatā—by such (a show of humility); bhagavataḥ—of the Personality of Godhead; sva-māyā—of His own illusory energy; maya—consisting of; vṛttibhiḥ—by the activities; na duṣyeta—is not spoiled; anubhāvaḥ—the power; taiḥ—by them; māyinaḥ—of a magician; kuhakam—the tricks; yathā—just as.
This apparent humility is simply a show of mercy. Such behavior of the Supreme Lord and His personal associates, which the Lord effects by His own bewildering potency, does not spoil His power any more than a magician's powers are diminished by his exhibition of tricks.
TEXTS 31-32
s$a{"îe"dM" manas$aA ivaṅma,
@AtmanaAnau‘aivazya ya:
gAuNAE: ku(vaRiṁ"r"ABaAita
k(taeRva sva«aā{"gyaTaA
tasmaE namaAe BagAvatae
i‡agAuNAAya gAuNAAtmanae
ke(valaAyaAiã"taIyaAya
gAur"vae “aṭmaUtaRyae
sṛṣṭvedaṁ manasā viśvam
ātmanānupraviśya yaḥ
guṇaiḥ kurvadbhir ābhāti
karteva svapna-dṛg yathā
tasmai namo bhagavate
tri-guṇāya guṇātmane
kevalāyādvitīyāya
gurave brahma-mūrtaye
sṛṣṭvā—creating; idam—this; manasā—by His mind, simply by His desire; viśvam—the universe; ātmanā—as the Supersoul; anupraviśya—subsequently entering; yaḥ—who; guṇaiḥ—by the modes of nature; kurvadbhiḥ—which are acting; ābhāti—appears; kartā iva—as if the doer; svapna-dṛk—a person who is seeing a dream; yathā—as; tasmai—unto Him; namaḥ—obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tri-guṇāya—who possesses the three modes of nature; guṇa-ātmane—who is the ultimate controller of the modes of nature; kevalāya—to the pure; advitīyāya—who has no equal; gurave—the supreme spiritual master; brahma-mūrtaye—the personal form of the Absolute Truth.
I offer my obeisances to that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has created this entire universe simply by His desire and then entered into it as the Supersoul. By making the modes of nature act, He seems to be the direct creator of this world, just as a dreamer seems to be acting within his dream. He is the owner and ultimate controller of the three modes of nature, yet He remains alone and pure, without any equal. He is the supreme spiritual master of all, the original personal form of the Absolute Truth.
The Supreme Lord releases His material potencies, and by their interaction creation takes place. The Lord remains aloof, as the supreme transcendental entity. Still, because the entire creation unfolds according to His design and will, His controlling hand is perceived within all things. People thus imagine that God is the direct builder of this world, although He remains aloof, creating through the manipulation of His multifarious potencies.
TEXT 33
kM( va{NAe nau parM" BaUmana,
varM" tvaã"r"d"zARnaAta,
yaÚ"zARnaAtpaUNARk(Ama:
s$atyak(Ama: paumaAna, Bavaeta,
kaṁ vṛṇe nu paraṁ bhūman
varaṁ tvad vara-darśanāt
yad-darśanāt pūrṇa-kāmaḥ
satya-kāmaḥ pumān bhavet
kam—what; vṛṇe—shall I choose; nu—indeed; param—other; bhūman—O all-pervading lord; varam—benediction; tvat—from you; vara-darśanāt—the sight of whom is itself the highest benediction; yat—of whom; darśanāt—from the seeing; pūrṇa-kāmaḥ—full in all desires; satya-kāmaḥ—able to achieve anything desired; pumān—a person; bhavet—becomes.
O all-pervading lord, since I have received the benediction of seeing you, what other benediction can I ask for? Simply by seeing you, a person fulfills all his desires and can achieve anything imaginable.
TEXT 34
var"maekM( va{NAe'TaAipa
paUNAARtk(AmaAiBavaSaRNAAta,
BagAvatyacyautaAM Bai·M(
tatpare"Sau taTaA tvaiya
varam ekaṁ vṛṇe 'thāpi
pūrṇāt kāmābhivarṣaṇāt
bhagavaty acyutāṁ bhaktiṁ
tat-pareṣu tathā tvayi
varam—benediction; ekam—one; vṛṇe—I request; atha api—nevertheless; pūrṇāt—from him who is completely full; kāma-abhivarṣaṇāt—who showers down the fulfillment of desires; bhagavati—for the Supreme Personality of Godhead; acyutām—infallible; bhaktim—devotional service; tat-pareṣu—for those who are dedicated to Him; tathā—and also; tvayi—for yourself.
But I do request one benediction from you, who are full of all perfection and able to shower down the fulfillment of all desires. I ask to have unfailing devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead and for His dedicated devotees, especially you.
The words tat-pareṣu tathā tvayi clearly indicate that Lord Śiva is a devotee of the Supreme Lord, not the Supreme Lord Himself. Because the representative of God is offered the same protocol as God Himself, Mārkaṇḍeya Ṛṣi addressed Lord Śiva as "lord" in previous verses. But now it is clearly revealed that, as stated throughout Vedic literature, Lord Śiva is an eternal servant of God and not God Himself.
Desire manifests itself within the mind and heart according to the subtle laws governing consciousness. Pure desire to engage in the loving service of the Lord brings one to the most exalted platform of consciousness, and such a perfect understanding of life is available only by the special mercy of the Lord's devotees.

