Song-1 Mangalacarana (SB 1.1.1-3)
TEXT 1
oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya
janmädy asya yato 'nvayäd itarataç cärtheñv abhijïaù svaräö
tene brahma hådä ya ädi-kavaye muhyanti yat sürayaù
tejo-väri-mådäà yathä vinimayo yatra tri-sargo 'måñä
dhämnä svena sadä nirasta-kuhakaà satyaà paraà dhémahi


om—O my Lord; namaù—offering my obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Personality of Godhead; väsudeväya—unto Väsudeva (the son of Vasudeva), or Lord Çré Kåñëa, the primeval Lord; janma-ädi—creation, sustenance and destruction; asya—of the manifested universes; yataù—from whom; anvayät—directly; itarataù—indirectly; ca—and; artheñu—purposes; abhijïaù—fully cognizant; sva-räö—fully independent; tene—imparted; brahma—the Vedic knowledge; hådä—consciousness of the heart; yaù—one who; ädi-kavaye—unto the original created being; muhyanti—are illusioned; yat—about whom; sürayaù—great sages and demigods; tejaù—fire; väri—water; mådäm—earth; yathä—as much as; vinimayaù—action and reaction; yatra—whereupon; tri-sargaù—three modes of creation, creative faculties; amåñä—almost factual; dhämnä—along with all transcendental paraphernalia; svena—self-sufficiently; sadä—always; nirasta—negation by absence; kuhakam—illusion; satyam—truth; param—absolute; dhémahi—I do meditate upon.

O my Lord, Çré Kåñëa, son of Vasudeva, O all-pervading Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. I meditate upon Lord Çré Kåñëa because He is the Absolute Truth and the primeval cause of all causes of the creation, sustenance and destruction of the manifested universes. He is directly and indirectly conscious of all manifestations, and He is independent because there is no other cause beyond Him. It is He only who first imparted the Vedic knowledge unto the heart of Brahmäjé, the original living being. By Him even the great sages and demigods are placed into illusion, as one is bewildered by the illusory representations of water seen in fire, or land seen on water. Only because of Him do the material universes, temporarily manifested by the reactions of the three modes of nature, appear factual, although they are unreal. I therefore meditate upon Him, Lord Çré Kåñëa, who is eternally existent in the transcendental abode, which is forever free from the illusory representations of the material world. I meditate upon Him, for He is the Absolute Truth.

PURPORT
Obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, directly indicate Lord Çré Kåñëa, who is the divine son of Vasudeva and Devaké. This fact will be more explicitly explained later in the text of this work, when Çré Vyäsadeva directly asserts that Çré Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead and all others are His direct or indirect plenary portions or portions of the portion. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has even more explicitly explained the subject matter in his Kåñëa-sandarbha. And Brahmä, the original living being, has explained the subject of Çré Kåñëa substantially in his treatise named Brahma-saàhitä. In an Upaniñad in the Säma-veda, it is also stated that Lord Çré Kåñëa is the divine son of Devaké. 
Therefore, in this prayer, the first proposition holds that Lord Çré Kåñëa is the primeval Lord, and if any transcendental nomenclature is to be understood as belonging to the Absolute Personality of Godhead, it must be the name indicated by the word Kåñëa, which means the all-attractive. In the Bhagavad-gétä, in many places, the Lord asserts Himself to be the original Personality of Godhead, and this is confirmed by Arjuna, who also cites great sages like Närada, Vyäsa, and many others. In the Padma Puräëa, it is also stated that out of the innumerable names of the Lord, the name Kåñëa is the principal one. Although the name Väsudeva indicates the plenary portion of the Personality of Godhead, and although all the different forms of the Lord, being identical with Väsudeva, are thus indicated in this text, the name Väsudeva particularly indicates Kåñëa, the divine son of Vasudeva and Devaké. Çré Kåñëa is always meditated upon by the paramahaàsas, who are the perfected ones among those in the renounced order of life.
Väsudeva, or Lord Çré Kåñëa, is the cause of all causes. Everything that exists emanates from the Lord. How this is so is explained in later chapters of this work. This work is described by Mahäprabhu Çré Caitanya as the spotless Puräëa because it contains the transcendental narration of the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa. The history of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is also very glorious. It was compiled by Çré Vyäsadeva after he had attained maturity in transcendental knowledge. He wrote this under the instructions of Çré Näradajé, his spiritual master. Vyäsadeva compiled all Vedic literatures, containing the four divisions of the Vedas, the Vedänta-sütras (or the Brahma-sütras), the Puräëas, the Mahäbhärata, and so on. But nevertheless he was not satisfied. His dissatisfaction was observed by his spiritual master, and thus Närada advised him to write on the transcendental activities of Lord Çré Kåñëa. These transcendental activities are described specifically in the Bhägavatam's Tenth Canto, which is considered its substance. But in order to reach the very substance one must proceed gradually by developing knowledge of the categories.
It is natural that a philosophical mind wants to know about the origin of the creation. At night he sees the stars in the sky, and he naturally speculates about their inhabitants. Such inquiries are natural for man because man has a developed consciousness which is higher than that of the animals. The author of Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives a direct answer to such inquiries. He says that the Lord Çré Kåñëa is the origin of all creations. He is not only the creator of the universe, but the destroyer as well. The manifested cosmic nature is created at a certain period by the will of the Lord. It is maintained for some time, and then it is annihilated by His will. Therefore, the supreme will is behind all cosmic activities. Of course, there are atheists of various categories who do not believe in a creator, but that is due to a poor fund of knowledge. The modern scientist, for example, has created space satellites, and by some arrangement or other, these satellites are thrown into outer space to fly for some time at the control of the scientist, who is far away. Similarly, all the universes with innumerable stars and planets are controlled by the intelligence of the Personality of Godhead.
In the Vedic literatures it is said that the Absolute Truth Personality of Godhead is the chief amongst all living personalities. All living beings, beginning from the first created being, Brahmä, down to the smallest ant, are individual living beings. And above Brahmä, there are even other living beings with individual capacities, and the Personality of Godhead is also a similar living being. And He is an individual as are the other living beings. But the Supreme Lord, or the supreme living being, has the greatest intelligence, and He possesses supermost inconceivable energies of all different varieties. If a man's brain can produce a space satellite, one can very easily imagine how brains higher than man can produce similarly wonderful things which are far superior. The reasonable person will easily accept this argument, but there are stubborn atheists who would never agree. Çréla Vyäsadeva, however, at once accepts the supreme intelligence as the parameçvara. He offers his respectful obeisances unto the supreme intelligence addressed as the para or the parameçvara or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And that parameçvara is Çré Kåñëa, as admitted in the Bhagavad-gétä and other scriptures delivered by Çré Vyäsadeva, and specifically in this Çrémad-Bhägavatam. In the Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord says that there is no other para-tattva (summum bonum) than Himself. Therefore, Çré Vyäsadeva at once worships the para-tattva, Çré Kåñëa, whose transcendental activities are described in the Tenth Canto.
Unscrupulous persons go immediately to the Tenth Canto, and especially to the five chapters which describe the Lord's räsa dance. This portion of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the most confidential part of this great literature. Unless one is thoroughly accomplished in the transcendental knowledge of the Lord, one is sure to misunderstand the Lord's worshipable transcendental pastimes called räsa dance and His loving affairs with the gopés. This subject matter is highly spiritual, and only the liberated persons who have gradually attained to the stage of paramahaàsa can transcendentally relish this räsa dance. Çréla Vyäsadeva therefore gives the reader the chance to gradually develop spiritual realization before actually relishing the essence of the pastimes of the Lord. Therefore, he purposely invokes a Gäyatré mantra, dhémahi. This Gäyatré mantra is meant for spiritually advanced people. When one is successful in chanting the Gäyatré mantra, he can enter into the transcendental position of the Lord. One must therefore acquire brahminical qualities or be perfectly situated in the quality of goodness in order to chant the Gäyatré mantra successfully and then attain to the stage of transcendentally realizing the Lord—His name, His fame, His qualities and so on.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the narration of the svarüpa of the Lord manifested by His internal potency, and this potency is distinguished from the external potency, which has manifested the cosmic world, which is within our experience. Çréla Vyäsadeva makes a clear distinction between the two in this çloka. Çré Vyäsadeva says herein that the manifested internal potency is real whereas the external manifested energy in the form of material existence is only temporary and illusory like the mirage in the desert. In the desert mirage there is no actual water. There is only the appearance of water. Real water is somewhere else. The manifested cosmic creation appears as reality. But reality, of which this is but a shadow, is in the spiritual world. Absolute Truth is in the spiritual sky, not the material sky. In the material sky everything is relative truth. That is to say, one truth depends on something else. This cosmic creation results from interaction of the three modes of nature, and the temporary manifestations are so created as to present an illusion of reality to the bewildered mind of the conditioned soul, who appears in so many species of life, including the higher demigods, like Brahmä, Indra, Candra, and so on. In actuality, there is no reality in the manifested world. There appears to be reality, however, because of the true reality which exists in the spiritual world, where the Personality of Godhead eternally exists with His transcendental paraphernalia.
The chief engineer of a complicated construction does not personally take part in the construction, but he knows every nook and corner because everything is done under his direction. He knows everything about the construction, both directly and indirectly. Similarly, the Personality of Godhead, who is the supreme engineer of this cosmic creation, knows every nook and corner, although affairs are apparently being carried out by demigods. Beginning from Brahmä down to the insignificant ant, no one is independent in the matter of material creation. The hand of the Lord is seen everywhere. All material elements as well as all spiritual sparks emanate from Him only. And whatever is created in this material world is but the interaction of two energies, the material and the spiritual, which emanate from the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. A chemist can manufacture water in the chemical laboratory by mixing hydrogen and oxygen. But, in reality, the living entity works in the laboratory under the direction of the Supreme Lord. And the materials with which he works are also supplied by the Lord. The Lord knows everything directly and indirectly, and He is cognizant of all minute details, and He is fully independent. He is compared to a mine of gold, and the cosmic creations in so many different forms are compared to objects made from the gold, such as gold rings, necklaces and so on. The gold ring and the gold necklace are qualitatively one with the gold in the mine, but quantitatively the gold in the mine is different. Therefore, the Absolute Truth is simultaneously one and different. Nothing is absolutely equal with the Absolute Truth, but at the same time, nothing is independent of the Absolute Truth.
Conditioned souls, beginning from Brahmä, who engineers the entire universe, down to the insignificant ant, are all creating, but none of them are independent of the Supreme Lord. The materialist wrongly thinks that there is no creator other than his own self. This is called mäyä, or illusion. Because of his poor fund of knowledge, the materialist cannot see beyond the purview of his imperfect senses, and thus he thinks that matter automatically takes its own shape without the aid of a superior intelligence. This is refuted in this çloka by Çréla Vyäsadeva: "Since the complete whole, or the Absolute Truth, is the source of everything, nothing can be independent of the body of the Absolute Truth." Whatever happens to the body quickly becomes known to the embodied. Similarly, the creation is the body of the absolute whole. Therefore, the Absolute knows everything directly and indirectly that happens in the creation.
In the çruti-mantra, it is also stated that the absolute whole, or Brahman, is the ultimate source of everything. Everything emanates from Him, and everything is maintained by Him. And at the end, everything enters into Him. That is the law of nature. In the småti-mantra, the same is confirmed. It is said there that the source from which everything emanates at the beginning of Brahmä's millennium, and the reservoir to which everything ultimately enters, is the Absolute Truth, or Brahman. Material scientists take it for granted that the ultimate source of the planetary system is the sun, but they are unable to explain the source of the sun. Herein, the ultimate source is explained. According to the Vedic literature, Brahmä is the creator of this universe. Yet he had to meditate to get inspiration for such creation. Therefore, neither Brahmä nor the sun is  the ultimate creator. It is stated in this çloka that Brahmä was taught Vedic knowledge by the Personality of Godhead. One may argue that Brahmä, being the original living being, could not be inspired because there was no other being living at that time. Herein it is stated that the Supreme Lord inspired the secondary creator, Brahmä, in order that Brahmä could carry out his creative functions. So, the supreme intelligence behind all creations is the Absolute Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. In the Bhagavad-gétä, Lord Çré Kåñëa states that it is He only who superintends the creative energy, prakåti, which constitutes the totality of matter. Therefore, Çré Vyäsadeva does not worship Brahmä, but the Supreme Lord, who guides Brahmä in his creative activities. 
In this çloka, the particular words abhijïaù and svaräö are significant. These two words distinguish the Supreme Lord from all the other living entities. No other living entity is either abhijïaù or svaräö. That is, no one is either fully cognizant or fully independent. Even Brahmä has to meditate upon the Supreme Lord in order to create. Then what to speak of great scientists like Einstein! The brains of such a scientist are certainly not the products of any human being. Scientists cannot manufacture such a brain, and what to speak of foolish atheists who defy the authority of the Lord? Even Mäyävädé impersonalists, who flatter themselves that they can become one with the Lord, are neither abhijïaù nor svaräö. Such impersonalists undergo severe austerities to acquire knowledge to become one with the Lord. But ultimately they become dependent on some rich disciple who supplies them with money to build monasteries and temples. Atheists like Rävaëa or Hiraëyakaçipu had to undergo severe penances before they could flout the authority of the Lord. But ultimately, they were rendered helpless and could not save themselves when the Lord appeared before them as cruel death. This is also the case with the modern atheists, who also dare to flout the authority of the Lord. Such atheists will be dealt with similarly, for history repeats itself. Whenever men neglect the authority of the Lord, nature and her laws are there to penalize them. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä in the well-known verse yadä yadä hi dharmasya gläniù. "Whenever there is a decline of dharma and a rise of adharma, O Arjuna, then I incarnate Myself." (Bg. 4.7)
That the Supreme Lord is all-perfect is confirmed in all çruti-mantras. It is said in the çruti-mantras that the all-perfect Lord threw a glance over matter and thus created all living beings. The living beings are parts and parcels of the Lord, and He impregnates the vast material creation with seeds of spiritual sparks, and thus the creative energies are set in motion to enact so many wonderful creations. An atheist may argue that God is no more expert than a watchmaker, but of course God is greater because He can create machines in duplicate male and female forms. The male and female forms of different types of machineries go on producing innumerable similar machines without God's further attention. If a man could manufacture such a set of machines that could produce other machines without his attention, then he could approach the intelligence of God. But that is not possible, for each machine has to be handled individually. Therefore, no one can create as well as God. Another name for God is asamordhva, which means that no one is equal to or greater than Him. Paraà satyam, or the Supreme Truth, is He who has no equal or superior. This is confirmed in the çruti-mantras. It is said that before the creation of the material universe there existed the Lord only, who is master of everyone. That Lord instructed Brahmä in Vedic knowledge. That Lord has to be obeyed in all respects. Anyone who wants to get rid of the material entanglement must surrender unto Him. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä.
Unless one surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, it is certain that he will be bewildered. When an intelligent man surrenders unto the lotus feet of Kåñëa and knows completely that Kåñëa is the cause of all causes, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä, then only can such an intelligent man become a mahätmä, or great soul. But such a great soul is rarely seen. Only the mahätmäs can understand that the Supreme Lord is the primeval cause of all creations. He is parama or ultimate truth because all other truths are relative to Him. He is omniscient. For Him, there is no illusion.
Some Mäyävädé scholars argue that Çrémad-Bhägavatam was not compiled by Çré Vyäsadeva. And some of them suggest that this book is a modern creation written by someone named Vopadeva. In order to refute such meaningless arguments, Çré Çrédhara Svämé points out that there is reference to the Bhägavatam in many of the oldest Puräëas. This first çloka of the Bhägavatam begins with the Gäyatré mantra. There is reference to this in the Matsya Puräëa, which is the oldest Puräëa. In that Puräëa it is said about the Bhägavatam that in it there are many narrations of spiritual instructions, that it begins with the Gäyatré mantra, and that it contains the history of Våträsura. Anyone who makes a gift of this great work on a full-moon day attains to the highest perfection of life by returning to Godhead. There is reference to the Bhägavatam in other Puräëas also, where it is clearly stated that this work was finished in twelve cantos, which include eighteen thousand çlokas. In the Padma Puräëa also there is reference to the Bhägavatam in a conversation between Gautama and Mahäräja Ambaréña. The king was advised therein to read regularly Çrémad-Bhägavatam if he desired liberation from material bondage. Under the circumstances, there is no doubt about the authority of the Bhägavatam. Within the past five hundred years, many erudite scholars and äcäryas like Jéva Gosvämé, Sanätana Gosvämé, Viçvanätha Cakravarté, Vallabhäcärya, and many other distinguished scholars even after the time of Lord Caitanya made elaborate commentaries on the Bhägavatam. And the serious student would do well to attempt to go through them to better relish the transcendental messages.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura specifically deals with the original and pure sex psychology (ädi-rasa), devoid of all mundane inebriety. The whole material creation is moving under the principle of sex life. In modern civilization, sex life is the focal point for all activities. Wherever one turns his face, he sees sex life predominant. Therefore, sex life is not unreal. Its reality is experienced in the spiritual world. The material sex life is but a perverted reflection of the original fact. The original fact is in the Absolute Truth, and thus the Absolute Truth cannot be impersonal. It is not possible to be impersonal and contain pure sex life. Consequently, the impersonalist philosophers have given indirect impetus to the abominable mundane sex life because they have overstressed the impersonality of the ultimate truth. Consequently, man without information of the actual spiritual form of sex has accepted perverted material sex life as the all in all. There is a distinction between sex life in the diseased material condition and spiritual sex life.
This Çrémad-Bhägavatam will gradually elevate the unbiased reader to the highest perfectional stage of transcendence. It will enable him to transcend the three modes of material activities: fruitive actions, speculative philosophy, and worship of functional deities as inculcated in Vedic verses.
TEXT 2
dharmaù projjhita-kaitavo 'tra paramo nirmatsaräëäà satäà
vedyaà västavam atra vastu çivadaà täpa-trayonmülanam
çrémad-bhägavate mahä-muni-kåte kià vä parair éçvaraù
sadyo hådy avarudhyate 'tra kåtibhiù çuçrüñubhis tat-kñaëät


dharmaù—religiosity; projjhita—completely rejected; kaitavaù—covered by fruitive intention; atra—herein; paramaù—the highest; nirmatsaräëäm—of the one-hundred-percent pure in heart; satäm—devotees; vedyam—understandable; västavam—factual; atra—herein; vastu—substance; çivadam—giving well-being; täpa-traya—threefold miseries; unmülanam—causing uprooting of; çrémat—beautiful; bhägavate—the Bhägavata Puräëa; mahä-muni—the great sage (Vyäsadeva); kåte—having compiled; kim—what is; vä—the need; paraiù—others; éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord; sadyaù—at once; hådi—within the heart; avarudhyate—becomes compact; atra—herein; kåtibhiù—by the pious men; çuçrüñubhiù—by culture; tat-kñaëät—without delay.

Completely rejecting all religious activities which are materially motivated, this Bhägavata Puräëa propounds the highest truth, which is understandable by those devotees who are fully pure in heart. The highest truth is reality distinguished from illusion for the welfare of all. Such truth uproots the threefold miseries. This beautiful Bhägavatam, compiled by the great sage Vyäsadeva [in his maturity], is sufficient in itself for God realization. What is the need of any other scripture? As soon as one attentively and submissively hears the message of the Bhägavatam, by this culture of knowledge the Supreme Lord is established within his heart.
PURPORT
Religion includes four primary subjects, namely pious activities, economic development, satisfaction of the senses, and finally liberation from material bondage. Irreligious life is a barbarous condition. Indeed, human life begins when religion begins. Eating, sleeping, fearing, and mating are the four principles of animal life. These are common both to animals and to human beings. But religion is the extra function of the human being. Without religion, human life is no better than animal life. Therefore, in human societies there is some form of religion which aims at self-realization and which makes reference to man's eternal relationship with God.
In the lower stages of human civilization, there is always competition to lord it over the material nature, or, in other words, there is a continuous rivalry to satisfy the senses. Driven by such consciousness, man turns to religion. He thus performs pious activities or religious functions in order to gain something material. But if such material gains are obtainable in other ways, then so-called religion is neglected. This is the situation in modern civilization. Man is thriving economically, so at present he is not very interested in religion. Churches, mosques and temples are now practically vacant. Men are more interested in factories, shops, and cinemas than in religious places which were erected by their forefathers. This practically proves that religion is performed for some economic gains. Economic gains are needed for sense gratification. Often when one is baffled in the pursuit of sense gratification, he takes to salvation and tries to become one with the Supreme Lord. Consequently, all these states are simply different types of sense gratification.
In the Vedas, the above-mentioned four activities are prescribed in the regulative way so that there will not be any undue competition for sense gratification. But Çrémad-Bhägavatam is transcendental to all these sense-gratificatory activities. It is purely transcendental literature which can be understood only by the pure devotees of the Lord, who are transcendental to competitive sense gratification. In the material world there is keen competition between animal and animal, man and man, community and community, nation and nation. But the devotees of the Lord rise above such competitions. They do not compete with the materialist because they are on the path back to Godhead, where life is eternal and blissful. Such transcendentalists are nonenvious and pure in heart. In the material world, everyone is envious of everyone else, and therefore there is competition. But the transcendental devotees of the Lord are not only free from material envy, but are well-wishers to everyone, and they strive to establish a competitionless society with God in the center. The contemporary socialist's conception of a competitionless society is artificial because in the socialist state there is competition for the post of dictator. From the point of view of the Vedas or from the point of view of common human activities, sense gratification is the basis of material life. There are three paths mentioned in the Vedas. One involves fruitive activities to gain promotion to better planets, another involves worshiping different demigods for promotion to the planets of the demigods, and another involves realizing the Absolute Truth and His impersonal feature and becoming one with Him.
The impersonal aspect of the Absolute Truth is not the highest. Above the impersonal feature is the Paramätmä feature, and above this is the personal feature of the Absolute Truth, or Bhagavän. Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives information about the Absolute Truth in His personal feature. It is therefore higher than impersonal speculations and the jïäna-käëòa division of the Vedas, what to speak of the karma-käëòa division. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is even higher than the upäsanä-käëòa because it recommends the worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, the divine son of Vasudeva. In the karma-käëòa, there is competition to reach heavenly planets for better sense gratification, and there is similar competition in the jïäna-käëòa and the upäsanä-käëòa. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam is superior to all of these because it aims at the Supreme Truth, which is the substance or the root of all categories. From Çrémad-Bhägavatam one can come to know the substance as well as the categories. The substance is the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Lord, and all emanations are relative forms of energy.
Nothing is apart from the substance, but at the same time the energies are different from the substance. This conception is not contradictory. Çrémad-Bhägavatam explicitly promulgates this simultaneously-one-and-different philosophy of the Vedänta-sütra, which begins with the "janmädy asya" [SB 1.1.1] sütra.
This knowledge that the energy of the Lord is simultaneously one with and different from the Lord is an answer to the mental speculators' attempt to establish the energy as the Absolute. When this knowledge is factually understood, one sees the conceptions of monism and dualism to be imperfect. Development of this transcendental consciousness grounded in the conception of simultaneously-one-and-different leads one immediately to the stage of freedom from the threefold miseries. The threefold miseries are (1) those miseries which arise from the mind and body, (2) those miseries inflicted by other living beings, and (3) those miseries arising from natural catastrophes, over which one has no control. Çrémad-Bhägavatam begins with the surrender of the devotee unto the Absolute Person. The devotee is fully aware that he is one with the Absolute and at the same time in the eternal position of servant to the Absolute. In the material conception, one falsely thinks himself the lord of all he surveys, and therefore he is always troubled by the threefold miseries of life. But as soon as one comes to know his real position as transcendental servant, he at once becomes free from all miseries. As long as the living entity is trying to master material nature, there is no possibility of his becoming servant of the Supreme. Service to the Lord is rendered in pure consciousness of one's spiritual identity; by service one is immediately freed from material encumbrances.
Over and above this, Çrémad-Bhägavatam is a personal commentation on the Vedänta-sütra by Çré Vyäsadeva. It was written in the maturity of his spiritual life through the mercy of Närada. Çré Vyäsadeva is the authorized incarnation of Näräyaëa, the Personality of Godhead. Therefore, there is no question as to his authority. He is the author of all other Vedic literatures, yet he recommends the study of Çrémad-Bhägavatam above all others. In other Puräëas there are different methods set forth by which one can worship the demigods. But in the Bhägavatam only the Supreme Lord is mentioned. The Supreme Lord is the total body, and the demigods are the different parts of that body. Consequently, one who worships the Supreme Lord does not need to worship the demigods, because the Supreme Lord becomes fixed in the heart of the devotee immediately. Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu has recommended the Çrémad-Bhägavatam as the spotless Puräëa and distinguished it from all other Puräëas.
The proper method for receiving this transcendental message is to hear it submissively. A challenging attitude cannot help one realize this transcendental message. One particular word is used herein for proper guidance. This word is çuçrüñu. One must be anxious to hear this transcendental message. The desire to sincerely hear is the first qualification.
Less fortunate persons are not at all interested in hearing this Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The process is simple, but the application is difficult. Unfortunate people find enough time to hear idle social and political conversations, but when invited to attend a meeting of devotees to hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam they suddenly become reluctant, or they indulge in hearing the portion of the Bhägavatam they are unfit to hear. Sometimes professional readers of the Bhägavatam immediately plunge into the confidential topics of the pastimes of the Supreme Lord, which they interpret as sex literature. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is meant to be heard from the beginning. Those who are fit to assimilate this work are mentioned in this çloka: "One becomes qualified to hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam after many pious deeds." The intelligent person, with thoughtful discretion, can be assured by the great sage Vyäsadeva that he can realize the Supreme Personality directly by hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Without undergoing the different stages of realization set forth in the Vedas, one can be lifted immediately to the position of paramahaàsa simply by agreeing to receive this message.
TEXT 3
nigama-kalpa-taror galitaà phalaà
çuka-mukhäd amåta-drava-saàyutam
pibata bhägavataà rasam ä-layaà
muhur aho rasikä bhuvi bhävukäù


nigama—the Vedic literatures; kalpa-taroù—the desire tree; galitam—fully matured; phalam—fruit; çuka—Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, the original speaker of Çrémad-Bhägavatam; mukhät—from the lips of; amåta—nectar; drava—semisolid and soft and therefore easily swallowable; saàyutam—perfect in all respects; pibata—do relish it; bhägavatam—the book dealing in the science of the eternal relation with the Lord; rasam—juice (that which is relishable); ä-layam—until liberation, or even in a liberated condition; muhuù—always; aho—O; rasikäù—those who are full in the knowledge of mellows; bhuvi—on the earth; bhävukäù—expert and thoughtful.

O expert and thoughtful men, relish Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the mature fruit of the desire tree of Vedic literatures. It emanated from the lips of Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé. Therefore this fruit has become even more tasteful, although its nectarean juice was already relishable for all, including liberated souls.

PURPORT
In the two previous çlokas it has been definitely proved that the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the sublime literature which surpasses all other Vedic scriptures due to its transcendental qualities. It is transcendental to all mundane activities and mundane knowledge. In this çloka it is stated that Çrémad-Bhägavatam is not only a superior literature but is the ripened fruit of all Vedic literatures. In other words, it is the cream of all Vedic knowledge. Considering all this, patient and submissive hearing is definitely essential. With great respect and attention, one should receive the message and lessons imparted by the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
The Vedas are compared to the desire tree because they contain all things knowable by man. They deal with mundane necessities as well as spiritual realization. The Vedas contain regulative principles of knowledge covering social, political, religious, economic, military, medicinal, chemical, physical and metaphysical subject matter and all that may be necessary to keep the body and soul together. Above and beyond all this are specific directions for spiritual realization. Regulated knowledge involves a gradual raising of the living entity to the spiritual platform, and the highest spiritual realization is knowledge that the Personality of Godhead is the reservoir of all spiritual tastes, or rasas.
Every living entity, beginning from Brahmä, the first-born living being within the material world, down to the insignificant ant, desires to relish some sort of taste derived from sense perceptions. These sensual pleasures are technically called rasas. Such rasas are of different varieties. In the revealed scriptures the following twelve varieties of rasas are enumerated: (1) raudra (anger), (2) adbhuta (wonder), (3) çåìgära (conjugal love), (4) häsya (comedy), (5) véra (chivalry), (6) dayä (mercy), (7) däsya (servitorship), (8) sakhya (fraternity), (9) bhayänaka (horror), (10) bébhatsa (shock), (11) çänta (neutrality), (12) vätsalya (parenthood).
The sum total of all these rasas is called affection or love. Primarily, such signs of love are manifested in adoration, service, friendship, parental affection, and conjugal love. And when these five are absent, love is present indirectly in anger, wonder, comedy, chivalry, fear, shock and so on. For example, when a man is in love with a woman, the rasa is called conjugal love. But when such loving affairs are disturbed there may be wonder, anger, shock, or even horror. Sometimes loving affairs between two persons culminate in ghastly murder scenes. Such rasas are displayed between man and man and between animal and animal. There is no possibility of an exchange or rasa between a man and an animal or between a man and any other species of living being within the material world. The rasas are exchanged between members of the same species. But as far as the spirit souls are concerned, they are one qualitatively with the Supreme Lord. Therefore, the rasas were originally exchanged between the spiritual living being and the spiritual whole, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The spiritual exchange or rasa is fully exhibited in spiritual existence between living beings and the Supreme Lord.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is therefore described in the çruti-mantras, Vedic hymns, as "the fountainhead of all rasas." When one associates with the Supreme Lord and exchanges one's constitutional rasa with the Lord, then the living being is actually happy.
These çruti-mantras indicate that every living being has his constitutional position, which is endowed with a particular type of rasa to be exchanged with the Personality of Godhead. In the liberated condition only, this primary rasa is experienced in full. In the material existence, the rasa is experienced in the perverted form, which is temporary. And thus the rasas of the material world are exhibited in the material form of raudra (anger) and so on.
Therefore, one who attains full knowledge of these different rasas, which are the basic principles of activities, can understand the false representations of the original rasas which are reflected in the material world. The learned scholar seeks to relish the real rasa in the spiritual form. In the beginning he desires to become one with the Supreme. Thus, less intelligent transcendentalists cannot go beyond this conception of becoming one with the spirit whole, without knowing of the different rasas.
In this çloka, it is definitely stated that spiritual rasa, which is relished even in the liberated stage, can be experienced in the literature of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam due to its being the ripened fruit of all Vedic knowledge. By submissively hearing this transcendental literature, one can attain the full pleasure of his heart's desire. But one must be very careful to hear the message from the right source. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is exactly received from the right source because it was brought by Närada Muni from the spiritual world and given to his disciple Çré Vyäsadeva. The latter in turn delivered the message to his son Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, and Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé delivered the message to Mahäräja Parékñit during the seven days before the King's death. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé was a liberated soul from his very birth. He was liberated even in the womb of his mother, and he did not undergo any sort of spiritual training after his birth. At birth no one is qualified, neither in the mundane nor in the spiritual sense. But Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé, due to his being a perfectly liberated soul, did not have to undergo an evolutionary process for spiritual realization. Yet despite his being a completely liberated person situated in the transcendental position above the three material modes, he was attracted to this transcendental rasa of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is adored by liberated souls who sing Vedic hymns. The Supreme Lord's pastimes are more attractive to liberated souls than to mundane people. He is of necessity not impersonal because it is only possible to carry on transcendental rasa with a person.
In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam the transcendental pastimes of the Lord are narrated, and the narration is systematically depicted by Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé. Thus the subject matter is appealing to all classes of persons, including those who seek liberation to relish the humor of becoming one with the supreme whole.
In Sanskrit the parrot is also known as çuka. When a ripened fruit is cut by the red beaks of such birds, its sweet flavor is enhanced. The Vedic fruit which is mature and ripe in knowledge is spoken through the lips of Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, who is compared to the parrot not for his ability to recite the Bhägavatam exactly as he heard it from his learned father, but for his ability to present the work in a manner that would appeal to all classes of men.
The subject matter is so presented through the lips of Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé that any sincere listener who hears submissively can at once relish transcendental tastes which are distinct from the perverted tastes of the material world. The ripened fruit is not dropped all of a sudden from the highest planet of Kåñëaloka. Rather, it has come down carefully through the chain of disciplic succession without change or disturbance. Foolish people who are not in the transcendental disciplic succession commit great blunders by trying to understand the highest transcendental rasa, known as the räsa dance, without following in the footsteps of Çukadeva Gosvämé, who presents this fruit very carefully by stages of transcendental realization. One should be intelligent enough to know the position of Çrémad-Bhägavatam by considering personalities like Çukadeva Gosvämé, who deals with the subject so carefully. This process of disciplic succession of the Bhägavata school suggests that in the future also, for all time, Çrémad-Bhägavatam has to be understood from a person who is factually a representative of Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé. A professional man who makes a business out of reciting the Bhägavatam illegally is certainly not a representative of Çukadeva Gosvämé. Such a man's business is only to earn his livelihood. Therefore one should refrain from hearing the lectures of such professional men. Such men usually go to the most confidential part of the literature without undergoing the gradual process of understanding this grave subject. They usually plunge into the subject matter of the räsa dance, which is misunderstood by the foolish class of men. Some of them take this to be immoral, while others try to cover it up by their own stupid interpretations. They have no desire to follow in the footsteps of Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé.
One should conclude, therefore, that the serious student of rasa should receive the message of the Bhägavatam in the chain of disciplic succession from Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, who describes the Bhägavatam from its very beginning and not whimsically to satisfy the mundaner who has very little knowledge in transcendental science. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is so carefully presented that a sincere and serious person can at once enjoy the ripened fruit of Vedic knowledge simply by drinking the nectarean juice through the mouth of Çukadeva Gosvämé or his bona fide representative.

Song-2 Pranams to Srila Sukadeva Goswami &Others (SB I.2.2-4)
TEXT 2
süta uväca
yaà pravrajantam anupetam apeta-kåtyaà
dvaipäyano viraha-kätara äjuhäva
putreti tan-mayatayä taravo 'bhinedus
taà sarva-bhüta-hådayaà munim änato 'smi


sütaù—Süta Gosvämé; uväca—said; yam—whom; pravrajantam—while going away for the renounced order of life; anupetam—without being reformed by the sacred thread; apeta—not undergoing ceremonies; kåtyam—prescribed duties; dvaipäyanaù—Vyäsadeva; viraha—separation; kätaraù—being afraid of; äjuhäva—exclaimed; putra iti—O my son; tat-mayatayä—being absorbed in that way; taravaù—all the trees; abhineduù—responded; tam—unto him; sarva—all; bhüta—living entities; hådayam—heart; munim—sage; änataù asmi—offer obeisances.

Çréla Süta Gosvämé said: Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto that great sage [Çukadeva Gosvämé] who can enter the hearts of all. When he went away to take up the renounced order of life [sannyäsa], leaving home without undergoing reformation by the sacred thread or the ceremonies observed by the higher castes, his father, Vyäsadeva, fearing separation from him, cried out, "O my son!" Indeed, only the trees, which were absorbed in the same feelings of separation, echoed in response to the begrieved father.

PURPORT
The institution of varëa and äçrama prescribes many regulative duties to be observed by its followers. Such duties enjoin that a candidate willing to study the Vedas must approach a bona fide spiritual master and request acceptance as his disciple. The sacred thread is the sign of those who are competent to study the Vedas from the äcärya, or the bona fide spiritual master. Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé did not undergo such purificatory ceremonies because he was a liberated soul from his very birth.
Generally, a man is born as an ordinary being, and by the purificatory processes he is born for the second time. When he sees a new light and seeks direction for spiritual progress, he approaches a spiritual master for instruction in the Vedas. The spiritual master accepts only the sincere inquirer as his disciple and gives him the sacred thread. In this way a man becomes twice-born, or a dvija. After qualifying as a dvija one may study the Vedas, and after becoming well versed in the Vedas one becomes a vipra. A vipra, or a qualified brähmaëa, thus realizes the Absolute and makes further progress in spiritual life until he reaches the Vaiñëava stage. The Vaiñëava stage is the postgraduate status of a brähmaëa. A progressive brähmaëa must necessarily become a Vaiñëava, for a Vaiñëava is a self-realized, learned brähmaëa.
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé was a Vaiñëava from the beginning; therefore, there was no need for him to undergo all the processes of the varëäçrama institution. Ultimately the aim of varëäçrama-dharma is to turn a crude man into a pure devotee of the Lord, or a Vaiñëava. Anyone, therefore, who becomes a Vaiñëava accepted by the first-class Vaiñëava, or uttama-adhikäré Vaiñëava, is already considered a brähmaëa, regardless of his birth due to his past deeds. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu accepted this principle and recognized Çréla Haridäsa Öhäkura as the äcärya of the holy name, although Öhäkura Haridäsa appeared in a Mohammedan family. In conclusion, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé was born a Vaiñëava, and, therefore, brahminism was included in him. He did not have to undergo any ceremonies. Any lowborn person—be he a Kiräta, Hüëa, Ändhra, Pulinda, Pulkaça, Äbhéra, Çumbha, Yavana, Khasa or even lower—can be delivered to the highest transcendental position by the mercy of Vaiñëavas. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé was the instructing spiritual master of Çré Süta Gosvämé, who therefore offers his respectful obeisances unto Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé before he begins his answers to the questions of the sages at Naimiñäraëya.
TEXT 3
yaù svänubhävam akhila-çruti-säram ekam
adhyätma-dépam atititérñatäà tamo 'ndham
saàsäriëäà karuëayäha puräëa-guhyaà
taà vyäsa-sünum upayämi guruà munénäm


yaù—he who; sva-anubhävam—self-assimilated (experienced); akhila—all around; çruti—the Vedas; säram—cream; ekam—the only one; adhyätma—transcendental; dépam—torchlight; atititérñatäm—desiring to overcome; tamaù andham—deeply dark material existence; saàsäriëäm—of the materialistic men; karuëayä—out of causeless mercy; äha—said; puräëa—supplement to the Vedas; guhyam—very confidential; tam—unto him; vyäsa-sünum—the son of Vyäsadeva; upayämi—let me offer my obeisances; gurum—the spiritual master; munénäm—of the great sages.

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto him [Çuka], the spiritual master of all sages, the son of Vyäsadeva, who, out of his great compassion for those gross materialists who struggle to cross over the darkest regions of material existence, spoke this most confidential supplement to the cream of Vedic knowledge, after having personally assimilated it by experience.

PURPORT
In this prayer, Çréla Süta Gosvämé practically summarizes the complete introduction of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the natural supplementary commentary on the Vedänta-sütras. The Vedänta-sütras, or the Brahma-sütras, were compiled by Vyäsadeva with a view to presenting just the cream of Vedic knowledge. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the natural commentary on this cream. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé was a thoroughly realized master of the Vedänta-sütra, and consequently he also personally realized the commentary, Çrémad-Bhägavatam. And just to show his boundless mercy upon bewildered materialistic men who want to cross completely over nescience, he recited for the first time this confidential knowledge.
There is no point in arguing that a materialistic man can be happy. No materialistic creature—be he the great Brahmä or an insignificant ant—can be happy. Everyone tries to make a permanent plan for happiness, but everyone is baffled by the laws of material nature. Therefore the materialistic world is called the darkest region of God's creation. Yet the unhappy materialists can get out of it simply by desiring to get out. Unfortunately they are so foolish that they do not want to escape. Therefore they are compared to the camel, who relishes thorny twigs because he likes the taste of the twigs mixed with blood. He does not realize that it is his own blood and that his tongue is being cut by the thorns. Similarly, to the materialist his own blood is as sweet as honey, and although he is always harassed by his own material creations, he does not wish to escape. Such materialists are called karmés. Out of hundreds of thousands of karmés, only a few may feel tired of material engagement and desire to get out of the labyrinth. Such intelligent persons are called jïänés. The Vedänta-sütra is directed to such jïänés. But Çréla Vyäsadeva, being the incarnation of the Supreme Lord, could foresee the misuse of the Vedänta-sütra by unscrupulous men, and, therefore, he personally supplemented the Vedänta-sütra with the Bhägavata Puräëa. It is clearly said that this Bhägavatam is the original commentary on the Brahma-sütras. Çréla Vyäsadeva also instructed the Bhägavatam to his own son, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, who was already at the liberated stage of transcendence. Çréla Çukadeva realized it personally and then explained it. By the mercy of Çréla Çukadeva, the Bhägavata-vedänta-sütra is available for all those sincere souls who want to get out of material existence.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the one unrivaled commentary on Vedänta-sütra. Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya intentionally did not touch it because he knew that the natural commentary would be difficult for him to surpass. He wrote his Çäréraka-bhäñya, and his so-called followers deprecated the Bhägavatam as some "new" presentation. One should not be misled by such propaganda directed against the Bhägavatam by the Mäyäväda school. From this introductory çloka, the beginning student should know that Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the only transcendental literature meant for those who are paramahaàsas and completely freed from the material disease called malice. The Mäyävädés are envious of the Personality of Godhead despite Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya's admission that Näräyaëa, the Personality of Godhead, is above the material creation. The envious Mäyävädé cannot have access to the Bhägavatam, but those who are really anxious to get out of this material existence may take shelter of this Bhägavatam because it is uttered by the liberated Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé. It is the transcendental torchlight by which one can see perfectly the transcendental Absolute Truth realized as Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän.
TEXT 4
näräyaëaà namaskåtya
naraà caiva narottamam
devéà sarasvatéà vyäsaà
tato jayam udérayet


näräyaëam—the Personality of Godhead; namaù-kåtya—after offering respectful obeisances; naram ca eva—and Näräyaëa Åñi; nara-uttamam—the supermost human being; devém—the goddess; sarasvatém—the mistress of learning; vyäsam—Vyäsadeva; tataù—thereafter; jayam—all that is meant for conquering; udérayet—be announced.

Before reciting this Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is the very means of conquest, one should offer respectful obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, unto Nara-näräyaëa Åñi, the supermost human being, unto Mother Sarasvaté, the goddess of learning, and unto Çréla Vyäsadeva, the author.

PURPORT
All the Vedic literatures and the Puräëas are meant for conquering the darkest region of material existence. The living being is in the state of forgetfulness of his relation with God due to his being overly attracted to material sense gratification from time immemorial. His struggle for existence in the material world is perpetual, and it is not possible for him to get out of it by making plans. If he at all wants to conquer this perpetual struggle for existence, he must reestablish his eternal relation with God. And one who wants to adopt such remedial measures must take shelter of literatures such as the Vedas and the Puräëas. Foolish people say that the Puräëas have no connection with the Vedas. However, the Puräëas are supplementary explanations of the Vedas intended for different types of men. All men are not equal. There are men who are conducted by the mode of goodness, others who are under the mode of passion and others who are under the mode of ignorance. The Puräëas are so divided that any class of men can take advantage of them and gradually regain their lost position and get out of the hard struggle for existence. Çréla Süta Gosvämé shows the way of chanting the Puräëas. This may be followed by persons who aspire to be preachers of the Vedic literatures and the Puräëas. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the spotless Puräëa, and it is especially meant for those who desire to get out of the material entanglement permanently.

Song-3 Prayers by Arjuna to Lord Krishna (SB 1.7.22-26)

TEXT 22
arjuna uväca
kåñëa kåñëa mahä-bäho
bhaktänäm abhayaìkara
tvam eko dahyamänänäm
apavargo 'si saàsåteù


arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa; kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa; mahä-bäho—He who is the Almighty; bhaktänäm—of the devotees; abhayaìkara—eradicating the fears; tvam—You; ekaù—alone; dahyamänänäm—those who are suffering from; apavargaù—the path of liberation; asi—are; saàsåteù—in the midst of material miseries.

Arjuna said: O my Lord Çré Kåñëa, You are the almighty Personality of Godhead. There is no limit to Your different energies. Therefore only You are competent to instill fearlessness in the hearts of Your devotees. Everyone in the flames of material miseries can find the path of liberation in You only.

PURPORT
Arjuna was aware of the transcendental qualities of Lord Çré Kåñëa, as he had already experienced them during the Kurukñetra War, in which both of them were present. Therefore, Arjuna's version of Lord Kåñëa is authoritative. Kåñëa is almighty and is especially the cause of fearlessness for the devotees. A devotee of the Lord is always fearless because of the protection given by the Lord. Material existence is something like a blazing fire in the forest, which can be extinguished by the mercy of the Lord Çré Kåñëa. The spiritual master is the mercy representative of the Lord. Therefore, a person burning in the flames of material existence may receive the rains of mercy of the Lord through the transparent medium of the self-realized spiritual master. The spiritual master, by his words, can penetrate into the heart of the suffering person and inject knowledge transcendental, which alone can extinguish the fire of material existence.
TEXT 23
tvam ädyaù puruñaù säkñäd
éçvaraù prakåteù paraù
mäyäà vyudasya cic-chaktyä
kaivalye sthita ätmani


tvam ädyaù—You are the original; puruñaù—the enjoying personality; säkñät—directly; éçvaraù—the controller; prakåteù—to material nature; paraù—transcendental; mäyäm—the material energy; vyudasya—one who has thrown aside; cit-çaktyä—by dint of internal potency; kaivalye—in pure eternal knowledge and bliss; sthitaù—placed; ätmani—own self.

You are the original Personality of Godhead, who expand Yourself all over the creations and are transcendental to material energy. You have cast away the effects of the material energy by dint of Your spiritual potency. You are always situated in eternal bliss and transcendental knowledge.

PURPORT
The Lord states in the Bhagavad-gétä that one who surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Lord can get release from the clutches of nescience. Kåñëa is just like the sun, and mäyä or material existence is just like darkness. Wherever there is the light of the sun, darkness or ignorance at once vanishes. The best means to get out of the world of ignorance is suggested here. The Lord is addressed herein as the original Personality of Godhead. From Him all other Personalities of Godhead expand. The all-pervasive Lord Viñëu is Lord Kåñëa's plenary portion or expansion. The Lord expands Himself in innumerable forms of Godhead and living beings, along with His different energies. But Çré Kåñëa is the original primeval Lord, from whom everything emanates. The all-pervasive feature of the Lord experienced within the manifested world is also a partial representation of the Lord. Paramätmä, therefore, is included within Him. He is the Absolute Personality of Godhead. He has nothing to do with the actions and reactions of the material manifestation because He is far above the material creation. Darkness is a perverse representation of the sun, and therefore the existence of darkness depends on the existence of the sun, but in the sun proper there is no trace of darkness. As the sun is full of light only, similarly the Absolute Personality of Godhead, beyond the material existence, is full of bliss. He is not only full of bliss, but also full of transcendental variegatedness. Transcendence is not at all static but is full of dynamic variegatedness. He is distinct from the material nature, which is complicated by the three modes of material nature. He is parama, or the chief. Therefore He is absolute. He has manifold energies, and through His diverse energies He creates, manifests, maintains and destroys the material world. In His own abode, however, everything is eternal and absolute. The world is conducted not by the energies or powerful agents by themselves, but by the potent all-powerful with all energies.
TEXT 24
sa eva jéva-lokasya
mäyä-mohita-cetasaù
vidhatse svena véryeëa
çreyo dharmädi-lakñaëam


saù—that Transcendence; eva—certainly; jéva-lokasya—of the conditioned living beings; mäyä-mohita—captivated by the illusory energy; cetasaù—by the heart; vidhatse—execute; svena—by Your own; véryeëa—influence; çreyaù—ultimate good; dharma-ädi—four principles of liberation; lakñaëam—characterized by.

And yet, though You are beyond the purview of the material energy, You execute the four principles of liberation characterized by religion and so on for the ultimate good of the conditioned souls.

PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, out of His causeless mercy, descends to the manifested world without being influenced by the material modes of nature. He is eternally beyond the material manifestations. He descends out of His causeless mercy only to reclaim the fallen souls, who are captivated by the illusory energy. They are attacked by the material energy, and they want to enjoy her under false pretexts, although in essence the living entity is unable to enjoy. One is eternally the servitor of the Lord, and when he forgets this position he thinks of enjoying the material world, but factually he is in illusion. The Lord descends to eradicate this false sense of enjoyment and thus reclaim conditioned souls back to Godhead. That is the all-merciful nature of the Lord for the fallen souls.
TEXT 25
tathäyaà cävatäras te
bhuvo bhära-jihérñayä
svänäà cänanya-bhävänäm
anudhyänäya cäsakåt


tathä—thus; ayam—this; ca—and; avatäraù—incarnation; te—Your; bhuvaù—of the material world; bhära—burden; jihérñayä—for removing; svänäm—of the friends; ca ananya-bhävänäm—and of the exclusive devotees; anudhyänäya—for remembering constantly; ca—and; asakåt—repeatedly.

Thus You descend as an incarnation to remove the burden of the world and to benefit Your friends, especially those who are Your exclusive devotees and are constantly rapt in meditation upon You.

PURPORT
It appears that the Lord is partial to His devotees. Everyone is related with the Lord. He is equal to everyone, and yet He is more inclined to His own men and devotees. The Lord is everyone's father. No one can be His father, and yet no one can be His son. His devotees are His kinsmen, and His devotees are His relations. This is His transcendental pastime. It has nothing to do with mundane ideas of relations, fatherhood or anything like that. As mentioned above, the Lord is above the modes of material nature, and thus there is nothing mundane about His kinsmen and relations in devotional service.
TEXT 26
kim idaà svit kuto veti
deva-deva na vedmy aham
sarvato mukham äyäti
tejaù parama-däruëam


kim—what is; idam—this; svit—does it come; kutaù—wherefrom; vä iti—be either; deva-deva—O Lord of lords; na—not; vedmi—do I know; aham—I; sarvataù—all around; mukham—directions; äyäti—coming from; tejaù—effulgence; parama—very much; däruëam—dangerous.

O Lord of lords, how is it that this dangerous effulgence is spreading all around? Where does it come from? I do not understand it.

PURPORT
Anything that is presented before the Personality of Godhead should be so done after due presentation of respectful prayers. That is the standard procedure, and Çré Arjuna, although an intimate friend of the Lord, is observing this method for general information.

Song-4 Prayers by Uttara (SB 1.8.9-10)

TEXT 9
uttaroväca
pähi pähi mahä-yogin
deva-deva jagat-pate
nänyaà tvad abhayaà paçye
yatra måtyuù parasparam


uttarä uväca—Uttarä said; pähi pähi—protect, protect; mahä-yogin—the greatest mystic; deva-deva—the worshipable of the worshiped; jagat-pate—O Lord of the universe; na—not; anyam—anyone else; tvat—than You; abhayam—fearlessness; paçye—do I see; yatra—where there is; måtyuù—death; parasparam—in the world of duality.

Uttarä said: O Lord of lords, Lord of the universe! You are the greatest of mystics. Please protect me, protect me, for there is no one else who can save me from the clutches of death in this world of duality.
This material world is the world of duality, in contrast with the oneness of the absolute realm. The world of duality is composed of matter and spirit, whereas the absolute world is complete spirit without any tinge of the material qualities. In the dual world everyone is falsely trying to become the master of the world, whereas in the absolute world the Lord is the absolute Lord, and all others are His absolute servitors. In the world of duality everyone is envious of all others, and death is inevitable due to the dual existence of matter and spirit. The Lord is the only shelter of fearlessness for the surrendered soul. One cannot save himself from the cruel hands of death in the material world without having surrendered himself at the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 10
abhidravati mäm éça
çaras taptäyaso vibho
kämaà dahatu mäà nätha
mä me garbho nipätyatäm


abhidravati—coming towards; mäm—me; éça—O Lord; çaraù—the arrow; tapta—fiery; ayasaù—iron; vibho—O great one; kämam—desire; dahatu—let it burn; mäm—me; nätha—O protector; mä—not; me—my; garbhaù—embryo; nipätyatäm—be aborted.

O my Lord, You are all-powerful. A fiery iron arrow is coming towards me fast. My Lord, let it burn me personally, if You so desire, but please do not let it burn and abort my embryo. Please do me this favor, my Lord.

PURPORT
This incident took place after the death of Abhimanyu, the husband of Uttarä. Abhimanyu's widow, Uttarä, should have followed the path of her husband, but because she was pregnant, and Mahäräja Parékñit, a great devotee of the Lord, was lying in embryo, she was responsible for his protection. The mother of a child has a great responsibility in giving all protection to the child, and therefore Uttarä was not ashamed to express this frankly before Lord Kåñëa. Uttarä was the daughter of a great king, the wife of a great hero, and student of a great devotee, and later she was the mother of a good king also. She was fortunate in every respect.

Song-5 Prayers by Queen Kunti (SB 1.8.18-43)
TEXT 18
kunty uväca
namasye puruñaà tvädyam
éçvaraà prakåteù param
alakñyaà sarva-bhütänäm
antar bahir avasthitam


kunté uväca—Çrématé Kunté said; namasye—let me bow down; puruñam—the Supreme Person; tvä—You; ädyam—the original; éçvaram—the controller; prakåteù—of the material cosmos; param—beyond; alakñyam—the invisible; sarva—all; bhütänäm—of living beings; antaù—within; bahiù—without; avasthitam—existing.

Çrématé Kunté said: O Kåñëa, I offer my obeisances unto You because You are the original personality and are unaffected by the qualities of the material world. You are existing both within and without everything, yet You are invisible to all.

PURPORT
Çrématé Kuntédevé was quite aware that Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead, although He was playing the part of her nephew. Such an enlightened lady could not commit a mistake by offering obeisances unto her nephew. Therefore, she addressed Him as the original puruña beyond the material cosmos. Although all living entities are also transcendental, they are neither original nor infallible. The living entities are apt to fall down under the clutches of material nature, but the Lord is never like that. In the Vedas, therefore, He is described as the chief among all living entities (nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm [Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13]). Then again He is addressed as éçvara, or the controller. The living entities or the demigods like Indra, Candra and Sürya are also to some extent éçvara, but none of them is the supreme éçvara, or the ultimate controller. He is the parameçvara, or the Supersoul. He is both within and without. Although He was present before Çrématé Kunté as her nephew, He was also within her and everyone else. In the Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) the Lord says, "I am situated in everyone's heart, and only due to Me one remembers, forgets and is cognizant, etc. Through all the Vedas I am to be known because I am the compiler of the Vedas, and I am the teacher of the Vedänta." Queen Kunté affirms that the Lord, although both within and without all living beings, is still invisible. The Lord is, so to speak, a puzzle for the common man. Queen Kunté experienced personally that Lord Kåñëa was present before her, yet He entered within the womb of Uttarä to save her embryo from the attack of Açvatthämä's brahmästra. Kunté herself was puzzled about whether Çré Kåñëa is all-pervasive or localized. In fact, He is both, but He reserves the right of not being exposed to persons who are not surrendered souls. This checking curtain is called the mäyä energy of the Supreme Lord, and it controls the limited vision of the rebellious soul. It is explained as follows.
TEXT 19
mäyä-javanikäcchannam
ajïädhokñajam avyayam
na lakñyase müòha-dåçä
naöo näöyadharo yathä


mäyä—deluding; javanikä—curtain; äcchannam—covered by; ajïä—ignorant; adhokñajam—beyond the range of material conception (transcendental); avyayam—irreproachable; na—not; lakñyase—observed; müòha-dåçä—by the foolish observer; naöaù—artist; näöya-dharaù—dressed as a player; yathä—as.

Being beyond the range of limited sense perception, You are the eternally irreproachable factor covered by the curtain of deluding energy. You are invisible to the foolish observer, exactly as an actor dressed as a player is not recognized.

PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä Lord Çré Kåñëa affirms that less intelligent persons mistake Him to be an ordinary man like us, and thus they deride Him. The same is confirmed herein by Queen Kunté. The less intelligent persons are those who rebel against the authority of the Lord. Such persons are known as asuras. The asuras cannot recognize the Lord's authority. When the Lord Himself appears amongst us, as Räma, Nåsiàha, Varäha or in His original form as Kåñëa, He performs many wonderful acts which are humanly impossible. As we shall find in the Tenth Canto of this great literature, Lord Çré Kåñëa exhibited His humanly impossible activities even from the days of His lying on the lap of His mother. He killed the Pütanä witch, although she smeared her breast with poison just to kill the Lord. The Lord sucked her breast like a natural baby, and He sucked out her very life also. Similarly, He lifted the Govardhana Hill just as a boy picks up a frog's umbrella and stood several days continuously just to give protection to the residents of Våndävana. These are some of the superhuman activities of the Lord described in the authoritative Vedic literatures like the Puräëas, Itihäsas (histories) and Upaniñads. He has delivered wonderful instructions in the shape of the Bhagavad-gétä. He has shown marvelous capacities as a hero, as a householder, as a teacher and as a renouncer. He is accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by such authoritative personalities as Vyäsa, Devala, Asita, Närada, Madhva, Çaìkara, Rämänuja, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, Jéva Gosvämé, Viçvanätha Cakravarté, Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté and all other authorities of the line. He Himself has declared as much in many places of the authentic literatures. And yet there is a class of men with demoniac mentality who are always reluctant to accept the Lord as the Supreme Absolute Truth. This is partially due to their poor fund of knowledge and partially due to their stubborn obstinacy, which results from various misdeeds in the past and present. Such persons could not recognize Lord Çré Kåñëa even when He was present before them. 
Another difficulty is that those who depend more on their imperfect senses cannot realize Him as the Supreme Lord. Such persons are like the modern scientist. They want to know everything by their experimental knowledge. But it is not possible to know the Supreme Person by imperfect experimental knowledge. He is described herein as adhokñaja, or beyond the range of experimental knowledge. All our senses are imperfect. We claim to observe everything and anything, but we must admit that we can observe things under certain material conditions only, which are also beyond our control. The Lord is beyond the observation of sense perception. Queen Kunté accepts this deficiency of the conditioned soul, especially of the woman class, who are less intelligent. For less intelligent men there must be such things as temples, mosques or churches so that they may begin to recognize the authority of the Lord and hear about Him from authorities in such holy places. For less intelligent men, this beginning of spiritual life is essential, and only foolish men decry the establishment of such places of worship, which are required to raise the standard of spiritual attributes for the mass of people. For less intelligent persons, bowing down before the authority of the Lord, as generally done in the temples, mosques or churches, is as beneficial as it is for the advanced devotees to meditate upon Him by active service.
TEXT 20
tathä paramahaàsänäà
munénäm amalätmanäm
bhakti-yoga-vidhänärthaà
kathaà paçyema hi striyaù


tathä—besides that; paramahaàsänäm—of the advanced transcendentalists; munénäm—of the great philosophers or mental speculators; amala-ätmanäm—those whose minds are competent to discern between spirit and matter; bhakti-yoga—the science of devotional service; vidhäna-artham—for executing; katham—how; paçyema—can observe; hi—certainly; striyaù—women.

You Yourself descend to propagate the transcendental science of devotional service unto the hearts of the advanced transcendentalists and mental speculators, who are purified by being able to discriminate between matter and spirit. How, then, can we women know You perfectly?

PURPORT
Even the greatest philosophical speculators cannot have access to the region of the Lord. It is said in the Upaniñads that the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, is beyond the range of the thinking power of the greatest philosopher. He is unknowable by great learning or by the greatest brain. He is knowable only by one who has His mercy. Others may go on thinking about Him for years together, yet He is unknowable. This very fact is corroborated by the Queen, who is playing the part of an innocent woman. Women in general are unable to speculate like philosophers, but they are blessed by the Lord because they believe at once in the superiority and almightiness of the Lord and thus offer obeisances without reservation. The Lord is so kind that He does not show special favor only to one who is a great philosopher. He knows the sincerity of purpose. For this reason only, women generally assemble in great numbers in any sort of religious function. In every country and in every sect of religion it appears that the women are more interested than the men. This simplicity of acceptance of the Lord's authority is more effective than showy insincere religious fervor.
TEXT 21
kåñëäya väsudeväya
devaké-nandanäya ca
nanda-gopa-kumäräya
govindäya namo namaù


kåñëäya—the Supreme Lord; väsudeväya—unto the son of Vasudeva; devaké-nandanäya—unto the son of Devaké; ca—and; nanda-gopa—Nanda and the cowherd men; kumäräya—unto their son; govindäya—unto the Personality of Godhead, who enlivens the cows and the senses; namaù—respectful obeisances; namaù—obeisances.

Let me therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who has become the son of Vasudeva, the pleasure of Devaké, the boy of Nanda and the other cowherd men of Våndävana, and the enlivener of the cows and the senses.

PURPORT
The Lord, being thus unapproachable by any material assets, out of unbounded and causeless mercy descends to the earth as He is in order to show His special mercy upon His unalloyed devotees and to diminish the upsurges of the demoniac persons. Queen Kunté specifically adores the incarnation or descent of Lord Kåñëa above all other incarnations because in this particular incarnation He is more approachable. In the Räma incarnation He remained a king's son from His very childhood, but in the incarnation of Kåñëa, although He was the son of a king, He at once left the shelter of His real father and mother (King Vasudeva and Queen Devaké) just after His appearance and went to the lap of Yaçodämayé to play the part of an ordinary cowherd boy in the blessed Vrajabhümi, which is very sanctified because of His childhood pastimes. Therefore Lord Kåñëa is more merciful than Lord Räma. He was undoubtedly very kind to Kunté's brother Vasudeva and the family. Had He not become the son of Vasudeva and Devaké, Queen Kunté could not claim Him to be her nephew and thus address Kåñëa in parental affection. But Nanda and Yaçodä are more fortunate because they could relish the Lord's childhood pastimes, which are more attractive than all other pastimes. There is no parallel to His childhood pastimes as exhibited at Vrajabhümi, which are replicas of His eternal affairs in the original Kåñëaloka, described as the cintämaëi-dhäma in the Brahma-saàhitä [Bs. 5.29]. Lord Çré Kåñëa descended Himself at Vrajabhümi with all His transcendental entourage and paraphernalia. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore confirmed that no one is as fortunate as the residents of Vrajabhümi, and specifically the cowherd girls, who dedicated their everything for the satisfaction of the Lord. His pastimes with Nanda and Yaçodä and His pastimes with the cowherd men and especially with the cowherd boys and the cows have caused Him to be known as Govinda. Lord Kåñëa as Govinda is more inclined to the brähmaëas and the cows, indicating thereby that human prosperity depends more on these two items, namely brahminical culture and cow protection. Lord Kåñëa is never satisfied where these are lacking.
TEXT 22
namaù paìkaja-näbhäya
namaù paìkaja-mäline
namaù paìkaja-neträya
namas te paìkajäìghraye


namaù—all respectful obeisances; paìkaja-näbhäya—unto the Lord who has a specific depression resembling a lotus flower in the center of His abdomen; namaù—obeisances; paìkaja-mäline—one who is always decorated with a garland of lotus flowers; namaù—obeisances; paìkaja-neträya—one whose glance is as cooling as a lotus flower; namaù te—respectful obeisances unto You; paìkaja-aìghraye—unto You, the soles of whose feet are engraved with lotus flowers (and who are therefore said to possess lotus feet).

My respectful obeisances are unto You, O Lord, whose abdomen is marked with a depression like a lotus flower, who are always decorated with garlands of lotus flowers, whose glance is as cool as the lotus, and whose feet are engraved with lotuses.

PURPORT
Here are some of the specific symbolical marks on the spiritual body of the Personality of Godhead which distinguish His body from the bodies of all others. They are all special features of the body of the Lord. The Lord may appear as one of us, but He is always distinct by His specific bodily features. Çrématé Kunté claims herself unfit to see the Lord because of her being a woman. This is claimed because women, çüdras (the laborer class) and the dvija-bandhus, or the wretched descendants of the higher three classes, are unfit by intelligence to understand transcendental subject matter concerning the spiritual name, fame, attributes, forms, etc., of the Supreme Absolute Truth. Such persons, although they are unfit to enter into the spiritual affairs of the Lord, can see Him as the arcä-vigraha, who descends to the material world just to distribute favors to the fallen souls, including the above-mentioned women, çüdras and dvija-bandhus. Because such fallen souls cannot see anything beyond matter, the Lord condescends to enter into each and every one of the innumerable universes as the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who grows a lotus stem from the lotuslike depression in the center of His transcendental abdomen, and thus Brahmä, the first living being in the universe, is born. Therefore, the Lord is known as the Paìkajanäbhi. The Paìkajanäbhi Lord accepts the arcä-vigraha (His transcendental form) in different elements, namely a form within the mind, a form made of wood, a form made of earth, a form made of metal, a form made of jewels, a form made of paint, a form drawn on sand, etc. All such forms of the Lord are always decorated with garlands of lotus flowers, and there should be a soothing atmosphere in the temple of worship to attract the burning attention of the nondevotees always engaged in material wranglings. The meditators worship a form within the mind. Therefore, the Lord is merciful even to the women, çüdras and dvija-bandhus, provided they agree to visit the temple of worship in different forms made for them. Such temple visitors are not idolaters, as alleged by some men with a poor fund of knowledge. All the great äcäryas established such temples of worship in all places just to favor the less intelligent, and one should not pose himself as transcending the stage of temple worship while one is actually in the category of the çüdras and the women or less. One should begin to see the Lord from His lotus feet, gradually rising to the thighs, waist, chest and face. One should not try to look at the face of the Lord without being accustomed to seeing the lotus feet of the Lord. Çrématé Kunté, because of her being the aunt of the Lord, did not begin to see the Lord from the lotus feet because the Lord might feel ashamed, and thus Kuntédevé, just to save a painful situation for the Lord, began to see the Lord just above His lotus feet, i.e., from the waist of the Lord, gradually rising to the face, and then down to the lotus feet. In the round, everything there is in order.
TEXT 23

yathä håñékeça khalena devaké
kaàsena ruddhäticiraà çucärpitä
vimocitähaà ca sahätmajä vibho
tvayaiva näthena muhur vipad-gaëät


yathä—as it were; håñékeça—the master of the senses; khalena—by the envious; devaké—Devaké (the mother of Çré Kåñëa); kaàsena—by King Kaàsa; ruddhä—imprisoned; ati-ciram—for a long time; çuca-arpitä—distressed; vimocitä—released; aham ca—also myself; saha-ätma-jä—along with my children; vibho—O great one; tvayä eva—by Your Lordship; näthena—as the protector; muhuù—constantly; vipat-gaëät—from a series of dangers.

O Håñékeça, master of the senses and Lord of lords, You have released Your mother, Devaké, who was long imprisoned and distressed by the envious King Kaàsa, and me and my children from a series of constant dangers.

PURPORT
Devaké, the mother of Kåñëa and sister of King Kaàsa, was put into prison along with her husband, Vasudeva, because the envious King was afraid of being killed by Devaké's eighth son (Kåñëa). He killed all the sons of Devaké who were born before Kåñëa, but Kåñëa escaped the danger of child-slaughter because He was transferred to the house of Nanda Mahäräja, Lord Kåñëa's foster father. Kuntédevé, along with her children, was also saved from a series of dangers. But Kuntédevé was shown far more favor because Lord Kåñëa did not save the other children of Devaké, whereas He saved the children of Kuntédevé. This was done because Devaké's husband, Vasudeva, was living, whereas Kuntédevé was a widow, and there was none to help her except Kåñëa. The conclusion is that Kåñëa endows more favor to a devotee who is in greater dangers. Sometimes He puts His pure devotees in such dangers because in that condition of helplessness the devotee becomes more attached to the Lord. The more the attachment is there for the Lord, the more success is there for the devotee.
TEXT 24
viñän mahägneù puruñäda-darçanäd
asat-sabhäyä vana-väsa-kåcchrataù
mådhe mådhe 'neka-mahärathästrato
drauëy-astrataç cäsma hare 'bhirakñitäù


viñät—from poison; mahä-agneù—from the great fire; puruña-ada—the man-eaters; darçanät—by combating; asat—vicious; sabhäyäù—assembly; vana-väsa—exiled to the forest; kåcchrataù—sufferings; mådhe mådhe—again and again in battle; aneka—many; mahä-ratha—great generals; astrataù—weapons; drauëi—the son of Droëäcärya; astrataù—from the weapon of; ca—and; äsma—indicating past tense; hare—O my Lord; abhirakñitäù—protected completely.

My dear Kåñëa, Your Lordship has protected us from a poisoned cake, from a great fire, from cannibals, from the vicious assembly, from sufferings during our exile in the forest and from the battle where great generals fought. And now You have saved us from the weapon of Açvatthämä.

PURPORT
The list of dangerous encounters is submitted herein. Devaké was once put into difficulty by her envious brother, otherwise she was well. But Kuntédevé and her sons were put into one difficulty after another for years and years together. They were put into trouble by Duryodhana and his party due to the kingdom, and each and every time the sons of Kunté were saved by the Lord. Once Bhéma was administered poison in a cake, once they were put into a house made of lac that was set afire, and once Draupadé was dragged into the vicious assembly of the Kurus and attempts were made to insult her by stripping her naked. The Lord saved Draupadé by supplying an immeasurable length of cloth, and Duryodhana's party failed to see her naked. Similarly, when they were exiled in the forest, Bhéma had to fight with the man-eater demon Hiòimba Räkñasa, but the Lord saved him. So it was not finished there. After all these tribulations, there was the great Battle of Kurukñetra, and Arjuna had to meet such great generals as Droëa, Bhéñma and Karëa, all powerful fighters. And at last, even when everything was done, there was the brahmästra released by the son of Droëäcärya to kill the child within the womb of Uttarä, and so the Lord saved the only surviving descendant of the Kurus, Mahäräja Parékñit.
TEXT 25
vipadaù santu täù çaçvat
tatra tatra jagad-guro
bhavato darçanaà yat syäd
apunar bhava-darçanam


vipadaù—calamities; santu—let there be; täù—all; çaçvat—again and again; tatra—there; tatra—and there; jagat-guro—O Lord of the universe; bhavataù—Your; darçanam—meeting; yat—that which; syät—is; apunaù—not again; bhava-darçanam—seeing repetition of birth and death.

I wish that all those calamities would happen again and again so that we could see You again and again, for seeing You means that we will no longer see repeated births and deaths.

PURPORT
Generally those who are distressed, needy, intelligent or inquisitive and who have performed some pious activities worship or begin to worship the Lord. Others, who are thriving on misdeeds only, regardless of status, cannot approach the Supreme due to being misled by the illusory energy. Therefore, for a pious person, if there is some calamity there is no other alternative than to take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. Constantly remembering the lotus feet of the Lord means preparing for liberation from birth and death. Therefore, even though there are so-called calamities, they are welcome because they give us an opportunity to remember the Lord, which means liberation.
One who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, which are accepted as the most suitable boat for crossing the ocean of nescience, can achieve liberation as easily as one leaps over the holes made by the hoofs of a calf. Such persons are meant to reside in the abode of the Lord, and they have nothing to do with a place where there is danger in every step.
This material world is certified by the Lord in the Bhagavad-gétä as a dangerous place full of calamities. Less intelligent persons prepare plans to adjust to those calamities without knowing that the nature of this place is itself full of calamities. They have no information of the abode of the Lord, which is full of bliss and without trace of calamity. The duty of the sane person, therefore, is to be undisturbed by worldly calamities, which are sure to happen in all circumstances. Suffering all sorts of unavoidable misfortunes, one should make progress in spiritual realization because that is the mission of human life. The spirit soul is transcendental to all material calamities; therefore, the so-called calamities are called false. A man may see a tiger swallowing him in a dream, and he may cry for this calamity. Actually there is no tiger and there is no suffering; it is simply a case of dreams. In the same way, all calamities of life are said to be dreams. If someone is lucky enough to get in contact with the Lord by devotional service, it is all gain. Contact with the Lord by any one of the nine devotional services is always a forward step on the path going back to Godhead.
TEXT 26
janmaiçvarya-çruta-çrébhir
edhamäna-madaù pumän
naivärhaty abhidhätuà vai
tväm akiïcana-gocaram


janma—birth; aiçvarya—opulence; çruta—education; çrébhiù—by the possession of beauty; edhamäna—progressively increasing; madaù—intoxication; pumän—the human being; na—never; eva—ever; arhati—deserves; abhidhätum—to address in feeling; vai—certainly; tväm—You; akiïcana-gocaram—one who is approached easily by the materially exhausted man.

My Lord, Your Lordship can easily be approached, but only by those who are materially exhausted, because one who is on the path of [material] progress, trying to improve himself with respectable parentage, great opulence, high education and bodily beauty, cannot address You with sincere feeling.

PURPORT
Being materially advanced means taking birth in an aristocratic family and possessing great wealth, an education and attractive personal beauty. All materialistic men are mad after possessing all these material opulences, and this is known as the advancement of material civilization. But the result is that by possessing all these material assets one becomes artificially puffed up, intoxicated by such temporary possessions. Consequently, such materially puffed up persons are incapable of uttering the holy name of the Lord by addressing Him feelingly, "O Govinda, O Kåñëa." It is said in the çästras that by once uttering the holy name of the Lord, the sinner gets rid of a quantity of sins that he is unable to commit. Such is the power of uttering the holy name of the Lord. There is not the least exaggeration in this statement. Actually the Lord's holy name has such powerful potency. But there is a quality to such utterances also. It depends on the quality of feeling. A helpless man can feelingly utter the holy name of the Lord, whereas a man who utters the same holy name in great material satisfaction cannot be so sincere. A materially puffed up person may utter the holy name of the Lord occasionally, but he is incapable of uttering the name in quality. Therefore, the four principles of material advancement, namely (1) high parentage, (2) good wealth, (3) high education and (4) attractive beauty, are, so to speak, disqualifications for progress on the path of spiritual advancement. The material covering of the pure spirit soul is an external feature, as much as fever is an external feature of the unhealthy body. The general process is to decrease the degree of the fever and not to aggravate it by maltreatment. Sometimes it is seen that spiritually advanced persons become materially impoverished. This is no discouragement. On the other hand, such impoverishment is a good sign as much as the falling of temperature is a good sign. The principle of life should be to decrease the degree of material intoxication, which leads one to be more and more illusioned about the aim of life. Grossly illusioned persons are quite unfit for entrance into the kingdom of God.
TEXT 27
namo 'kiïcana-vittäya
nivåtta-guëa-våttaye
ätmärämäya çäntäya
kaivalya-pataye namaù


namaù—all obeisances unto You; akiïcana-vittäya—unto the property of the materially impoverished; nivåtta—completely transcendental to the actions of the material modes; guëa—material modes; våttaye—affection; ätma-ärämäya—one who is self-satisfied; çäntäya—the most gentle; kaivalya-pataye—unto the master of the monists; namaù—bowing down.

My obeisances are unto You, who are the property of the materially impoverished. You have nothing to do with the actions and reactions of the material modes of nature. You are self-satisfied, and therefore You are the most gentle and are master of the monists.

PURPORT
A living being is finished as soon as there is nothing to possess. Therefore a living being cannot be, in the real sense of the term, a renouncer. A living being renounces something for gaining something more valuable. A student sacrifices his childish proclivities to gain better education. A servant gives up his job for a better job. Similarly, a devotee renounces the material world not for nothing but for something tangible in spiritual value. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, Sanätana Gosvämé and Çréla Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé and others gave up their worldly pomp and prosperity for the sake of the service of the Lord. They were big men in the worldly sense. Rüpa and Sanätana Gosvämés were ministers in the government service of Bengal, and Çréla Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé was the son of a big zamindar of his time. But they left everything to gain something superior to what they previously possessed. The devotees are generally without material prosperity, but they have a very secret treasure house in the lotus feet of the Lord. There is a nice story about Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé. He had a touchstone with him, and this stone was left in a pile of refuse. A needy man took it, but later on wondered why the valuable stone was kept in such a neglected place. He therefore asked him for the most valuable thing, and then he was given the holy name of the Lord. Akiïcana means one who has nothing to give materially. A factual devotee, or mahätmä, does not give anything material to anyone because he has already left all material assets. He can, however, deliver the supreme asset, namely the Personality of Godhead, because He is the only property of a factual devotee. The touchstone of Sanätana Gosvämé, which was thrown in the rubbish, was not the property of the Gosvämé, otherwise it would not have been kept in such a place. This specific example is given for the neophyte devotees just to convince them that material hankerings and spiritual advancement go ill together. Unless one is able to see everything as spiritual in relation with the Supreme Lord, one must always distinguish between spirit and matter. A spiritual master like Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, although personally able to see everything as spiritual, set this example for us only because we have no such spiritual vision.
Advancement of material vision or material civilization is a great stumbling block for spiritual advancement. Such material advancement entangles the living being in the bondage of a material body, followed by all sorts of material miseries. Such material advancement is called anartha, or things not wanted. Actually this is so. In the present context of material advancement one uses lipstick at a cost of fifty cents, and there are so many unwanted things which are all products of the material conception of life. By diverting attention to so many unwanted things, human energy is spoiled without achievement of spiritual realization, the prime necessity of human life. The attempt to reach the moon is another example of spoiling energy, because even if the moon is reached, the problems of life will not be solved. The devotees of the Lord are called akiïcanas because they have practically no material assets. Such material assets are all products of the three modes of material nature. They foil spiritual energy, and thus the less we possess such products of material nature, the more we have a good chance for spiritual progress.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no direct connection with material activities. All His acts and deeds, which are exhibited even in this material world, are spiritual and thus unaffected by the modes of material nature. In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says that all His acts, even His appearance and disappearance in and out of the material world, are transcendental, and that one who knows this perfectly shall not take his birth again in this material world but will go back to Godhead.
The material disease is due to hankering after and lording it over material nature. This hankering is due to an interaction of the three modes of nature, and neither the Lord nor the devotees have attachment for such false enjoyment. Therefore, the Lord and the devotees are called nivåtta-guëa-våtti. The perfect nivåtta-guëa-våtti is the Supreme Lord because He never becomes attracted by the modes of material nature, whereas the living beings have such a tendency. Some of them are entrapped by the illusory attraction of material nature.
Because the Lord is the property of the devotees and the devotees are the property of the Lord reciprocally, the devotees are certainly transcendental to the modes of material nature. That is a natural conclusion. Such unalloyed devotees are distinct from the mixed devotees, who approach the Lord for mitigation of miseries and poverty or because of inquisitiveness and speculation. The unalloyed devotees and the Lord are transcendentally attached to one another. For others, the Lord has nothing to reciprocate, and therefore He is called ätmäräma, self-satisfied. Self-satisfied as He is, He is the master of all monists who seek to merge into the existence of the Lord. Such monists merge within the personal effulgence of the Lord called the brahma-jyoti, but the devotees enter into the transcendental pastimes of the Lord, which are never to be misunderstood as material.
TEXT 28
manye tväà kälam éçänam
anädi-nidhanaà vibhum
samaà carantaà sarvatra
bhütänäà yan mithaù kaliù


manye—I consider; tväm—Your Lordship; kälam—the eternal time; éçänam—the Supreme Lord; anädi-nidhanam—without beginning and end; vibhum—all-pervading; samam—equally merciful; carantam—distributing; sarvatra—everywhere; bhütänäm—of the living beings; yat mithaù—by intercourse; kaliù—dissension.

My Lord, I consider Your Lordship to be eternal time, the supreme controller, without beginning and end, the all-pervasive one. In distributing Your mercy, You are equal to everyone. The dissensions between living beings are due to social intercourse.

PURPORT
Kuntédevé knew that Kåñëa was neither her nephew nor an ordinary family member of her paternal house. She knew perfectly well that Kåñëa is the primeval Lord who lives in everyone's heart as the Supersoul, Paramätmä. Another name of the Paramätmä feature of the Lord is käla, or eternal time. Eternal time is the witness of all our actions, good and bad, and thus resultant reactions are destined by Him. It is no use saying that we do not know why and for what we are suffering. We may forget the misdeed for which we may suffer at this present moment, but we must remember that Paramätmä is our constant companion, and therefore He knows everything—past, present and future. And because the Paramätmä feature of Lord Kåñëa destines all actions and reactions, He is the supreme controller also. Without His sanction not a blade of grass can move. The living beings are given as much freedom as they deserve, and misuse of that freedom is the cause of suffering. The devotees of the Lord do not misuse their freedom, and therefore they are the good sons of the Lord. Others, who misuse freedom, are put into miseries destined by the eternal käla. The käla offers the conditioned souls both happiness and miseries. It is all predestined by eternal time. As we have miseries without calling for them, so we have happiness also without asking for it, because it is all predestined by käla. No one is therefore either an enemy or a friend of the Lord. Everyone is suffering and enjoying the result of his own destiny. This destiny is made by the living beings in course of social intercourse. Everyone here wants to lord it over the material nature, and thus everyone creates his own destiny under the supervision of the Supreme Lord. He is all-pervading and therefore He can see everyone's activities. And because the Lord has no beginning or end, He is known also as the eternal time, käla.
TEXT 29
na veda kaçcid bhagavaàç cikérñitaà
tavehamänasya nåëäà viòambanam
na yasya kaçcid dayito 'sti karhicid
dveñyaç ca yasmin viñamä matir nåëäm


na—does not; veda—know; kaçcit—anyone; bhagavan—O Lord; cikérñitam—pastimes; tava—Your; éhamänasya—like the worldly men; nåëäm—of the people in general; viòambanam—misleading; na—never; yasya—His; kaçcit—anyone; dayitaù—object of specific favor; asti—there is; karhicit—anywhere; dveñyaù—object of envy; ca—and; yasmin—unto Him; viñamä—partiality; matiù—conception; nåëäm—of the people.

O Lord, no one can understand Your transcendental pastimes, which appear to be human and so are misleading. You have no specific object of favor, nor do You have any object of envy. People only imagine that You are partial.

PURPORT
The Lord's mercy upon the fallen souls is equally distributed. He has no one as the specific object of hostility. The very conception of the Personality of Godhead as a human being is misleading. His pastimes appear to be exactly like a human being's, but actually they are transcendental and without any tinge of material contamination. He is undoubtedly known as partial to His pure devotees, but in fact He is never partial, as much as the sun is never partial to anyone. By utilizing the sunrays, even stones sometimes become valuable, whereas a blind man cannot see the sun although there are profuse sunrays before him. Darkness and light are two opposite conceptions, but this does not mean that the sun is partial in distributing its rays. The sunrays are open to everyone, but the capacities of the receptacles differ. Foolish people think that devotional service is flattering the Lord to get special mercy. Factually the pure devotees who are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord are not a mercantile community. A mercantile house renders service to someone in exchange for something valuable. The pure devotee does not render service unto the Lord for such exchange, and therefore the full mercy of the Lord is open for him. Suffering men, needy men, inquisitive persons and philosophers make temporary connections with the Lord to serve a particular purpose. When the purpose is served, there is no more relation with the Lord. A suffering man, if he is pious at all, prays to the Lord for his recovery. But as soon as the recovery is over, in most cases the suffering man no longer cares to keep any connection with the Lord. The mercy of the Lord is open for him, but he is reluctant to receive it. That is the difference between a pure devotee and a mixed devotee. Those who are completely against the service of the Lord are considered to be in abject darkness, those who ask for the Lord's favor only at the time of necessity are partial recipients of the mercy of the Lord, and those who are cent-per-cent engaged in the service of the Lord are full recipients of the mercy of the Lord. Such partiality in receiving the Lord's mercy is relative to the recipient, and it is not due to the partiality of the all-merciful Lord.
When the Lord descends to this material world by His all-merciful energy, He plays like a human being, and therefore it appears that the Lord is partial to His devotees only, but that is not a fact. Despite such apparent manifestation of partiality, His mercy is equally distributed. In the Battlefield of Kurukñetra all persons who died in the fight before the presence of the Lord got salvation without the necessary qualifications because death before the presence of the Lord purifies the passing soul from the effects of all sins, and therefore the dying man gets a place somewhere in the transcendental abode. Somehow or other if someone puts himself open in the sunrays, he is sure to get the requisite benefit both by heat and by ultraviolet rays. Therefore, the conclusion is that the Lord is never partial. It is wrong for the people in general to think of Him as partial.
TEXT 30
janma karma ca viçvätmann
ajasyäkartur ätmanaù
tiryaì-nèñiñu yädaùsu
tad atyanta-viòambanam


janma—birth; karma—activity; ca—and; viçva-ätman—O soul of the universe; ajasya—of the unborn; akartuù—of the inactive; ätmanaù—of the vital energy; tiryak—animal; nå—human being; åñiñu—in the sages; yädaùsu—in the water; tat—that; atyanta—very; viòambanam—bewildering.

Of course it is bewildering, O soul of the universe, that You work though You are inactive, and that You take birth though You are the vital force and the unborn. You Yourself descend amongst animals, men, sages and aquatics. This is very bewildering.

PURPORT
The transcendental pastimes of the Lord are not only bewildering but also apparently contradictory. In other words, they are all inconceivable to the limited thinking power of the human being. The Lord is the all-pervading Supersoul of all existence, and yet He appears in the form of a boar amongst the animals, in the form of a human being as Räma, Kåñëa, etc., in the form of a åñi like Näräyaëa, and in the form of an aquatic like a fish. Yet it is said that He is unborn and He has nothing to do. In the çruti-mantra it is said that the Supreme Brahman has nothing to do, no one is equal to or greater than Him, He has manifold energies, and everything is performed by Him perfectly by automatic knowledge, strength and activity. All these statements prove without any question that the Lord's activities, forms and deeds are all inconceivable to our limited thinking power, and because He is inconceivably powerful, everything is possible in Him. Therefore no one can calculate Him exactly; every action of the Lord is bewildering to the common man. He cannot be understood by the Vedic knowledge, but He can be easily understood by the pure devotees because they are intimately related with Him. The devotees therefore know for certain that although He appears amongst the animals He is not an animal, and that He is also not a man or a åñi or a fish. He is eternally the Supreme Lord, in all circumstances.
TEXT 31
gopy ädade tvayi kåtägasi däma tävad
yä te daçäçru-kaliläïjana-sambhramäkñam
vaktraà ninéya bhaya-bhävanayä sthitasya
sä mäà vimohayati bhér api yad bibheti


gopé—the cowherd lady (Yaçodä); ädade—took up; tvayi—on Your; kåta-ägasi—creating disturbances (by breaking the butter pot); däma—rope; tävat—at that time; yä—that which; te—Your; daçä—situation; açru-kalila—overflooded with tears; aïjana—ointment; sambhrama—perturbed; akñam—eyes; vaktram—face; ninéya—downwards; bhaya-bhävanayä—by thoughts of fear; sthitasya—of the situation; sä—that; mäm—me; vimohayati—bewilders; bhéù api—even fear personified; yat—whom; bibheti—is afraid.

My dear Kåñëa, Yaçodä took up a rope to bind You when You committed an offense, and Your perturbed eyes overflooded with tears, which washed the mascara from Your eyes. And You were afraid, though fear personified is afraid of You. This sight is bewildering to me.

PURPORT
Here is another example of the bewilderment created by the pastimes of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is the Supreme in all circumstances, as already explained. Here is a specific example of the Lord's being the Supreme and at the same time a plaything in the presence of His pure devotee. The Lord's pure devotee renders service unto the Lord out of unalloyed love only, and while discharging such devotional service the pure devotee forgets the position of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord also accepts the loving service of His devotees more relishably when the service is rendered spontaneously out of pure affection, without anything of reverential admiration. Generally the Lord is worshiped by the devotees in a reverential attitude, but the Lord is meticulously pleased when the devotee, out of pure affection and love, considers the Lord to be less important than himself. The Lord's pastimes in the original abode of Goloka Våndävana are exchanged in that spirit. The friends of Kåñëa consider Him one of them. They do not consider Him to be of reverential importance. The parents of the Lord (who are all pure devotees) consider Him a child only. The Lord accepts the chastisements of the parents more cheerfully than the prayers of the Vedic hymns. Similarly, He accepts the reproaches of His fiancees more palatably than the Vedic hymns. 
When Lord Kåñëa was present in this material world to manifest His eternal pastimes of the transcendental realm of Goloka Våndävana as an attraction for the people in general, He displayed a unique picture of subordination before His foster mother, Yaçodä. The Lord, in His naturally childish playful activities, used to spoil the stocked butter of Mother Yaçodä by breaking the pots and distributing the contents to His friends and playmates, including the celebrated monkeys of Våndävana, who took advantage of the Lord's munificence. Mother Yaçodä saw this, and out of her pure love she wanted to make a show of punishment for her transcendental child. She took a rope and threatened the Lord that she would tie Him up, as is generally done in the ordinary household. Seeing the rope in the hands of Mother Yaçodä, the Lord bowed down His head and began to weep just like a child, and tears rolled down His cheeks, washing off the black ointment smeared about His beautiful eyes. This picture of the Lord is adored by Kuntédevé because she is conscious of the Lord's supreme position. He is feared often by fear personified, yet He is afraid of His mother, who wanted to punish Him just in an ordinary manner. Kunté was conscious of the exalted position of Kåñëa, whereas Yaçodä was not. Therefore Yaçodä's position was more exalted than Kunté's. Mother Yaçodä got the Lord as her child, and the Lord made her forget altogether that her child was the Lord Himself. If Mother Yaçodä had been conscious of the exalted position of the Lord, she would certainly have hesitated to punish the Lord. But she was made to forget this situation because the Lord wanted to make a complete gesture of childishness before the affectionate Yaçodä. This exchange of love between the mother and the son was performed in a natural way, and Kunté, remembering the scene, was bewildered, and she could do nothing but praise the transcendental maternal and filial love. Indirectly Mother Yaçodä is praised for her unique position of love, for she could control even the all-powerful Lord as her beloved child.
TEXT 32
kecid ähur ajaà jätaà
puëya-çlokasya kértaye
yadoù priyasyänvaväye
malayasyeva candanam


kecit—someone; ähuù—says; ajam—the Unborn; jätam—being born; puëya-çlokasya—of the great pious king; kértaye—for glorifying; yadoù—of King Yadu; priyasya—of the dear; anvaväye—in the family of; malayasya—Malaya Hills; iva—as; candanam—sandalwood.

Some say that the Unborn has taken birth for the glorification of the great pious king, and others say that You took birth to please King Yadu, one of Your dearest devotees. You appeared in his family as sandalwood appears in the Malaya Hills.

PURPORT
Because the Lord's appearance in this material world is bewildering, there are different opinions about the birth of the Unborn. In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says that He takes His birth in the material world although He is the Lord of all creations and He is unborn. So there cannot be any denial of the birth of the Unborn, because He Himself establishes the truth. But still there are different opinions as to why He takes His birth. That is also declared in the Bhagavad-gétä. He appears by His own internal potency to reestablish the principles of religion and to protect the pious and to annihilate the impious. That is the mission of the appearance of the Unborn. Still, it is said that the Lord is there to glorify the pious King Yudhiñöhira. Lord Çré Kåñëa certainly wanted to establish the kingdom of the Päëòavas for the good of all in the world. When there is a pious king ruling over the world, the people are happy. When the ruler is impious, the people are unhappy. In the Age of Kali in most cases the rulers are impious, and therefore the citizens are also continuously unhappy. But in the case of democracy, the impious citizens themselves elect their representative to rule over them, and therefore they cannot blame anyone for their unhappiness. Mahäräja Nala was also celebrated as a great pious king (puëya-çloka), but he had no connection with Lord Kåñëa. Therefore here puëya-çloka means Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, who was glorified by Lord Kåñëa. Kåñëa had also glorified King Yadu, having taken His birth in the family of that king. Thus Kåñëa is known as Yädava, Yaduvéra, Yadunandana, etc., although the Lord is always independent of such obligation. He is just like the sandalwood that grows in the Malaya Hills. Trees can grow anywhere and everywhere, yet because the sandalwood trees grow mostly in the area of the Malaya Hills, the name sandalwood and the Malaya Hills, the name sandalwood and the Malaya Hills are interrelated. Therefore, the conclusion is that the Lord is ever unborn like the sun and yet He appears in this material world in the same way that the sun rises on the eastern horizon. As the sun is never the son of the eastern horizon, so the Lord is no one's son but is the father of everything that be.
TEXT 33
apare vasudevasya
devakyäà yäcito 'bhyagät
ajas tvam asya kñemäya
vadhäya ca sura-dviñäm


apare—others; vasudevasya—of Vasudeva; devakyäm—of Devaké; yäcitaù—being prayed for; abhyagät—took birth; ajaù—unborn; tvam—You are; asya—of him; kñemäya—for the good; vadhäya—for the purpose of killing; ca—and; sura-dviñäm—of those who are envious of the demigods.

Others say that since both Vasudeva and Devaké prayed for You, You have taken Your birth as their son. Undoubtedly You are unborn, yet You took Your birth for their welfare and to kill those who are envious of the demigods.

PURPORT
It is also said that Vasudeva and Devaké, in their previous birth as Sutapä and Påçni, underwent a severe type of penance to get the Lord as their son, and as a result of such austerities the Lord appeared as their son. It is already declared in the Bhagavad-gétä that the Lord appears for the welfare of all people of the world and to vanquish the asuras, or the materialistic atheists.
TEXT 34
bhärävatäraëäyänye
bhuvo näva ivodadhau
sédantyä bhüri-bhäreëa
jäto hy ätma-bhuvärthitaù


bhära-avatäraëäya—just to reduce the burden of the world; anye—others; bhuvaù—of the world; nävaù—boat; iva—like; udadhau—on the sea; sédantyäù—aggrieved; bhüri—extremely; bhäreëa—by the burden; jätaù—You were born; hi—certainly; ätma-bhuvä—by Brahmä; arthitaù—being prayed for.

Others say that the world, being overburdened like a boat at sea, was much aggrieved, and that Brahmä, who is Your son, prayed for You, and so You have appeared in order to diminish the trouble.

PURPORT
Brahmä, or the first living being born just after the creation, is the direct son of Näräyaëa. Näräyaëa, as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, first of all entered the material universe. Without spiritual contact, matter cannot create. This principle was followed from the very beginning of the creation. The Supreme Spirit entered the universe, and the first living being, Brahmä, was born on a lotus flower grown out of the transcendental abdomen of Viñëu. Viñëu is therefore known as Padmanäbha. Brahmä is known as ätma-bhü because he was begotten directly from the father without any contact of mother Lakñméjé. Lakñméjé was present near Näräyaëa, engaged in the service of the Lord, and still, without contact with Lakñméjé, Näräyaëa begot Brahmä. That is the omnipotency of the Lord. One who foolishly considers Näräyaëa like other living beings should take a lesson from this. Näräyaëa is not an ordinary living being. He is the Personality of Godhead Himself, and He has all the potencies of all the senses in all parts of His transcendental body. An ordinary living being begets a child by sexual intercourse, and he has no means of begetting a child  other than the one designed for him. But Näräyaëa, being omnipotent, is not bound to any condition of energy. He is complete and independent to do anything and everything by His various potencies, very easily and perfectly. Brahmä is therefore directly the son of the father and was not put into the womb of a mother. Therefore he is known as ätma-bhü. This Brahmä is in charge of further creations in the universe, secondarily reflected by the potency of the Omnipotent. Within the halo of the universe there is a transcendental planet known as Çvetadvépa, which is the abode of the Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, the Paramätmä feature of the Supreme Lord. Whenever there is trouble in the universe that cannot be solved by the administrative demigods, they approach Brahmäjé for a solution, and if it is not to be solved even by Brahmäjé, then Brahmäjé consults and prays to the Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu for an incarnation and solution to the problem. Such a problem arose when Kaàsa and others were ruling over the earth and the earth became too much overburdened by the misdeeds of the asuras. Brahmäjé, along with other demigods, prayed at the shore of the Kñérodaka Ocean, and they were advised of the descent of Kåñëa as the son of Vasudeva and Devaké. So some people say that the Lord appeared because of the prayers of Brahmäjé.
TEXT 35
bhave 'smin kliçyamänänäm
avidyä-käma-karmabhiù
çravaëa-smaraëärhäëi
kariñyann iti kecana


bhave—in the material creation; asmin—this; kliçyamänänäm—of those who are suffering from; avidyä—nescience; käma—desire; karmabhiù—by execution of fruitive work; çravaëa—hearing; smaraëa—remembering; arhäëi—worshiping; kariñyan—may perform; iti—thus; kecana—others.

And yet others say that You appeared in order to renovate the devotional service of hearing, remembering, worshiping and so on in order that the conditioned souls suffering from material pangs might take advantage and gain liberation.

PURPORT
In the Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä the Lord asserts that He appears in every millennium just to reestablish the way of religion. The way of religion is made by the Supreme Lord. No one can manufacture a new path of religion, as is the fashion for certain ambitious persons. The factual way of religion is to accept the Lord as the supreme authority and thus render service unto Him in spontaneous love. A living being cannot help but render service because he is constitutionally made for that purpose. The only function of the living being is to render service to the Lord. The Lord is great, and living beings are subordinate to Him. Therefore, the duty of the living being is just to serve Him only. Unfortunately the illusioned living beings, out of misunderstanding only, become servants of the senses by material desire. This desire is called avidyä, or nescience. And out of such illegitimate desire the living being makes different plans for material enjoyment centered about a perverted sex life. He therefore becomes entangled in the chain of birth and death by transmigrating into different bodies on different planets under the direction of the Supreme Lord. Unless, therefore, one is beyond the boundary of this nescience, one cannot get free from the threefold miseries of material life. That is the law of nature.
The Lord, however, out of His causeless mercy, because He is more merciful to the suffering living beings than they can expect, appears before them and renovates the principles of devotional service, comprised of hearing, chanting, remembering, serving, worshiping, praying, cooperating and surrendering unto Him. Adoption of all the above-mentioned items, or any one of them, can help a conditioned soul get out of the tangle of nescience and thus become liberated from all material sufferings created by the living being illusioned by the external energy. This particular type of mercy is bestowed upon the living being by the Lord in the form of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
TEXT 36
çåëvanti gäyanti gåëanty abhékñëaçaù
smaranti nandanti tavehitaà janäù
ta eva paçyanty acireëa tävakaà
bhava-pravähoparamaà padämbujam


çåëvanti—hear; gäyanti—chant; gåëanti—take; abhékñëaçaù—continuously; smaranti—remember; nandanti—take pleasure; tava—Your; éhitam—activities; janäù—people in general; te—they; eva—certainly; paçyanti—can see; acireëa—very soon; tävakam—Your; bhava-praväha—the current of rebirth; uparamam—cessation; pada-ambujam—lotus feet.

O Kåñëa, those who continuously hear, chant and repeat Your transcendental activities, or take pleasure in others' doing so, certainly see Your lotus feet, which alone can stop the repetition of birth and death.

PURPORT
The Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa cannot be seen by our present conditional vision. In order to see Him, one has to change his present vision by developing a different condition of life full of spontaneous love of Godhead. When Çré Kåñëa was personally present on the face of the globe, not everyone could see Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Materialists like Rävaëa, Hiraëyakaçipu, Kaàsa, Jaräsandha and Çiçupäla were highly qualified personalities by acquisition of material assets, but they were unable to appreciate the presence of the Lord. Therefore, even though the Lord may be present before our eyes, it is not possible to see Him unless we have the necessary vision. This necessary qualification is developed by the process of devotional service only, beginning with hearing about the Lord from the right sources. The Bhagavad-gétä is one of the popular literatures which are generally heard, chanted, repeated, etc., by the people in general, but in spite of such hearing, etc., sometimes it is experienced that the performer of such devotional service does not see the Lord face to face. The reason is that the first item, çravaëa, is very important. If hearing is from the right sources, it acts very quickly. Generally people hear from unauthorized persons. Such unauthorized persons may be very learned by academic qualifications, but because they do not follow the principles of devotional service, hearing from them becomes a sheer waste of time. Sometimes they fashionably interpret the texts to suit their own purposes. Therefore, first one should select a competent and bona fide speaker and then hear from him. When the hearing process is perfect and complete, the other processes become automatically perfect in their own way.
There are different transcendental activities of the Lord, and each and every one of them is competent to bestow the desired result, provided the hearing process is perfect. In the Bhägavatam the activities of the Lord begin from His dealings with the Päëòavas. There are many other pastimes of the Lord in connection with His dealings with the asuras and others. And in the Tenth Canto the sublime dealings with His conjugal associates, the gopés and His married wives at Dvärakä, are mentioned. Since the Lord is absolute, there is no difference in the transcendental nature of each and every dealing of the Lord. But sometimes people, in an unauthorized hearing process, take more interest in hearing about His dealings with the gopés. Such an inclination indicates the lusty feelings of the hearer, so a bona fide speaker of the dealings of the Lord never indulges in such hearings. One must hear about the Lord from the very beginning, as in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam or any other scriptures, and that will help the hearer attain perfection by progressive development. One should not, therefore, consider that His dealings with the Päëòavas are less important than His dealings with the gopés. We must always remember that the Lord is always transcendental to all mundane attachment. In all the above-mentioned dealings of the Lord, He is the hero in all circumstances, and hearing about Him or about His devotees or combatants is conducive to spiritual life. It is said that the Vedas and Puräëas, etc., are all made to revive our lost relation with Him. Hearing all these scriptures is essential.
TEXT 37
apy adya nas tvaà sva-kåtehita prabho
jihäsasi svit suhådo 'nujévinaù
yeñäà na cänyad bhavataù padämbujät
paräyaëaà räjasu yojitäàhasäm


api—if; adya—today; naù—us; tvam—You; sva-kåta—self-executed; éhita—all duties; prabho—O my Lord; jihäsasi—giving up; svit—possibly; suhådaù—intimate friends; anujévinaù—living at the mercy of; yeñäm—of whom; na—nor; ca—and; anyat—anyone else; bhavataù—Your; pada-ambujät—from the lotus feet; paräyaëam—dependent; räjasu—unto the kings; yojita—engaged in; aàhasäm—enmity.

O my Lord, You have executed all duties Yourself. Are You leaving us today, though we are completely dependent on Your mercy and have no one else to protect us, now when all kings are at enmity with us?

PURPORT
The Päëòavas are most fortunate because with all good luck they were entirely dependent on the mercy of the Lord. In the material world, to be dependent on the mercy of someone else is the utmost sign of misfortune, but in the case of our transcendental relation with the Lord, it is the most fortunate case when we can live completely dependent on Him. The material disease is due to thinking of becoming independent of everything. But the cruel material nature does not allow us to become independent. The false attempt to become independent of the stringent laws of nature is known as material advancement of experimental knowledge. The whole material world is moving on this false attempt of becoming independent of the laws of nature. Beginning from Rävaëa, who wanted to prepare a direct staircase to the planets of heaven, down to the people of the present age, they are trying to overcome the laws of nature. They are trying now to approach distant planetary systems by electronic mechanical power. But the highest goal of human civilization is to work hard under the guidance of the Lord and become completely dependent on Him. The highest achievement of perfect civilization is to work with valor but at the same time depend completely on the Lord. The Päëòavas were the ideal executors of this standard of civilization. Undoubtedly they were completely dependent on the good will of Lord Çré Kåñëa, but they were not idle parasites of the Lord. They were all highly qualified, both by personal character and by physical activities. Still they always looked for the mercy of the Lord because they knew that every living being is dependent by constitutional position. The perfection of life is, therefore, to become dependent on the will of the Lord instead of becoming falsely independent in the material world. Those who try to become falsely independent of the Lord are called anätha, or without any guardian, whereas those who are completely dependent on the will of the Lord are called sanätha, or those having someone to protect them. Therefore we must try to be sanätha so that we can always be protected from the unfavorable condition of material existence. By the deluding power of the external material nature we forget that the material condition of life is the most undesirable perplexity. The Bhagavad-gétä (7.19) therefore directs us that after many, many births a fortunate person becomes aware of the fact that Väsudeva is all in all and that the best way of leading one's life is to surrender unto Him completely. That is the sign of a mahätmä. All the members of the Päëòava family were mahätmäs in household life. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the head of these mahätmäs, and Queen Kuntédevé was the mother. The lessons of the Bhagavad-gétä and all the Puräëas, specifically the Bhägavata Puräëa, are therefore inevitably connected with the history of the Päëòava mahätmäs. For them, separation from the Lord was just like the separation of a fish from water. Çrématé Kuntédevé, therefore, felt such separation like a thunderbolt, and the whole prayer of the Queen is to try to persuade the Lord to stay with them. After the Battle of Kurukñetra, although the inimical kings were killed, their sons and grandsons were still there to deal with the Päëòavas. It is not only the Päëòavas who were put into the condition of enmity, but all of us are always in such a condition, and the best way of living is to become completely dependent on the will of the Lord and thereby overcome all difficulties of material existence.
TEXT 38
ke vayaà näma-rüpäbhyäà
yadubhiù saha päëòaväù
bhavato 'darçanaà yarhi
håñékäëäm iveçituù


ke—who are; vayam—we; näma-rüpäbhyäm—without fame and ability; yadubhiù—with the Yadus; saha—along with; päëòaväù—and the Päëòavas; bhavataù—Your; adarçanam—absence; yarhi—as if; håñékäëäm—of the senses; iva—like; éçituù—of the living being.

As the name and fame of a particular body is finished with the disappearance of the living spirit, similarly if You do not look upon us, all our fame and activities, along with the Päëòavas and Yadus, will end at once. 

PURPORT
Kuntédevé is quite aware that the existence of the Päëòavas is due to Çré Kåñëa only. The Päëòavas are undoubtedly well established in name and fame and are guided by the great King Yudhiñöhira, who is morality personified, and the Yadus are undoubtedly great allies, but without the guidance of Lord Kåñëa all of them are nonentities, as much as the senses of the body are useless without the guidance of consciousness. No one should be proud of his prestige, power and fame without being guided by the favor of the Supreme Lord. The living beings are always dependent, and the ultimate dependable object is the Lord Himself. We may, therefore, invent by our advancement of material knowledge all sorts of counteracting material resources, but without being guided by the Lord all such inventions end in fiasco, however strong and stout the reactionary elements may be.
TEXT 39
neyaà çobhiñyate tatra
yathedänéà gadädhara
tvat-padair aìkitä bhäti
sva-lakñaëa-vilakñitaiù


na—not; iyam—this land of our kingdom; çobhiñyate—will appear beautiful; tatra—then; yathä—as it is; idäném—now; gadädhara—O Kåñëa; tvat—Your; padaiù—by the feet; aìkitä—marked; bhäti—is dazzling; sva-lakñaëa—Your own marks; vilakñitaiù—by the impressions.

O Gadädhara [Kåñëa], our kingdom is now being marked by the impressions of Your feet, and therefore it appears beautiful. But when You leave, it will no longer be so.

PURPORT
There are certain particular marks on the feet of the Lord which distinguish the Lord from others. The marks of the flag, thunderbolt, instrument for driving an elephant, umbrella, lotus, disc, etc., are on the bottom of the Lord's feet. These marks are impressed upon the soft dust of the land where the Lord traverses. The land of Hastinäpura was thus marked while Lord Çré Kåñëa was there with the Päëòavas, and the kingdom of the Päëòavas thus flourished by such auspicious signs. Kuntédevé pointed out these distinguishing features and was afraid of ill luck in the absence of the Lord.
TEXT 40
ime jana-padäù svåddhäù
supakvauñadhi-vérudhaù
vanädri-nady-udanvanto
hy edhante tava vékñitaiù


ime—all these; jana-padäù—cities and towns; svåddhäù—flourished; supakva—nature; auñadhi—herbs; vérudhaù—vegetables; vana—forests; adri—hills; nadé—rivers; udanvantaù—seas; hi—certainly; edhante—increasing; tava—by You; vékñitaiù—seen.

All these cities and villages are flourishing in all respects because the herbs and grains are in abundance, the trees are full of fruits, the rivers are flowing, the hills are full of minerals, and the oceans are full of wealth. And this is all due to Your glancing over them. 

PURPORT
Human prosperity flourishes by natural gifts and not by gigantic industrial enterprises. The gigantic industrial enterprises are products of a godless civilization, and they cause the destruction of the noble aims of human life. The more we go on increasing such troublesome industries to squeeze out the vital energy of the human being, the more there will be unrest and dissatisfaction of the people in general, although a few only can live lavishly by exploitation. The natural gifts such as grains and vegetables, fruits, rivers, the hills full of jewels and minerals, and the seas full of pearls are supplied by the order of the Supreme, and as He desires, material nature produces them in abundance or restricts them at times. The natural law is that the human being may take advantage of these godly gifts of nature and satisfactorily flourish on them without being captivated by the exploitative motive of lording it over material nature. The more we attempt to exploit material nature according to our whims of enjoyment, the more we shall become entrapped by the reaction of such exploitative attempts. If we have sufficient grains, fruits, vegetables and herbs, then what is the necessity of running a slaughterhouse and killing poor animals? A man need not kill an animal if he has sufficient grains and vegetables to eat. The flow of river waters fertilizes the fields, and there is more than what we need. Minerals are produced in the hills, and the jewels in the ocean. If the human civilization has sufficient grains, minerals, jewels, water, milk, etc., then why should it hanker after terrible industrial enterprises at the cost of the labor of some unfortunate men? But all these natural gifts are dependent on the mercy of the Lord. What we need, therefore, is to be obedient to the laws of the Lord and achieve the perfection of human life by devotional service. The indications by Kuntédevé are just to the point. She desires that God's mercy be bestowed upon them so that natural prosperity be maintained by His grace.
TEXT 41
atha viçveça viçvätman
viçva-mürte svakeñu me
sneha-päçam imaà chindhi
dåòhaà päëòuñu våñëiñu


atha—therefore; viçva-éça—O Lord of the universe; viçva-ätman—O soul of the universe; viçva-mürte—O personality of the universal form; svakeñu—unto my own kinsmen; me—my; sneha-päçam—tie of affection; imam—this; chindhi—cut off; dåòham—deep; päëòuñu—for the Päëòavas; våñëiñu—for the Våñëis also.

O Lord of the universe, soul of the universe, O personality of the form of the universe, please, therefore, sever my tie of affection for my kinsmen, the Päëòavas and the Våñëis.

PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord is ashamed to ask anything in self-interest from the Lord. But the householders are sometimes obliged to ask favors from the Lord, being bound by the tie of family affection. Çrématé Kuntédevé was conscious of this fact, and therefore she prayed to the Lord to cut off her affectionate tie to her own kinsmen, the Päëòavas and the Våñëis. The Päëòavas are her own sons, and the Våñëis are the members of her paternal family. Kåñëa was equally related to both the families. Both the families required the Lord's help because both were dependent devotees of the Lord. Çrématé Kuntédevé wished Çré Kåñëa to remain with her sons the Päëòavas, but by His doing so her paternal house would be bereft of the benefit. All these partialities troubled the mind of Kunté, and therefore she desired to cut off the affectionate tie.
A pure devotee cuts off the limited ties of affection for his family and widens his activities of devotional service for all forgotten souls. The typical example is the band of Six Gosvämés, who followed the path of Lord Caitanya. All of them belonged to the most enlightened and cultured rich families of the higher castes, but for the benefit of the mass of population they left their comfortable homes and became mendicants. To cut off all family affection means to broaden the field of activities. Without doing this, no one can be qualified as a brähmaëa, a king, a public leader or a devotee of the Lord. The Personality of Godhead, as an ideal king, showed this by example. Çré Rämacandra cut off the tie of affection for His beloved wife to manifest the qualities of an ideal king.
Such personalities as a brähmaëa, a devotee, a king or a public leader must be very broadminded in discharging their respective duties. Çrématé Kuntédevé was conscious of this fact, and being weak she prayed to be free from such bondage of family affection. The Lord is addressed as the Lord of the universe, or the Lord of the universal mind, indicating His all-powerful ability to cut the hard knot of family affection. Therefore, it is sometimes experienced that the Lord, out of His special affinity towards a weak devotee, breaks the family affection by force of circumstances arranged by His all-powerful energy. By doing so He causes the devotee to become completely dependent on Him and thus clears the path for his going back to Godhead.
TEXT 42
tvayi me 'nanya-viñayä
matir madhu-pate 'sakåt
ratim udvahatäd addhä
gaìgevaugham udanvati


tvayi—unto You; me—my; ananya-viñayä—unalloyed; matiù—attention; madhu-pate—O Lord of Madhu; asakåt—continuously; ratim—attraction; udvahatät—may overflow; addhä—directly; gaìgä—the Ganges; iva—like; ogham—flows; udanvati—down to the sea.

O Lord of Madhu, as the Ganges forever flows to the sea without hindrance, let my attraction be constantly drawn unto You without being diverted to anyone else.
PURPORT
Perfection of pure devotional service is attained when all attention is diverted towards the transcendental loving service of the Lord. To cut off the tie of all other affections does not mean complete negation of the finer elements, like affection for someone else. This is not possible. A living being, whoever he may be, must have this feeling of affection for others because this is a symptom of life. The symptoms of life, such as desire, anger, hankerings, feelings of attraction, etc., cannot be annihilated. Only the objective has to be changed. Desire cannot be negated, but in devotional service the desire is changed only for the service of the Lord in place of desire for sense gratification. The so-called affection for family, society, country, etc., consists of different phases of sense gratification. When this desire is changed for the satisfaction of the Lord, it is called devotional service.
In the Bhagavad-gétä we can see that it was just to satisfy his own personal desires that Arjuna refused to fight with his brothers and relations. But when he heard the message of the Lord, Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä, he changed his decision and served the Lord. And for his doing so, he became a famous devotee of the Lord, for it is declared in all the scriptures that Arjuna attained spiritual perfection by devotional service to the Lord in friendship. The fighting was there, the friendship was there, Arjuna was there, and Kåñëa was there, but Arjuna became a different person by devotional service. Therefore, the prayers of Kunté also indicate the same categorical changes in activities. Çrématé Kunté wanted to serve the Lord without diversion, and that was her prayer. This unalloyed devotion is the ultimate goal of life. Our attention is usually diverted to the service of something which is nongodly or not in the program of the Lord. When the program is changed into the service of the Lord, that is to say, when the senses are purified in relation with the service of the Lord, it is called pure unalloyed devotional service. Çrématé Kuntédevé wanted that perfection and prayed for it from the Lord.
Her affection for the Päëòavas and the Våñëis is not out of the range of devotional service because the service of the Lord and the service of the devotees are identical. Sometimes service to the devotee is more valuable than service to the Lord. But here the affection of Kuntédevé for the Päëòavas and the Våñëis was due to family relation. This tie of affection in terms of material relation is the relation of mäyä because the relations of the body or the mind are due to the influence of the external energy. Relations of the soul, established in relation with the Supreme Soul, are factual relations. When Kuntédevé wanted to cut off the family relation, she meant to cut off the relation of the skin. The skin relation is the cause of material bondage, but the relation of the soul is the cause of freedom. This relation of the soul to the soul can be established by the medium of the relation with the Supersoul. Seeing in the darkness is not seeing. But seeing by the light of the sun means to see the sun and everything else which was unseen in the darkness. That is the way of devotional service.
TEXT 43
çré-kåñëa kåñëa-sakha våñëy-åñabhävani-dhrug-
räjanya-vaàça-dahanänapavarga-vérya
govinda go-dvija-surärti-harävatära
yogeçvaräkhila-guro bhagavan namas te


çré-kåñëa—O Çré Kåñëa; kåñëa-sakha—O friend of Arjuna; våñëi—of descendants of Våñëi; åñabha—O chief; avani—the earth; dhruk—rebellious; räjanya-vaàça—dynasties of the kings; dahana—O annihilator; anapavarga—without deterioration; vérya—of prowess; govinda—O proprietor of Golokadhäma; go—of the cows; dvija—the brähmaëas; sura—the demigods; arti-hara—to relieve distress; avatära—O Lord who descend; yoga-éçvara—O master of all mystic powers; akhila—universal; guro—O preceptor; bhagavan—O possessor of all opulences; namaù te—respectful obeisances unto You.

O Kåñëa, O friend of Arjuna, O chief amongst the descendants of Våñëi, You are the destroyer of those political parties which are disturbing elements on this earth. Your prowess never deteriorates. You are the proprietor of the transcendental abode, and You descend to relieve the distresses of the cows, the brähmaëas and the devotees. You possess all mystic powers, and You are the preceptor of the entire universe. You are the almighty God, and I offer You my respectful obeisances.

PURPORT
A summary of the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa is made herein by Çrématé Kuntédevé. The almighty Lord has His eternal transcendental abode, where He is engaged in keeping surabhi cows. He is served by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune. He descends to the material world to reclaim His devotees and to annihilate the disturbing elements amongst the groups of political parties and kings who are supposed to be in charge of administration work. He creates, maintains and annihilates by His unlimited energies, and still He is always full with prowess and does not deteriorate in potency. The cows, the brähmaëas and the devotees of the Lord are all objects of His special attention because they are very important factors for the general welfare of living beings.

Song-6 Prayers by Bhismadeva (SB 1.9.32-42)
TEXT 32
çré-bhéñma uväca
iti matir upakalpitä vitåñëä
bhagavati sätvata-puìgave vibhümni
sva-sukham upagate kvacid vihartuà
prakåtim upeyuñi yad-bhava-pravähaù


çré-bhéñmaù uväca—Çré Bhéñmadeva said; iti—thus; matiù—thinking, feeling and willing; upakalpitä—invested; vitåñëä—freed from all sense desires; bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead; sätvata-puìgave—unto the leader of the devotees; vibhümni—unto the great; sva-sukham—self-satisfaction; upagate—unto Him who has attained it; kvacit—sometimes; vihartum—out of transcendental pleasure; prakåtim—in the material world; upeyuñi—do accept it; yat-bhava—from whom the creation; pravähaù—is made and annihilated.

Bhéñmadeva said: Let me now invest my thinking, feeling and willing, which were so long engaged in different subjects and occupational duties, in the all-powerful Lord Çré Kåñëa. He is always self-satisfied, but sometimes, being the leader of the devotees, He enjoys transcendental pleasure by descending to the material world, although it is from Him only that the material world is created.

PURPORT
Because Bhéñmadeva was a statesman, the head of the Kuru dynasty, a great general and a leader of kñatriyas, his mind was strewn over so many subjects, and his thinking, feeling and willing were engaged in different matters. Now, in order to achieve pure devotional service, he wanted to invest all powers of thinking, feeling and willing entirely in the Supreme Being, Lord Kåñëa. He is described herein as the leader of the devotees and all-powerful. Although Lord Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead, He Himself descends to earth to bestow upon His pure devotees the boon of devotional service. He descends sometimes as Lord Kåñëa as He is, and sometimes as Lord Caitanya. Both are leaders of the pure devotees. Pure devotees of the Lord have no desire other than the service of the Lord, and therefore they are called sätvatas. The Lord is the chief amongst such sätvatas. Bhéñmadeva, therefore, had no other desires—he was completely free of all material desires. Unless one is purified from all sorts of material desires, the Lord does not become one's leader. Desires cannot be wiped out, but they have only to be purified. It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä by the Lord Himself that He gives His instruction from within the heart of a pure devotee who is constantly engaged in the service of the Lord. Such instruction is given not for any material purpose but only for going back home, back to Godhead (Bg. 10.10). For the ordinary man who wants to lord it over material nature, the Lord only sanctions and becomes a witness of activities, but He never gives the nondevotee instructions for going back to Godhead. That is the difference in dealings by the Lord with different living beings, both the devotee and the nondevotee. He is the leader of all the living beings, as the king of the state rules both the prisoners and the free citizens. But His dealings are different in terms of devotee and nondevotee. Nondevotees never care to take any instruction from the Lord, and therefore the Lord is silent in their case, although He witnesses all their activities and awards them the necessary results, good or bad. The devotees are above this material goodness and badness. They are progressive on the path of transcendence, and therefore they have no desire for anything material. The devotee also knows Çré Kåñëa as the original Näräyaëa because Lord Çré Kåñëa, by His plenary portion, appears as the Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, the original source of all material creation. The Lord also desires the association of His pure devotees, and for them only the Lord descends to the earth and enlivens them. The Lord appears out of His own will. He is not forced by the conditions of material nature. He is therefore described here as the vibhu, or the Almighty, for He is never conditioned by the laws of material nature.
TEXT 33
tri-bhuvana-kamanaà tamäla-varëaà
ravi-kara-gaura-varämbaraà dadhäne
vapur alaka-kulävåtänanäbjaà
vijaya-sakhe ratir astu me 'navadyä


tri-bhuvana—three statuses of planetary systems; kamanam—the most desirable; tamäla-varëam—bluish like the tamäla tree; ravi-kara—sunrays; gaura—golden color; varämbaram—glittering dress; dadhäne—one who wears; vapuù—body; alaka-kula-ävåta—covered with paintings of sandalwood pulp; änana-abjam—face like a lotus; vijaya-sakhe—unto the friend of Arjuna; ratiù astu—may attraction be reposed upon Him; me—my; anavadyä—without desire for fruitive results.

Çré Kåñëa is the intimate friend of Arjuna. He has appeared on this earth in His transcendental body, which resembles the bluish color of the tamäla tree. His body attracts everyone in the three planetary systems [upper, middle and lower]. May His glittering yellow dress and His lotus face, covered with paintings of sandalwood pulp, be the object of my attraction, and may I not desire fruitive results.

PURPORT
When Çré Kåñëa by His own internal pleasure appears on earth, He does so by the agency of His internal potency. The attractive features of His transcendental body are desired in all the three worlds, namely the upper, middle and lower planetary systems. Nowhere in the universe are there such beautiful bodily features as those of Lord Kåñëa. Therefore His transcendental body has nothing to do with anything materially created. Arjuna is described here as the conqueror, and Kåñëa is described as his intimate friend. Bhéñmadeva, on his bed of arrows after the Battle of Kurukñetra, is remembering the particular dress of Lord Kåñëa which He put on as the driver of Arjuna's chariot. While fighting was going on between Arjuna and Bhéñma, Bhéñma's attraction was drawn by the glittering dress of Kåñëa, and indirectly he admired his so-called enemy Arjuna for possessing the Lord as his friend. Arjuna was always a conqueror because the Lord was his friend. Bhéñmadeva takes this opportunity to address the Lord as vijaya-sakhe (friend of Arjuna) because the Lord is pleased when He is addressed conjointly with His devotees, who are related with Him in different transcendental humors. While Kåñëa was the charioteer of Arjuna, sunrays glittered on the dress of the Lord, and the beautiful hue created by the reflection of such rays was never forgotten by Bhéñmadeva. As a great fighter he was relishing the relation with Kåñëa in the chivalrous humor. Transcendental relation with the Lord in any one of the different rasas (humors) is relishable by the respective devotees in the highest ecstasy. Less intelligent mundaners who want to make a show of being transcendentally related with the Lord artificially jump at once to the relation of conjugal love, imitating the damsels of Vrajadhäma. Such a cheap relation with the Lord exhibits only the base mentality of the mundaner because one who has relished conjugal humor with the Lord cannot be attached to worldly conjugal rasa, which is condemned even by mundane ethics. The eternal relation of a particular soul with the Lord is evolved. A genuine relation of the living being with the Supreme Lord can take any form out of the five principal rasas, and it does not make any difference in transcendental degree to the genuine devotee. Bhéñmadeva is a concrete example of this, and it should be carefully observed how the great general is transcendentally related with the Lord.
TEXT 34
yudhi turaga-rajo-vidhümra-viñvak-
kaca-lulita-çramaväry-alaìkåtäsye
mama niçita-çarair vibhidyamäna-
tvaci vilasat-kavace 'stu kåñëa ätmä


yudhi—on the battlefield; turaga—horses; rajaù—dust; vidhümra—turned an ashen color; viñvak—waving; kaca—hair; lulita—scattered; çrama-väri—perspiration due to labor; alaìkåta—decorated with; äsye—unto the face; mama—my; niçita—sharp; çaraiù—by the arrows; vibhidyamäna—pierced by; tvaci—in the skin; vilasat—enjoying pleasure; kavace—protective armor; astu—let there be; kåñëe—unto Çré Kåñëa; ätmä—mind.

On the battlefield [where Çré Kåñëa attended Arjuna out of friendship], the flowing hair of Lord Kåñëa turned ashen due to the dust raised by the hoofs of the horses. And because of His labor, beads of sweat wetted His face. All these decorations, intensified by the wounds on His skin dealt by my sharp arrows, were enjoyed by Him. Let my mind thus go unto Çré Kåñëa.

PURPORT
The Lord is the absolute form of eternity, bliss and knowledge. As such, transcendental loving service to the Lord in one of the five principal relations, namely çänta, däsya, sakhya, vätsalya and mädhurya, i.e., neutrality, servitorship, fraternity, parental affection and conjugal love, is graciously accepted by the Lord when offered to the Lord in genuine love and affection. Çré Bhéñmadeva is a great devotee of the Lord in the relation of servitorship. Thus his throwing of sharp arrows at the transcendental body of the Lord is as good as the worship of another devotee who throws soft roses upon Him.
It appears that Bhéñmadeva is repenting the actions he committed against the person of the Lord. But factually the Lord's body was not at all pained, due to His transcendental existence. His body is not matter. Both He Himself and His body are complete spiritual identity. Spirit is never pierced, burnt, dried, moistened, etc. This is vividly explained in the Bhagavad-gétä. So also it is stated in the Skanda Puräëa. It is said there that spirit is always uncontaminated and indestructible. It cannot be distressed, nor can it be dried up. When Lord Viñëu in His incarnation appears before us, He seems to be like one of the conditioned souls, materially encaged, just to bewilder the asuras, or the nonbelievers, who are always alert to kill the Lord, even from the very beginning of His appearance. Kaàsa wanted to kill Kåñëa, and Rävaëa wanted to kill Räma, because foolishly they were unaware of the fact that the Lord is never killed, for the spirit is never annihilated.
Therefore Bhéñmadeva's piercing of the body of Lord Kåñëa is a sort of bewildering problem for the nondevotee atheist, but those who are devotees, or liberated souls, are not bewildered.
Bhéñmadeva appreciated the all-merciful attitude of the Lord: although He had been disturbed by Bhéñmadeva's sharp arrows, He had not left Arjuna alone, nor was He reluctant to come before Bhéñma's deathbed even though He had been ill-treated by him on the battlefield. Bhéñma's repentance and the Lord's merciful attitude are both unique in this picture.
Çré Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, a great äcärya and devotee in the humor of conjugal love with the Lord, remarks very saliently in this regard. He says that the wounds created on the body of the Lord by the sharp arrows of Bhéñmadeva were as pleasing to the Lord as the biting of His fiancee when she bites the body of the Lord directed by a strong sense of sex desire. Such biting by the opposite sex is never taken as a sign of enmity, even if there is a wound on the body. Therefore, the fighting as an exchange of transcendental pleasure between the Lord and His pure devotee, Çré Bhéñmadeva, was not at all mundane. Besides that, since the Lord's body and the Lord are identical, there was no possibility of wounds in the absolute body. The apparent wounds caused by the sharp arrows are misleading to the common man, but one who has a little absolute knowledge can understand the transcendental exchange in the chivalrous relation. The Lord was perfectly happy with the wounds caused by the sharp arrows of Bhéñmadeva. The word vibhidyamäna is significant because the Lord's skin is not different from the Lord. Because our skin is different from our soul, in our case the word vibhidyamäna, or "being bruised and cut," would have been quite suitable. Transcendental bliss is of different varieties, and the variety of activities in the mundane world is but a perverted reflection of transcendental bliss. Because everything in the mundane world is qualitatively mundane, it is full of inebrieties, whereas in the absolute realm, because everything is of the same absolute nature, there are varieties of enjoyment without inebriety. The Lord enjoyed the wounds created by His great devotee Bhéñmadeva, and because Bhéñmadeva is a devotee in the chivalrous relation, he fixes up his mind on Kåñëa in that wounded condition.
TEXT 35
sapadi sakhi-vaco niçamya madhye
nija-parayor balayo rathaà niveçya
sthitavati para-sainikäyur akñëä
håtavati pärtha-sakhe ratir mamästu


sapadi—on the battlefield; sakhi-vacaù—command of the friend; niçamya—after hearing; madhye—in the midst; nija—His own; parayoù—and the opposite party; balayoù—strength; ratham—chariot; niveçya—having entered; sthitavati—while staying there; para-sainika—of the soldiers on the opposite side; äyuù—duration of life; akñëä—by looking over; håtavati—act of diminishing; pärtha—of Arjuna, son of Påthä (Kunté); sakhe—unto the friend; ratiù—intimate relation; mama—my; astu—let there be.

In obedience to the command of His friend, Lord Çré Kåñëa entered the arena of the Battlefield of Kurukñetra between the soldiers of Arjuna and Duryodhana, and while there He shortened the life spans of the opposite party by His merciful glance. This was done simply by His looking at the enemy. Let my mind be fixed upon that Kåñëa.

PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (1.21-25) Arjuna ordered the infallible Lord Çré Kåñëa to place his chariot between the phalanxes of the soldiers. He asked Him to stay there until he had finished observing the enemies he had to face in the battle. When the Lord was so asked, He at once did so, just like an order carrier. And the Lord pointed out all the important men on the opposite side, saying, "Here is Bhéñma, here is Droëa," and so on. The Lord, being the supreme living being, is never the order supplier or order carrier of anyone, whoever he may be. But out of His causeless mercy and affection for His pure devotees, sometimes He carries out the order of the devotee like an awaiting servant. By executing the order of a devotee, the Lord becomes pleased, as a father is pleased to carry out the order of his small child. This is possible only out of pure transcendental love between the Lord and His devotees, and Bhéñmadeva was quite aware of this fact. He therefore addressed the Lord as the friend of Arjuna.
The Lord diminished the duration of life of the opposite party by His merciful glance. It is said that all the fighters who assembled on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra attained salvation by personally seeing the Lord at the time of death. Therefore, His diminishing the duration of life of Arjuna's enemy does not mean that He was partial to the cause of Arjuna. Factually He was merciful to the opposite party because they would not have attained salvation by dying at home in the ordinary course of life. Here was a chance to see the Lord at the time of death and thus attain salvation from material life. Therefore, the Lord is all-good, and whatever He does is for everyone's good. Apparently it was for the victory of Arjuna, His intimate friend, but factually it was for the good of Arjuna's enemies. Such are the transcendental activities of the Lord, and whoever understands this also gets salvation after quitting this material body. The Lord does no wrong in any circumstance because He is absolute, all-good at all times.
TEXT 36
vyavahita-påtanä-mukhaà nirékñya
sva-jana-vadhäd vimukhasya doña-buddhyä
kumatim aharad ätma-vidyayä yaç
caraëa-ratiù paramasya tasya me 'stu


vyavahita—standing at a distance; påtanä—soldiers; mukham—faces; nirékñya—by looking upon; sva-jana—kinsmen; vadhät—from the act of killing; vimukhasya—one who is reluctant; doña-buddhyä—by polluted intelligence; kumatim—poor fund of knowledge; aharat—eradicated; ätma-vidyayä—by transcendental knowledge; yaù—He who; caraëa—to the feet; ratiù—attraction; paramasya—of the Supreme; tasya—for Him; me—my; astu—let there be.

When Arjuna was seemingly polluted by ignorance upon observing the soldiers and commanders before him on the battlefield, the Lord eradicated his ignorance by delivering transcendental knowledge. May His lotus feet always remain the object of my attraction.

PURPORT
The kings and the commanders were to stand in the front of the fighting soldiers. That was the system of actual fighting. The kings and commanders were not so-called presidents or ministers of defense, as they are today. They would not stay home while the poor soldiers or mercenaries were fighting face to face. This may be the regulation of modern democracy, but when actual monarchy was prevailing, the monarchs were not cowards elected without consideration of royal qualification. As it was evident from the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, all the executive heads of both parties, like Droëa, Bhéñma, Arjuna and Duryodhana, were not sleeping; all of them were actual participants in the fighting, which was selected to be executed at a place away from the civil residential quarters. This means that the innocent citizens were immune from all effects of fighting between the rival royal parties. The citizens had no business in seeing what was going to happen during such fighting. They were to pay one fourth of their income to the ruler, whether he be Arjuna or Duryodhana. All the commanders of the parties on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra were standing face to face, and Arjuna saw them with great compassion and lamented that he was to kill his kinsmen on the battlefield for the sake of the empire. He was not at all afraid of the giant military phalanx presented by Duryodhana, but because he was a merciful devotee of the Lord, renunciation of worldly things was natural for him, and thus he decided not to fight for worldly possessions. But this was due to a poor fund of knowledge, and therefore it is said here that his intelligence became polluted. His intelligence could not be polluted at any time because he was a devotee and constant companion of the Lord, as is clear in the Fourth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä. Arjuna's intelligence became apparently polluted because otherwise there would not have been a chance to deliver the teachings of the Bhagavad-gétä for the good of all polluted conditioned souls encaged in material bondage by their misconceptions concerning their relationship with the false material body. The Bhagavad-gétä was delivered to the conditioned souls of the world to deliver them from the wrong conception of identifying the body with the soul and to reestablish the soul's eternal relation with the Supreme Lord. Ätma-vidyä, or transcendental knowledge of Himself, was primarily spoken by the Lord for the benefit of all concerned in all parts of the universe.
TEXT 37
sva-nigamam apahäya mat-pratijïäm
åtam adhikartum avapluto rathasthaù
dhåta-ratha-caraëo 'bhyayäc caladgur
harir iva hantum ibhaà gatottaréyaù


sva-nigamam—own truthfulness; apahäya—for nullifying; mat-pratijïäm—my own promise; åtam—factual; adhi—more; kartum—for doing it; avaplutaù—getting down; ratha-sthaù—from the chariot; dhåta—taking up; ratha—chariot; caraëaù—wheel; abhyayät—went hurriedly; caladguù—trampling the earth; hariù—lion; iva—like; hantum—to kill; ibham—elephant; gata—leaving aside; uttaréyaù—covering cloth.

Fulfilling my vow and sacrificing His own promise, He got down from the chariot, took up its wheel, and ran towards me hurriedly, just as a lion goes to kill an elephant. He even dropped His outer garment on the way.

PURPORT
The Battle of Kurukñetra was fought on military principles but at the same time in a sporting spirit, as a friend fights with another friend. Duryodhana criticized Bhéñmadeva, alleging that he was reluctant to kill Arjuna because of paternal affection. A kñatriya cannot tolerate insults on the principle of fighting. Bhéñmadeva therefore promised that the next day he would kill all five Päëòavas with special weapons made for the purpose. Duryodhana was satisfied, and he kept the arrows with him to be delivered the next day during the fight. By tricks Arjuna took the arrows from Duryodhana, and Bhéñmadeva could understand that this was the trick of Lord Kåñëa. So he took a vow that the next day Kåñëa would have to take up weapons Himself or His friend Arjuna would die. In the next day's fighting Bhéñmadeva fought so violently that both Arjuna and Kåñëa were in trouble. Arjuna was almost defeated; the situation was so tense that he was about to be killed by Bhéñmadeva the very next moment. At that time Lord Kåñëa wanted to please His devotee Bhéñma by keeping Bhéñma's promise, which was more important than His own. Thus seemingly He broke His own promise. He had promised before the beginning of the Battle of Kurukñetra that He would remain without weapons and would not use His strength for either of the parties. But to protect Arjuna He got down from the chariot, took up the wheel of the chariot and hurriedly rushed at Bhéñmadeva in an angry mood, as a lion goes to kill an elephant. He dropped His covering cloth on the way, and out of great anger He did not know that He had dropped it. Bhéñmadeva at once gave up his weapons and stood to be killed by Kåñëa, his beloved Lord. The fighting of the day was thus ended at that very moment, and Arjuna was saved. Of course, there was no possibility of Arjuna's death because the Lord Himself was on the chariot, but because Bhéñmadeva wanted to see Lord Kåñëa take up some weapon to save His friend, the Lord created this situation, making Arjuna's death appear imminent. He stood before Bhéñmadeva to show him that his promise was fulfilled and that He had taken up the wheel.
TEXT 38
çita-viçikha-hato viçérëa-daàçaù
kñataja-paripluta ätatäyino me
prasabham abhisasära mad-vadhärthaà
sa bhavatu me bhagavän gatir mukundaù


çita—sharp; viçikha—arrows; hataù—wounded by; viçérëa-daàçaù—scattered shield; kñataja—by wounds; pariplutaù—smeared with blood; ätatäyinaù—the great aggressor; me—my; prasabham—in an angry mood; abhisasära—began to move on; mat-vadha-artham—for the purpose of killing me; saù—He; bhavatu—may become; me—my; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; gatiù—destination; mukundaù—who awards salvation.

May He, Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, who awards salvation, be my ultimate destination. On the battlefield He charged me, as if angry because of the wounds dealt by my sharp arrows. His shield was scattered, and His body was smeared with blood due to the wounds.

PURPORT
The dealings of Lord Kåñëa and Bhéñmadeva on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra are interesting because the activities of Lord Çré Kåñëa appeared to be partial to Arjuna and at enmity with Bhéñmadeva; but factually all this was especially meant to show special favor to Bhéñmadeva, a great devotee of the Lord. The astounding feature of such dealings is that a devotee can please the Lord by playing the part of an enemy. The Lord, being absolute, can accept service from His pure devotee even in the garb of an enemy. The Supreme Lord cannot have any enemy, nor can a so-called enemy harm Him because He is ajita, or unconquerable. But still He takes pleasure when His pure devotee beats Him like an enemy or rebukes Him from a superior position, although no one can be superior to the Lord. These are some of the transcendental reciprocatory dealings of the devotee with the Lord. And those who have no information of pure devotional service cannot penetrate into the mystery of such dealings. Bhéñmadeva played the part of a valiant warrior, and he purposely pierced the body of the Lord so that to the common eyes it appeared that the Lord was wounded, but factually all this was to bewilder the nondevotees. The Lord's all-spiritual body cannot be wounded, and a devotee cannot become the enemy of the Lord. Had it been so, Bhéñmadeva would not have desired to have the very same Lord as the ultimate destination of his life. Had Bhéñmadeva been an enemy of the Lord, Lord Kåñëa could have annihilated him without even moving. There would have been no need to come before Bhéñmadeva with blood and wounds. But He did so because the warrior devotee wanted to see the transcendental beauty of the Lord decorated with wounds created by a pure devotee. This is the way of exchanging transcendental rasa, or relations between the Lord and the servitor. By such dealings both the Lord and the devotee become glorified in their respective positions. The Lord was so angry that Arjuna checked Him when He was moving towards Bhéñmadeva, but in spite of Arjuna's checking, He proceeded towards Bhéñmadeva as a lover goes to a lover, without caring for hindrances. Apparently His determination was to kill Bhéñmadeva, but factually it was to please him, a great devotee of the Lord. The Lord is undoubtedly the deliverer of all conditioned souls. The impersonalists desire salvation from Him, and He always awards them according to their aspiration, but here Bhéñmadeva prays that the ultimate destination of his life be the Lord in His personal feature. All pure devotees aspire for this.
TEXT 39
vijaya-ratha-kuöumba ätta-totre
dhåta-haya-raçmini tac-chriyekñaëéye
bhagavati ratir astu me mumürñor
yam iha nirékñya hatä gatäù sva-rüpam


vijaya—Arjuna; ratha—chariot; kuöumbe—the object of protection at all risk; ätta-totre—with a whip in the right hand; dhåta-haya—controlling the horses; raçmini—ropes; tat-çriyä—beautifully standing; ékñaëéye—to look at; bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead; ratiù astu—let my attraction be; me—my; mumürñoù—one who is about to die; yam—upon whom; iha—in this world; nirékñya—by looking; hatäù—those who died; gatäù—attained; sva-rüpam—original form.

At the moment of death, let my ultimate attraction be to Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead. I concentrate my mind upon Arjuna's chariot driver, who stood with a whip in His right hand and a bridle rope in His left, and who was very careful to give protection to Arjuna's chariot by all means. Those who saw Him on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra attained their original forms after death.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord constantly sees the presence of the Lord within himself because of being transcendentally related by loving service. Such a pure devotee cannot forget the Lord for a moment. This is called trance. The mystic yogé tries to concentrate upon the Supersoul by restraining the senses from all other engagements, and thus he ultimately attains samädhi. A devotee more easily attains samädhi, or trance, by constantly remembering the Lord's personal feature along with His holy name, fame, pastimes, etc. Therefore, the concentration of the mystic yogé and that of the devotee are not on the same level. The concentration of the mystic yogé is mechanical, whereas that of the pure devotee is natural in pure love and spontaneous affection. Bhéñmadeva was a pure devotee, and as a military marshal he constantly remembered the battlefield feature of the Lord as Pärtha-särathi, the chariot driver of Arjuna. Therefore, the Lord's pastime as Pärtha-särathi is also eternal. The pastimes of the Lord, beginning from His birth at the prison house of Kaàsa up to the mausala-lélä at the end, all move one after another in all the universes, just as the clock hand moves from one point to another. And in such pastimes His associates like the Päëòavas and Bhéñma are constant eternal companions. So Bhéñmadeva never forgot the beautiful feature of the Lord as Pärtha-särathi, which even Arjuna could not see. Arjuna was behind the beautiful Pärtha-särathi, while Bhéñmadeva was just in front of the Lord. As far as the military feature of the Lord is concerned, Bhéñmadeva observed this with more relish than Arjuna.
All the soldiers and other persons on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra attained their original spiritual forms after their death because by the causeless mercy of the Lord they were able to see Him face to face on that occasion. The conditioned souls rotating in the evolutionary cycle from the aquatics up to the form of Brahmä are all in the form of mäyä, or the form obtained by one's own actions and awarded by material nature. The material forms of the conditioned souls are all foreign dresses, and when the conditioned soul becomes liberated from the clutches of the material energy, he attains his original spiritual form, like the Lord's. The impersonalist wants to attain the impersonal Brahman effulgence of the Lord, but that is not at all congenial to the living sparks, parts and parcels of the Lord. Therefore, the impersonalists again fall down and get material forms, which are all false to the spirit soul. A spiritual form like the Lord's, either two-handed or four-handed, is attained by the devotees of the Lord, either in the Vaikuëöhas or in the Goloka planet, according to the original nature of the soul. This form, which is cent per cent spiritual, is the svarüpa of the living being, and all the living beings who participated on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, on both sides, attained their svarüpa, as confirmed by Bhéñmadeva. So Lord Çré Kåñëa was not merciful only to the Päëòavas; He was also merciful to the other parties because all of them attained the same result. Bhéñmadeva wanted the same facility also, and that was his prayer to the Lord, although his position as an associate of the Lord is assured in all circumstances. The conclusion is that whoever dies looking on the Personality of Godhead within or without attains his svarüpa, which is the highest perfection of life.
TEXT 40
lalita-gati-viläsa-valguhäsa-
praëaya-nirékñaëa-kalpitorumänäù
kåtam anukåtavatya unmadändhäù
prakåtim agan kila yasya gopa-vadhvaù


lalita—attractive; gati—movements; viläsa—fascinating acts; valguhäsa—sweet smiling; praëaya—loving; nirékñaëa—looking upon; kalpita—mentality; urumänäù—highly glorified; kåtam anukåtavatyaù—in the act of copying the movements; unmada-andhäù—gone mad in ecstasy; prakåtim—characteristics; agan—underwent; kila—certainly; yasya—whose; gopa-vadhvaù—the cowherd damsels.

Let my mind be fixed upon Lord Çré Kåñëa, whose motions and smiles of love attracted the damsels of Vrajadhäma [the gopés]. The damsels imitated the characteristic movements of the Lord [after His disappearance from the räsa dance].

PURPORT
By intense ecstasy in loving service, the damsels of Vrajabhümi attained qualitative oneness with the Lord by dancing with Him on an equal level, embracing Him in nuptial love, smiling at Him in joke, and looking at Him with a loving attitude. The relation of the Lord with Arjuna is undoubtedly praiseworthy for devotees like Bhéñmadeva, but the relation of the gopés with the Lord is still more praiseworthy because of their still more purified loving service. By the grace of the Lord, Arjuna was fortunate enough to have the fraternal service of the Lord as chariot driver, but the Lord did not award Arjuna with equal strength. The gopés, however, practically became one with the Lord by attainment of equal footing with the Lord. Bhéñma's aspiration to remember the gopés is a prayer to have their mercy also at the last stage of his life. The Lord is satisfied more when His pure devotees are glorified, and therefore Bhéñmadeva has not only glorified the acts of Arjuna, his immediate object of attraction, but has also remembered the gopés, who were endowed with unrivalled opportunities for rendering loving service to the Lord. The gopés' equality with the Lord should never be misunderstood to be like the säyujya liberation of the impersonalist. The equality is one of perfect ecstasy, where the differential conception is completely eradicated, for the interests of the lover and the beloved become identical.
TEXT 41
muni-gaëa-nåpa-varya-saìkule 'ntaù-
sadasi yudhiñöhira-räjasüya eñäm
arhaëam upapeda ékñaëéyo
mama dåçi-gocara eña ävir ätmä


muni-gaëa—the great learned sages; nåpa-varya—the great ruling kings; saìkule—in the great assembly of; antaù-sadasi—conference; yudhiñöhira—of Emperor Yudhiñöhira; räja-süye—a royal performance of sacrifice; eñäm—of all the great elites; arhaëam—respectful worship; upapeda—received; ékñaëéyaù—the object of attraction; mama—my; dåçi—sight; gocaraù—within the view of; eñaù äviù—personally present; ätmä—the soul.

At the Räjasüya yajïa [sacrifice] performed by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, there was the greatest assembly of all the elite men of the world, the royal and learned orders, and in that great assembly Lord Çré Kåñëa was worshiped by one and all as the most exalted Personality of Godhead. This happened during my presence, and I remember the incident in order to keep my mind upon the Lord.

PURPORT
After gaining victory in the Battle of Kurukñetra, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, the Emperor of the world, performed the Räjasüya sacrificial ceremony. The emperor, in those days, upon his ascendance to the throne, would send a challenge horse all over the world to declare his supremacy, and any ruling prince or king was at liberty to accept the challenge and express his tacit willingness either to obey or to disobey the supremacy of the particular emperor. One who accepted the challenge had to fight with the emperor and establish his own supremacy by victory. The defeated king would have to sacrifice his life, making a place for another king or ruler. So Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira also dispatched such challenging horses all over the world, and every ruling prince and king all over the world accepted Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira's leadership as the Emperor of the world. After this, all rulers of the world under the regime of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira were invited to participate in the great sacrificial ceremony of Räjasüya. Such performances required hundreds of millions of dollars, and it was not an easy job for a petty king. Such a sacrificial ceremony, being too expensive and also difficult to perform under present circumstances, is now impossible in this Age of Kali. Nor can anyone secure the required expert priesthood to take charge of the ceremony.
So, after being invited, all the kings and great learned sages of the world assembled in the capital of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. The learned society, including the great philosophers, religionists, physicians, scientists and all great sages, was invited. That is to say, the brähmaëas and the kñatriyas were the topmost leading men in society, and they were all invited to participate in the assembly. The vaiçyas and çüdras were unimportant elements in society, and they are not mentioned herein. Due to the change of social activities in the modern age, the importance of men has also changed in terms of occupational positions.
So in that great assembly, Lord Çré Kåñëa was the cynosure of neighboring eyes. Everyone wanted to see Lord Kåñëa, and everyone wanted to pay his humble respects to the Lord. Bhéñmadeva remembered all this and was glad that his worshipable Lord, the Personality of Godhead, was present before him in His actual formal presence. So to meditate on the Supreme Lord is to meditate on the activities, form, pastimes, name and fame of the Lord. That is easier than what is imagined as meditation on the impersonal feature of the Supreme. In the Bhagavad-gétä (12.5) it is clearly stated that to meditate upon the impersonal feature of the Supreme is very difficult. It is practically no meditation or simply a waste of time because very seldom is the desired result obtained. The devotees, however, meditate upon the Lord's factual form and pastimes, and therefore the Lord is easily approachable by the devotees. This is also stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (12.9). The Lord is nondifferent from His transcendental activities. It is indicated also in this çloka that Lord Çré Kåñëa, while actually present before human society, especially in connection with the Battle of Kurukñetra, was accepted as the greatest personality of the time, although He might not have been recognized as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The propaganda that a very great man is worshiped as God after his death is misleading because a man after his death cannot be made into God. Nor can the Personality of Godhead be a human being, even when He is personally present. Both ideas are misconceptions. The idea of anthropomorphism cannot be applicable in the case of Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 42
tam imam aham ajaà çaréra-bhäjäà
hådi hådi dhiñöhitam ätma-kalpitänäm
pratidåçam iva naikadhärkam ekaà
samadhigato 'smi vidhüta-bheda-mohaù


tam—that Personality of Godhead; imam—now present before me; aham—I; ajam—the unborn; çaréra-bhäjäm—of the conditioned soul; hådi—in the heart; hådi—in the heart; dhiñöhitam—situated; ätma—the Supersoul; kalpitänäm—of the speculators; pratidåçam—in every direction; iva—like; na ekadhä—not one; arkam—the sun; ekam—one only; samadhigataù asmi—I have undergone trance in meditation; vidhüta—being freed from; bheda-mohaù—misconception of duality.

Now I can meditate with full concentration upon that one Lord, Çré Kåñëa, now present before me because now I have transcended the misconceptions of duality in regard to His presence in everyone's heart, even in the hearts of the mental speculators. He is in everyone's heart. The sun may be perceived differently, but the sun is one.

PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa is the one Absolute Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He has expanded Himself into His multiplenary portions and multidifferentiated portions by His inconceivable energy. The conception of duality is due to ignorance of His inconceivable energy. In the Bhagavad-gétä (9.11) the Lord says that only the foolish take Him to be a mere human being. Such foolish men are not aware of His inconceivable energies. By His inconceivable energy He is present in everyone's heart, as the sun is present before everyone all over the world. The Paramätmä feature of the Lord is an expansion of His plenary portions. He expands Himself as Paramätmä in everyone's heart by His inconceivable energy, and He also expands Himself as the glowing effulgence of brahma-jyoti by expansion of His personal glow. It is stated in the Brahma-saàhitä that the brahma-jyoti is His personal glow. Therefore, there is no difference between Him and His personal glow (brahma-jyoti) or His plenary portions as Paramätmä. Less intelligent persons who are not aware of this fact consider brahma-jyoti and Paramätmä to be different from Çré Kåñëa. This misconception of duality is completely removed from the mind of Bhéñmadeva, and he is now satisfied that it is Lord Çré Kåñëa only who is all in all in everything. This enlightenment is attained by the great mahätmäs, or devotees, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.19): the devotees realize that Väsudeva is all in all in everything and that there is no existence of anything without Väsudeva. Väsudeva, or Lord Çré Kåñëa, is the original Supreme Person, as now confirmed by Bhéñmadeva. Since Bhéñmadeva is one of the twelve mahäjanas, or great authorities, both the neophytes and the pure devotees must try to follow in his footsteps. That is the way of the devotional line.
The worshipable object of Bhéñmadeva is Lord Çré Kåñëa as Pärtha-särathi, and that of the gopés is the same Kåñëa in Våndävana as the most attractive Çyämasundara. Sometimes less intelligent scholars make a mistake and think that the Kåñëa of Våndävana and that of the Battle of Kurukñetra are different personalities. But for Bhéñmadeva this misconception is completely removed. Even the impersonalist's object of destination is Kåñëa as the impersonal jyoti, and the yogé's destination of Paramätmä is also Kåñëa. Kåñëa is both brahma-jyoti and localized Paramätmä, but brahma-jyoti and Paramätmä are not full representations of Kåñëa. In Kåñëa there are both brahma-jyoti and Paramätmä, but in brahma-jyoti or Paramätmä there is no Kåñëa or sweet relations with Kåñëa. In His personal feature Kåñëa is both Pärtha-särathi and Çyämasundara of Våndävana, but only in His impersonal feature is He the brahma-jyoti and the Paramätmä. Great mahätmäs like Bhéñmadeva realize all these different features of Lord Çré Kåñëa, and therefore they worship Lord Kåñëa with one-pointed attention, knowing Him as the origin of all features.

Song-7 Glorification of Krishna by the women of Hastinapura (SB 1.10.21-30)
TEXT 21
sa vai kiläyaà puruñaù purätano
ya eka äséd aviçeña ätmani
agre guëebhyo jagad-ätmanéçvare
nimélitätman niçi supta-çaktiñu


saù—He (Kåñëa); vai—as we remember; kila—definitely; ayam—this; puruñaù—Personality of Godhead; purätanaù—the original; yaù—who; ekaù—only one; äsét—existed; aviçeñaù—materially unmanifested; ätmani—own self; agre—before creation; guëebhyaù—of the modes of nature; jagat-ätmani—unto the Supersoul; éçvare—unto the Supreme Lord; nimélita—merged into; ätman—the living entity; niçi supta—inactive at night; çaktiñu—of the energies.

The ladies said: Here He is, the original Personality of Godhead as we definitely remember Him. He alone existed before the manifested creation of the modes of nature, and into Him only, because He is the Supreme Lord, all living beings merge, as if sleeping at night, their energy suspended.

PURPORT
There are two types of dissolution of the manifested cosmos. At the end of every 8,640,000,000 solar years, when Brahmä, the lord of one particular universe, goes to sleep, there is one annihilation. And at the end of Lord Brahmä's life, which takes place at the end of Brahmä's one hundred years of age, in our calculation at the end of 8,640,000,000 x 30 x 12 x 100 solar years, there is complete annihilation of the entire universe, and in both annihilations both the material energy, called the mahat-tattva, and the marginal energy, called the jéva-tattva, merge into the person of the Supreme Lord. The living beings remain asleep within the body of the Lord until there is another creation of the material world, and that is the way of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the material manifestation.
The material creation is effected by the interaction of the three modes of material nature set in motion by the Lord, and therefore it is said here that the Lord existed before the modes of material nature were set in motion. In the çruti-mantra it is said that only Viñëu, the Supreme Lord, existed before the creation, when there was no Brahmä, Çiva or other demigods. Viñëu means the Mahä-Viñëu, who is lying on the Causal Ocean. By His breathing only all the universes are generated in seeds and gradually develop into gigantic forms with innumerable planets within each and every universe. The seeds of universes develop into gigantic forms in the way seeds of a banyan tree develop into numberless banyan trees.
This Mahä-Viñëu is the plenary portion of the Lord Çré Kåñëa, who is mentioned in the Brahma-saàhitä as follows:
"Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the original Personality of Godhead, Govinda, whose plenary portion is the Mahä-Viñëu. All the Brahmäs, the heads of the universes, live only for the period of His exhaling, after the universes are generated from the pores of His transcendental body." (Bs. 5.48)
Thus Govinda, or Lord Kåñëa, is the cause of Mahä-Viñëu also. The ladies talking about this Vedic truth must have heard it from authoritative sources. An authoritative source is the only means of knowing about transcendental subject matter definitely. There is no alternative.
The merging of the living beings into the body of Mahä-Viñëu takes place automatically at the end of Brahmä's one hundred years. But that does not mean that the individual living being loses his identity. The identity is there, and as soon as there is another creation by the supreme will of the Lord, all the sleeping, inactive living beings are again let loose to begin their activities in the continuation of past different spheres of life. It is called suptotthita naya, or awakening from sleep and again engaging in one's respective continuous duty. When a man is asleep at night, he forgets himself—what he is, what his duty is and everything else of his waking state. But as soon as he awakens from slumber, he remembers all that he has to do and thus engages himself again in his prescribed activities. The living beings also remain merged in the body of Mahä-Viñëu during the period of annihilation, but as soon as there is another creation they arise to take up their unfinished work. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (8.18-20).
The Lord existed before the creative energy was set in action. The Lord is not a product of the material energy. His body is completely spiritual, and there is no difference between His body and Himself. Before creation the Lord remained in His abode, which is absolute and one.
TEXT 22
sa eva bhüyo nija-vérya-coditäà
sva-jéva-mäyäà prakåtià sisåkñatém
anäma-rüpätmani rüpa-nämané
vidhitsamäno 'nusasära çästra-kåt


saù—He; eva—thus; bhüyaù—again; nija—own personal; vérya—potency; coditäm—performance of; sva—own; jéva—living being; mäyäm—external energy; prakåtim—unto material nature; sisåkñatém—while re-creating; anäma—without mundane designation; rüpa-ätmani—forms of the soul; rüpa-nämané—forms and names; vidhitsamänaù—desiring to award; anusasära—entrusted; çästra-kåt—the compiler of revealed scripture.

The Personality of Godhead, again desiring to give names and forms to His parts and parcels, the living entities, placed them under the guidance of material nature. By His own potency, material nature is empowered to re-create.

PURPORT
The living entities are parts and parcels of the Lord. They are of two varieties, namely nitya-mukta and nitya-baddha. The nitya-muktas are eternally liberated souls, and they are eternally engaged in the reciprocation of transcendental loving service with the Lord in His eternal abode, beyond the manifested mundane creations. But the nitya-baddhas, or eternally conditioned souls, are entrusted to His external energy, mäyä, for rectification of their rebellious attitude toward the supreme father. Nitya-baddhas are eternally forgetful of their relation with the Lord as parts and parcels. Bewildered by the illusory energy, they think they are products of matter, and thus they are very busy in making plans in the material world for becoming happy. They go on merrily with such plans, but by the will of the Lord both the planmakers and the plans are annihilated at the end of a certain period, as above mentioned. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä as follows: "O son of Kunté, at the end of the millennium all the living entities merge into My nature, and again when the time of creation is ripe, I begin creation by the agency of My external energy." (Bg. 9.7)
The word bhüyaù indicates "again and again"; that is to say, the process of creation, maintenance and annihilation is going on perpetually by the external energy of the Lord. He is the cause of everything. But the living beings, who are constitutionally the parts and parcels of the Lord and are forgetful of the sweet relation, are given a chance again and again to get rid of the clutches of the external energy. And to revive his (the living being's) consciousness, the Lord also creates the revealed scriptures. Vedic literatures are the guiding directions for the conditioned souls so they can get free from the repetition of creation and annihilation of the material world and the material body.
The Lord says in the Bhagavad-gétä, "This created world and material energy are under My control. Under the influence of prakåti, automatically they are created again and again, and this is done by Me through the agency of My external energy."
Actually the spiritual spark living entities have no material names or forms. But in order to fulfill their desire to lord it over the material energy of material forms and names, they are given a chance for such false enjoyment, and at the same time they are given a chance to understand the real position through the revealed scriptures. The foolish and forgetful living being is always busy with false forms and false names. Modern nationalism is the culmination of such false names and false forms. Men are mad after false names and forms. The form of body obtained under certain conditions is taken up as factual, and the name also taken bewilders the conditioned soul into misusing the energy in the name of so many "isms." The scriptures, however, supply the clue for understanding the real position, but men are reluctant to take lessons from the scriptures created by the Lord for different places and times. For example, the Bhagavad-gétä is the guiding principle for every human being, but by the spell of the material energy people do not take care to carry out the programs of life in terms of the Bhagavad-gétä. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the postgraduate study of knowledge for one who has thoroughly understood the principles of the Bhagavad-gétä. Unfortunately people have no taste for them, and therefore they are under the clutches of mäyä for repetition of birth and death.
TEXT 23
sa vä ayaà yat padam atra sürayo
jitendriyä nirjita-mätariçvanaù
paçyanti bhakty-utkalitämalätmanä
nanv eña sattvaà parimärñöum arhati


saù—He; vai—by providence; ayam—this; yat—that which; padam atra—here is the same Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa; sürayaù—great devotees; jita-indriyäù—who have overcome the influence of the senses; nirjita—thoroughly controlled; mätariçvanaù—life; paçyanti—can see; bhakti—by dint of devotional service; utkalita—developed; amala-ätmanä—those whose minds are thoroughly cleansed; nanu eñaù—certainly by this only; sattvam—existence; parimärñöum—for purifying the mind completely; arhati—deserve.

Here is the same Supreme Personality of Godhead whose transcendental form is experienced by the great devotees who are completely cleansed of material consciousness by dint of rigid devotional service and full control of life and the senses. And that is the only way to purify one's existence.

PURPORT
As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord can be known in His real nature by dint of pure devotional service only. So it is stated here that only the great devotees of the Lord who are able to clear the mind of all material dust by rigid devotional service can experience the Lord as He is. Jitendriya means one who has full control over the senses. The senses are active parts of the body, and their activities cannot be stopped. The artificial means of the yogic processes to make the senses inactive has proved to be an abject failure, even in the case of great yogés like Viçvämitra Muni. Viçvämitra Muni controlled the senses by yogic trance, but when he happened to meet Menakä (a heavenly society woman), he became a victim of sex, and the artificial way of controlling the senses failed. But in the case of a pure devotee, the senses are not at all artificially stopped from doing anything, but they are given different good engagements. When the senses are engaged in more attractive activities, there is no chance of their being attracted by any inferior engagements. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the senses can be controlled only by better engagements. Devotional service necessitates purifying the senses by engaging them in the activities of devotional service. Devotional service is not inaction. Anything done in the service of the Lord becomes at once purified of its material nature. The material conception is due to ignorance only. There is nothing beyond Väsudeva. The Väsudeva conception gradually develops in the heart of the learned after a prolonged acceleration of the receptive organs. But the process ends in the knowledge of accepting Väsudeva as all in all. In the case of devotional service, this very same method is accepted from the very beginning, and by the grace of the Lord all factual knowledge becomes revealed in the heart of a devotee due to dictation by the Lord from within. Therefore controlling the senses by devotional service is the only and easiest means.
TEXT 24
sa vä ayaà sakhy anugéta-sat-katho
vedeñu guhyeñu ca guhya-vädibhiù
ya eka éço jagad-ätma-lélayä
såjaty avaty atti na tatra sajjate


saù—He; vai—also; ayam—this; sakhi—O my friend; anugéta—described; sat-kathaù—the excellent pastimes; vedeñu—in the Vedic literatures; guhyeñu—confidentially; ca—as also; guhya-vädibhiù—by the confidential devotees; yaù—one who; ekaù—one only; éçaù—the supreme controller; jagat—of the complete creation; ätma—Supersoul; lélayä—by manifestation of pastimes; såjati—creates; avati atti—also maintains and annihilates; na—never; tatra—there; sajjate—becomes attached to it.

O dear friends, here is that very Personality of Godhead whose attractive and confidential pastimes are described in the confidential parts of Vedic literature by His great devotees. It is He only who creates, maintains and annihilates the material world and yet remains unaffected.

PURPORT
As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, all the Vedic literatures are glorifying the greatness of Lord Çré Kåñëa. Here it is confirmed in the Bhägavatam also. The Vedas are expanded by many branches and subbranches by great devotees and empowered incarnations of the Lord like Vyäsa, Närada, Çukadeva Gosvämé, the Kumäras, Kapila, Prahläda, Janaka, Bali and Yamaräja, but in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam especially, the confidential parts of His activities are described by the confidential devotee Çukadeva Gosvämé. In the Vedänta-sütras or Upaniñads there is only a hint of the confidential parts of His pastimes. In such Vedic literatures as the Upaniñads, the Lord has expressively been distinguished from the mundane conception of His existence. His identity being fully spiritual, His form, name, qualities, and paraphernalia, etc., have been elaborately distinguished from matter, and therefore He is sometimes misunderstood by less intelligent persons as impersonal. But factually He is the Supreme Person, Bhagavän, and He is partially represented as Paramätmä or impersonal Brahman.
TEXT 25
yadä hy adharmeëa tamo-dhiyo nåpä
jévanti tatraiña hi sattvataù kila
dhatte bhagaà satyam åtaà dayäà yaço
bhaväya rüpäëi dadhad yuge yuge


yadä—whenever; hi—assuredly; adharmeëa—against the principles of God's will; tamaù-dhiyaù—persons in the lowest material modes; nåpäù—kings and administrators; jévanti—live like animals; tatra—thereupon; eñaù—He; hi—only; sattvataù—transcendental; kila—certainly; dhatte—is manifested; bhagam—supreme power; satyam—truth; åtam—positiveness; dayäm—mercy; yaçaù—wonderful activities; bhaväya—for the maintenance; rüpäëi—in various forms; dadhat—manifesting; yuge—different periods; yuge—and ages.

Whenever there are kings and administrators living like animals in the lowest modes of existence, the Lord in His transcendental form manifests His supreme power, the Truth Positive, shows special mercy to the faithful and performs wonderful activities. He thus manifests various transcendental forms in different periods and ages, as necessary.

PURPORT
As mentioned above, the cosmic creation is the property of the Supreme Lord. This is the basic philosophy of the Éçopaniñad: everything is the property of the Supreme Being. No one should encroach upon the property of the Supreme Lord. One should accept only what is kindly awarded by Him. Therefore, the earth or any other planet or universe is the absolute property of the Lord. The living beings are certainly His parts and parcels, or sons, and thus every one of them has a right to live at the mercy of the Lord to execute his prescribed work. No one, therefore, can encroach upon the right of another individual man or animal without being so sanctioned by the Lord. The king or the administrator is the representative of the Lord to look after the management of the Lord's will. He must therefore be a recognized person like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira or Parékñit. Such kings have full responsibility and knowledge from authorities about the administration of the world. But at times, due to the influence of the ignorance mode of material nature (tamo-guëa), the lowest of the material modes, kings and administrators come into power without knowledge and responsibility, and such foolish administrators live like animals for the sake of their own personal interest. The result is that the whole atmosphere becomes surcharged with anarchy and vicious elements. Nepotism, bribery, cheating, aggression and, therefore, famine, epidemic, war and similar other disturbing features become prominent in human society. And the devotees of the Lord, or the faithful, are persecuted by all means. All these symptoms indicate the time of an incarnation of the Lord to reestablish the principles of religion and to vanquish the maladministrators. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä.
The Lord then appears in His transcendental form without any tinge of material qualities. He descends just to keep the state of His creation in a normal condition. The normal condition is that the Lord has provided each and every planet with all the needs of the native living beings. They can happily live and execute their predestined occupations to attain salvation at the end, following the rules and regulations mentioned in the revealed scriptures. The material world is created to satisfy the whims of the nitya-baddhas, or everlastingly conditioned souls, just as playing cradles are provided for naughty boys. Otherwise, there was no need of the material world. But when the conditioned souls become intoxicated with the power of material science to exploit the resources unlawfully without the sanction of the Lord, and that also only for sense gratification, there is necessity of the Lord's incarnation to chastise the rebellious and to protect the faithful.
When He descends, He exhibits superhuman acts just to prove His supreme right, and materialists like Rävaëa, Hiraëyakaçipu and Kaàsa are sufficiently punished. He acts in a manner which no one can imitate. For example, the Lord, when He appeared as Räma, bridged the Indian Ocean. When He appeared as Kåñëa, from His very childhood He showed superhuman activities by killing Pütanä, Aghäsura, Çakaöäsura, Käliya, etc., and then His maternal uncle Kaàsa. When He was at Dvärakä He married 16, 108 queens, and all of them were blessed with a sufficient number of children. The sum total of His personal family members amounted to about ten million, popularly known as the Yadu-vaàça. And again, during His lifetime, He managed to vanquish them all. He is famous as the Govardhana-dhäré Hari because He lifted at the age of only seven the hill known as Govardhana. The Lord killed many undesirable kings in His time, and as a kñatriya He fought chivalrously. He is famous as asamordhva, unparalleled. No one is equal to or greater than Him.
TEXT 26

aho alaà çläghyatamaà yadoù kulam
aho alaà puëyatamaà madhor vanam
yad eña puàsäm åñabhaù çriyaù patiù
sva-janmanä caìkramaëena cäïcati


aho—oh; alam—verily; çläghya-tamam—supremely glorified; yadoù—of King Yadu; kulam—dynasty; aho—oh; alam—verily; puëya-tamam—supremely virtuous; madhoù vanam—the land of Mathurä; yat—because; eñaù—this; puàsäm—of all the living beings; åñabhaù—supreme leader; çriyaù—of the goddess of fortune; patiù—husband; sva-janmanä—by His appearance; caìkramaëena—by crawling; ca aïcati—glories.

Oh, how supremely glorified is the dynasty of King Yadu, and how virtuous is the land of Mathurä, where the supreme leader of all living beings, the husband of the goddess of fortune, has taken His birth and wandered in His childhood.

PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa has expressively given a description of His transcendental appearance, disappearance and activities. The Lord appears in a particular family or place by His inconceivable potency. He does not take His birth as a conditioned soul does, quitting one body and accepting another body. His birth is like the appearance and disappearance of the sun. The sun rises on the eastern horizon, but that does not mean that the eastern horizon is the parent of the sun. The sun is existent in every part of the universe, but he becomes visible at a scheduled time and so also becomes invisible at another scheduled time. Similarly, the Lord appears in this universe like the sun and again leaves our sight at another time. He exists at all times and at every place, but by His causeless mercy when He appears before us we take it for granted that He has taken His birth. Anyone who can understand this truth, in terms of the statements of revealed scriptures, certainly becomes liberated just after quitting the present body. Liberation is obtainable after many births and after great endeavor with patience and perseverance, and with knowledge and renunciation. But simply by knowing in truth about the Lord's transcendental births and activities, one can get liberation at once. That is the verdict of the Bhagavad-gétä (4.9). But those who are in the darkness of ignorance conclude that the Lord's birth and activities in the material world are similar to those of the ordinary living being. Such imperfect conclusions cannot give anyone liberation. His birth, therefore, in the family of King Yadu as the son of King Vasudeva and His transfer into the family of Nanda Mahäräja in the land of Mathurä are all transcendental arrangements made by the internal potency of the Lord. The fortunes of the Yadu dynasty and that of the inhabitants of the land of Mathurä cannot be materially estimated. If simply by knowing the transcendental nature of the birth and activities of the Lord one can get liberation easily, we can just imagine what is in store for those who actually enjoyed the company of the Lord in person as a family member or as a neighbor. All those who were fortunate enough to associate with the Lord, the husband of the goddess of fortune, certainly obtained something more than what is known as liberation. Therefore, rightly, the dynasty and the land are both ever glorious by the grace of the Lord.
TEXT 27
aho bata svar-yaçasas tiraskaré
kuçasthalé puëya-yaçaskaré bhuvaù
paçyanti nityaà yad anugraheñitaà
smitävalokaà sva-patià sma yat-prajäù


aho bata—how wonderful this is; svaù-yaçasaù—the glories of the heavenly planets; tiraskaré—that which defeats; kuçasthalé—Dvärakä; puëya—virtue; yaçaskaré—famous; bhuvaù—the planet earth; paçyanti—see; nityam—constantly; yat—that which; anugraha-iñitam—to bestow benediction; smita-avalokam—glance with the favor of sweet smiling; sva-patim—unto the soul of the living being (Kåñëa); sma—used to; yat-prajäù—the inhabitants of the place.

Undoubtedly it is wonderful that Dvärakä has defeated the glories of the heavenly planets and has enhanced the celebrity of the earth. The inhabitants of Dvärakä are always seeing the soul of all living beings [Kåñëa] in His loving feature. He glances at them and favors them with sweet smiles.

PURPORT
The heavenly planets are inhabited by demigods like Indra, Candra, Varuëa and Väyu, and the pious souls reach there after performance of many virtuous acts on earth. Modern scientists agree that the timing arrangement in higher planetary systems is different from that of the earth. Thus it is understood from the revealed scriptures that the duration of life there is ten thousand years (by our calculation). Six months on earth is equal to one day on the heavenly planets. Facilities of enjoyment are also similarly enhanced, and the beauty of the inhabitants is legendary. Common men on the earth are very much fond of reaching the heavenly planets because they have heard that comforts of life are far greater there than on the earth. They are now trying to reach the moon by spacecraft. Considering all this, the heavenly planets are more celebrated than the earth. But the celebrity of earth has defeated that of the heavenly planets because of Dvärakä, where Lord Çré Kåñëa reigned as king. Three places, namely Våndävana, Mathurä and Dvärakä, are more important than the famous planets within the universe. These places are perpetually sanctified because whenever the Lord descends to earth He displays His transcendental activities particularly in these three places. They are perpetually the holy lands of the Lord, and the inhabitants still take advantage of the holy places, even though the Lord is now out of their sight. The Lord is the soul of all living beings, and He desires always to have all the living beings, in their svarüpa, in their constitutional position, to participate in transcendental life in His association. His attractive features and sweet smiles go deep into the heart of everyone, and once it is so done the living being is admitted into the kingdom of God, from which no one returns. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä.
The heavenly planets may be very famous for offering better facilities of material enjoyment, but as we learn from the Bhagavad-gétä (9.20-21), one has to come back again to the earth planet as soon as the acquired virtue is finished. Dvärakä is certainly more important than the heavenly planets because whoever has been favored with the smiling glance of the Lord shall never come back again to this rotten earth, which is certified by the Lord Himself as a place of misery. Not only this earth but also all other planets of the universe are places of misery because in none of the planets within the universe are there eternal life, eternal bliss and eternal knowledge. Any person engaged in the devotional service of the Lord is recommended to live in one of the above-mentioned three places, namely Dvärakä, Mathurä or Våndävana. Because devotional service in these three places is magnified, those who go there to follow the principles in terms of instructions imparted in the revealed scriptures surely achieve the same result as obtained during the presence of Lord Çré Kåñëa. His abode and He Himself are identical, and a pure devotee under the guidance of another experienced devotee can obtain all the results, even at present.
TEXT 28
nünaà vrata-snäna-hutädineçvaraù
samarcito hy asya gåhéta-päëibhiù
pibanti yäù sakhy adharämåtaà muhur
vraja-striyaù sammumuhur yad-äçayäù


nünam—certainly in the previous birth; vrata—vows; snäna—baths; huta—sacrifices in the fire; ädinä—by all these; éçvaraù—the Personality of Godhead; samarcitaù—perfectly worshiped; hi—certainly; asya—His; gåhéta-päëibhiù—by the married wives; pibanti—relish; yäù—those who; sakhi—O friends; adhara-amåtam—the nectar from His lips; muhuù—again and again; vraja-striyaù—the damsels of Vrajabhümi; sammumuhuù—often fainted; yat-äçayäù—expecting to be favored in that way.

O friends, just think of His wives, whose hands He has accepted. How they must have undergone vows, taken baths, and performed fire sacrifices and perfect worship of the Lord of the universe to constantly relish now the nectar from His lips [by kissing]. The damsels of Vrajabhümi would often faint just by expecting such favors.

PURPORT
Religious rites prescribed in the scriptures are meant to purify the mundane qualities of the conditioned souls to enable them to be gradually promoted to the stage of rendering transcendental service unto the Supreme Lord. Attainment of this stage of pure spiritual life is the highest perfection, and this stage is called svarüpa, or the factual identity of the living being. Liberation means renovation of this stage of svarüpa. In that perfect stage of svarüpa, the living being is established in five phases of loving service, one of which is the stage of mädhurya-rasa, or the humor of conjugal love. The Lord is always perfect in Himself, and thus He has no hankering for Himself. He, however, becomes a master, a friend, a son or a husband to fulfill the intense love of the devotee concerned. Herein two classes of devotees of the Lord are mentioned in the stage of conjugal love. One is svakéya, and the other is parakéya. Both classes of devotees are in a relation of conjugal love with the Personality of Godhead Kåñëa. The queens at Dvärakä were svakéya, or duly married wives, but the damsels of Vraja were young friends of the Lord while He was unmarried. The Lord stayed at Våndävana till the age of sixteen, and His friendly relations with the neighboring girls were in terms of parakéya. These girls, as well as the queens, underwent severe penances by taking vows, bathing and offering sacrifices in the fire, as prescribed in the scriptures. The rites, as they are, are not an end in themselves, nor are fruitive action, culture of knowledge or perfection in mystic powers ends in themselves. They are all means to attain to the highest stage of svarüpa, to render one's constitutional transcendental service to the Lord. Each and every living being has his individual position in one of the above-mentioned five different kinds of reciprocating means with the Lord, and in one's pure spiritual form of svarüpa the relation becomes manifest without mundane affinity. The kissing of the Lord, either by His wives or His young girlfriends who aspired to have the Lord as their fiancé, is not of any mundane perverted quality. Had such things been mundane, a liberated soul like Çukadeva would not have taken the trouble to relish them, nor would Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu have been inclined to participate in those subjects after renouncing worldly life. The stage is earned after many lives of penance.
TEXT 29
yä vérya-çulkena håtäù svayaàvare
pramathya caidya-pramukhän hi çuñmiëaù
pradyumna-sämbämba-sutädayo 'parä
yäç cähåtä bhauma-vadhe sahasraçaù


yä—the lady; vérya—prowess; çulkena—by payment of the price; håtäù—taken away by force; svayaàvare—in the open selection of the bridegroom; pramathya—harassing; caidya—King Çiçupäla; pramukhän—headed by; hi—positively; çuñmiëaù—all very powerful; pradyumna—Pradyumna (Kåñëa's son); sämba—Sämba; amba—Amba; suta-ädayaù—children; aparäù—other ladies; yäù—those; ca—also; ähåtäù—similarly brought; bhauma-vadhe—after killing Bhaumäsura; sahasraçaù—by the thousands.

The children of these ladies are Pradyumna, Sämba, Amba, etc. Ladies like Rukmiëé, Satyabhämä and Jämbavaté were forcibly taken away by Him from their svayaàvara ceremonies after He defeated many powerful kings, headed by Çiçupäla. And other ladies were also forcibly taken away by Him after He killed Bhaumäsura and thousands of his assistants. All of these ladies are glorious.

PURPORT
Exceptionally qualified daughters of powerful kings were allowed to make a choice of their own bridegrooms in open competition, and such ceremonies were called svayaàvara, or personal selection of the bridegroom. Because the svayaàvara was an open competition between the rival and valiant princes, such princes were invited by the father of the princess, and usually there were regular fights between the invited princely order in a sporting spirit. But it so happened that sometimes the belligerent princes were killed in such marriage-fighting, and the victorious prince was offered the trophy princess for whom so many princes died. Rukmiëé, the principal queen of Lord Kåñëa, was the daughter of the King of Vidarbha, who wished that his qualified and beautiful daughter be given away to Lord Kåñëa. But her eldest brother wanted her to be given away to King Çiçupäla, who happened to be a cousin of Kåñëa. So there was open competition, and as usual Lord Kåñëa emerged successful, after harassing Çiçupäla and other princes by His unrivalled prowess. Rukmiëé had ten sons, like Pradyumna. There were other queens also taken away by Lord Kåñëa in a similar way. A full description of this beautiful booty of Lord Kåñëa will be given in the Tenth Canto. There were 16, 100 beautiful girls who were daughters of many kings and were forcibly stolen by Bhaumäsura, who kept them captive for his carnal desire. These girls prayed piteously to Lord Kåñëa for their deliverance, and the merciful Lord, called by their fervent prayer, released them all by fighting and killing Bhaumäsura. All these captive princesses were then accepted by the Lord as His wives, although in the estimation of society they were all fallen girls. The all-powerful Lord Kåñëa accepted the humble prayers of these girls and married them with the adoration of queens. So altogether Lord Kåñëa had 16, 108 queens at Dvärakä, and in each of them He begot ten children. All these children grew up, and each had as many children as the father. The aggregate of the family numbered 10,000,000.
TEXT 30
etäù paraà strétvam apästapeçalaà
nirasta-çaucaà bata sädhu kurvate
yäsäà gåhät puñkara-locanaù patir
na jätv apaity ähåtibhir hådi spåçan


etäù—all these women; param—highest; strétvam—womanhood; apästapeçalam—without independence; nirasta—without; çaucam—purity; bata sädhu—auspiciously glorified; kurvate—do they make; yäsäm—from whose; gåhät—homes; puñkara-locanaù—the lotus-eyed; patiù—husband; na jätu—never at any time; apaiti—goes away; ähåtibhiù—by presentation; hådi—in the heart; spåçan—endeared.

All these women auspiciously glorified their lives despite their being without independence or purity. Their husband, the lotus-eyed Personality of Godhead, never left them alone at home. He always pleased their hearts by making valuable presentations.

PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord are purified souls. As soon as the devotees surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord sincerely, the Lord accepts them, and thus the devotees at once become free from all material contaminations. Such devotees are above the three modes of material nature. There is no bodily disqualification of a devotee, just as there is no qualitative difference between the Ganges water and the filthy drain water when they are amalgamated. Women, merchants and laborers are not very intelligent, and thus it is very difficult for them to understand the science of God or to be engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. They are more materialistic, and less than them are the Kirätas, Hüëas, Ändhras, Pulindas, Pulkaças, Äbhéras, Kaìkas, Yavanas, Khasas, etc., but all of them can be delivered if they are properly engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. By engagement in the service of the Lord, the designative disqualifications are removed, and as pure souls they become eligible to enter into the kingdom of God.
The fallen girls under the clutches of Bhaumäsura sincerely prayed to Lord Çré Kåñëa for their deliverance, and their sincerity of purpose made them at once pure by virtue of devotion. The Lord therefore accepted them as His wives, and thus their lives became glorified. Such auspicious glorification was still more glorified when the Lord played with them as the most devoted husband.
The Lord used to live with His 16, 108 wives constantly. He expanded Himself into 16, 108 plenary portions, and each and every one of them was the Lord Himself without deviation from the Original Personality. The çruti-mantra affirms that the Lord can expand Himself into many. As husband of so many wives, He pleased them all with presentations, even at a costly endeavor. He brought the pärijäta plant from heaven and implanted it at the palace of Satyabhämä, one of the principal queens. If, therefore, anyone desires the Lord to become one's husband, the Lord fulfills such desires in full.

Song-8 Prayers by the citizens of Dvaraka(SB 1.11.6-10)
TEXT 6
natäù sma te nätha sadäìghri-paìkajaà
viriïca-vairiïcya-surendra-vanditam
paräyaëaà kñemam ihecchatäà paraà
na yatra kälaù prabhavet paraù prabhuù


natäù—bowed down; sma—we had done so; te—unto You; nätha—O Lord; sadä—always; aìghri-paìkajam—the lotus feet; viriïca—Brahmä, the first living being; vairiïcya—sons of Brahmä like Sanaka and Sanätana; sura-indra—the king of heaven; vanditam—worshiped by; paräyaëam—the supreme; kñemam—welfare; iha—in this life; icchatäm—one who so desires; param—the highest; na—never; yatra—wherein; kälaù—inevitable time; prabhavet—can exert its influence; paraù—transcendental; prabhuù—the Supreme Lord.

The citizens said: O Lord, You are worshiped by all demigods like Brahmä, the four Sanas and even the king of heaven. You are the ultimate rest for those who are really aspiring to achieve the highest benefit of life. You are the supreme transcendental Lord, and inevitable time cannot exert its influence upon You.
The Supreme Lord is Çré Kåñëa, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä, Brahma-saàhitä and other authorized Vedic literatures. No one is equal to or greater than Him, and that is the verdict of all scriptures. The influence of time and space is exerted upon the dependent living entities, who are all parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. The living entities are predominated Brahman, whereas the Supreme Lord is the predominating Absolute. As soon as we forget this clear fact, we are at once in illusion, and thus we are put into the threefold miseries, as one is put into dense darkness. The clear consciousness of the cognizant living being is God consciousness, in which one bows down unto Him in all circumstances.
TEXT 7
bhaväya nas tvaà bhava viçva-bhävana
tvam eva mätätha suhåt-patiù pitä
tvaà sad-gurur naù paramaà ca daivataà
yasyänuvåttyä kåtino babhüvima


bhaväya—for welfare; naù—for us; tvam—Your Lordship; bhava—just become; viçva-bhävana—the creator of the universe; tvam—Your Lordship; eva—certainly; mätä—mother; atha—as also; suhåt—well-wisher; patiù—husband; pitä—father; tvam—Your Lordship; sat-guruù—spiritual master; naù—our; paramam—the supreme; ca—and; daivatam—worshipable Deity; yasya—whose; anuvåttyä—following in the footsteps; kåtinaù—successful; babhüvima—we have become.

O creator of the universe, You are our mother, well-wisher, Lord, father, spiritual master and worshipable Deity. By following in Your footsteps we have become successful in every respect. We pray, therefore, that You continue to bless us with Your mercy.
PURPORT
The all-good Personality of Godhead, being the creator of the universe, has His all-good plans for the good of all good living beings. The good living beings are advised by the Lord to follow His good advice, and by doing so they become successful in all spheres of life. There is no need to worship any deity but the Lord. The Lord is all-powerful, and if He is satisfied by our obedience unto His lotus feet, He is competent to bestow upon us all kinds of blessings for the successful execution of both our material and spiritual lives. For attaining spiritual existence, the human form is a chance for all to understand our eternal relation with God. Our relation with Him is eternal; it can be neither broken nor vanquished. It may be forgotten for the time being, but it can be revived also by the grace of the Lord, if we follow His injunctions, which are revealed in the scriptures of all times and all places.
TEXT 8
aho sa-näthä bhavatä sma yad vayaà
traiviñöapänäm api düra-darçanam
prema-smita-snigdha-nirékñaëänanaà
paçyema rüpaà tava sarva-saubhagam


aho—oh, it is our good luck; sa-näthäù—to be under the protection of the master; bhavatä—by Your good self; sma—as we have become; yat vayam—as we are; traiviñöa-pänäm—by the demigods; api—also; düra-darçanam—very rarely seen; prema-smita—smiling with love; snigdha—affectionate; nirékñaëa-änanam—face looking in that mode; paçyema—let us look; rüpam—beauty; tava—Your; sarva—all; saubhagam—auspiciousness.

Oh, it is our good luck that we have come again today under Your protection by Your presence. Although Your Lordship is rarely visited even by the denizens of heaven, now it is possible for us to look upon Your smiling face, which is full of affectionate glances. We can now see Your transcendental form, full of all auspiciousness.

PURPORT
The Lord in His eternal personal form can be seen only by the pure devotees. The Lord is never impersonal. He is the Supreme Absolute Personality of Godhead, possible by dint of devotional service to be visited face to face, which is impossible to be done even by the denizens of higher planets. When Brahmäjé and other demigods want to consult Lord Viñëu, the plenary portion of Lord Kåñëa, they have to wait on the shore of the ocean of milk, where Lord Viñëu is lying on the White Island (Çvetadvépa). This ocean of milk and the Çvetadvépa planet are the replica of Vaikuëöhaloka within the universe. Neither Brahmäjé nor the demigods like Indra can enter into this island of Çvetadvépa, but they can stand on the shore of the ocean of milk and transmit their message to Lord Viñëu, known as Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. Therefore, the Lord is rarely seen by them, but the inhabitants of Dvärakä, because of their being pure devotees without any tinge of the material contamination of fruitive activities and empiric philosophical speculation, can see Him face to face by the grace of the Lord. This is the original state of the living entities and can be attained by reviving our natural and constitutional state of life, which is discovered by devotional service only.
TEXT 9
yarhy ambujäkñäpasasära bho bhavän
kurün madhün vätha suhåd-didåkñayä
taträbda-koöi-pratimaù kñaëo bhaved
ravià vinäkñëor iva nas taväcyuta


yarhi—whenever; ambuja-akña—O lotus-eyed one; apasasära—You go away; bho—oh; bhavän—Yourself; kurün—the descendants of King Kuru; madhün—the inhabitants of Mathurä (Vrajabhümi); vä—either; atha—therefore; suhåt-didåkñayä—for meeting them; tatra—at that time; abda-koöi—millions of years; pratimaù—like; kñaëaù—moments; bhavet—becomes; ravim—the sun; vinä—without; akñëoù—of the eyes; iva—like that; naù—ours; tava—Your; acyuta—O infallible one.

O lotus-eyed Lord, whenever You go away to Mathurä-Våndävana or Hastinäpura to meet Your friends and relatives, every moment of Your absence seems like millions of years. O infallible one, at that time our eyes become useless, as if bereft of the sun.

PURPORT
We are all proud of our material senses for making experiments to determine the existence of God. But we forget that our senses are not absolute by themselves. They can only act under certain conditions. For example, our eyes. As long as the sunshine is there, our eyes are useful to a certain extent. But in the absence of sunshine, the eyes are useless. Lord Çré Kåñëa, being the primeval Lord, the Supreme Truth, is compared to the sun. Without Him all our knowledge is either false or partial. The opposite of the sun is the darkness, and similarly the opposite of Kåñëa is mäyä, or illusion. The devotees of the Lord can see everything in true perspective due to the light disseminated by Lord Kåñëa. By the grace of the Lord the pure devotee cannot be in the darkness of ignorance. Therefore, it is necessary that we must always be in the sight of Lord Kåñëa so that we can see both ourselves and the Lord with His different energies. As we cannot see anything in the absence of the sun, so also we cannot see anything, including our own self, without the factual presence of the Lord. Without Him all our knowledge is covered by illusion.
TEXT 10
kathaà vayaà nätha ciroñite tvayi
prasanna-dåñöyäkhila-täpa-çoñaëam
jévema te sundara-häsa-çobhitam
apaçyamänä vadanaà manoharam
iti codéritä väcaù
prajänäà bhakta-vatsalaù
çåëväno 'nugrahaà dåñöyä
vitanvan präviçat puram


katham—how; vayam—we; nätha—O Lord; ciroñite—being abroad almost always; tvayi—by You; prasanna—satisfaction; dåñöyä—by the glance; akhila—universal; täpa—miseries; çoñaëam—vanquishing; jévema—shall be able to live; te—Your; sundara—beautiful; häsa—smiling; çobhitam—decorated; apaçyamänäù—without seeing; vadanam—face; manoharam—attractive; iti—thus; ca—and; udéritäù—speaking; väcaù—words; prajänäm—of the citizens; bhakta-vatsalaù—kind to the devotees; çåëvänaù—thus learning; anugraham—kindness; dåñöyä—by glances; vitanvan—distributing; präviçat—entered; puram—Dvärakäpuré.

O master, if You live abroad all the time, then we cannot look at Your attractive face, whose satisfied smiles vanquish all our sufferings. How can we exist without Your presence? 
Upon hearing their speeches, the Lord, who is very kind to the citizens and the devotees, entered the city of Dvärakä and acknowledged all their greetings by casting His transcendental glance over them.

PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa's attraction is so powerful that once being attracted by Him one cannot tolerate separation from Him. Why is this so? Because we are all eternally related with Him as the sunrays are eternally related with the sun disc. The sunrays are molecular parts of the solar radiation. Thus the sunrays and the sun cannot be separated. The separation by the cloud is temporary and artificial, and as soon as the cloud is cleared, the sunrays again display their natural effulgence in the presence of the sun. Similarly, the living entities, who are molecular parts of the whole spirit, are separated from the Lord by the artificial covering of mäyä, the illusory energy. This illusory energy, or the curtain of mäyä, has to be removed, and when it is so done, the living entity can see the Lord face to face, and all his miseries are at once removed. Every one of us wants to remove the miseries of life, but we do not know how to do it. The solution is given here, and it rests on us to assimilate it or not.
