
Song-2 Pranams to Srila Sukadeva Goswami &Others (SB I.2.2-4)

TEXT 2
süta uväca
yaà pravrajantam anupetam apeta-kåtyaà
dvaipäyano viraha-kätara äjuhäva
putreti tan-mayatayä taravo 'bhinedus
taà sarva-bhüta-hådayaà munim änato 'smi
sütaù—Süta Gosvämé; uväca—said; yam—whom; pravrajantam—while going away for the renounced order of life; anupetam—without being reformed by the sacred thread; apeta—not undergoing ceremonies; kåtyam—prescribed duties; dvaipäyanaù—Vyäsadeva; viraha—separation; kätaraù—being afraid of; äjuhäva—exclaimed; putra iti—O my son; tat-mayatayä—being absorbed in that way; taravaù—all the trees; abhineduù—responded; tam—unto him; sarva—all; bhüta—living entities; hådayam—heart; munim—sage; änataù asmi—offer obeisances.
Çréla Süta Gosvämé said: Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto that great sage [Çukadeva Gosvämé] who can enter the hearts of all. When he went away to take up the renounced order of life [sannyäsa], leaving home without undergoing reformation by the sacred thread or the ceremonies observed by the higher castes, his father, Vyäsadeva, fearing separation from him, cried out, "O my son!" Indeed, only the trees, which were absorbed in the same feelings of separation, echoed in response to the begrieved father.
TEXT 3
yaù svänubhävam akhila-çruti-säram ekam
adhyätma-dépam atititérñatäà tamo 'ndham
saàsäriëäà karuëayäha puräëa-guhyaà
taà vyäsa-sünum upayämi guruà munénäm
yaù—he who; sva-anubhävam—self-assimilated (experienced); akhila—all around; çruti—the Vedas; säram—cream; ekam—the only one; adhyätma—transcendental; dépam—torchlight; atititérñatäm—desiring to overcome; tamaù andham—deeply dark material existence; saàsäriëäm—of the materialistic men; karuëayä—out of causeless mercy; äha—said; puräëa—supplement to the Vedas; guhyam—very confidential; tam—unto him; vyäsa-sünum—the son of Vyäsadeva; upayämi—let me offer my obeisances; gurum—the spiritual master; munénäm—of the great sages.
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto him [Çuka], the spiritual master of all sages, the son of Vyäsadeva, who, out of his great compassion for those gross materialists who struggle to cross over the darkest regions of material existence, spoke this most confidential supplement to the cream of Vedic knowledge, after having personally assimilated it by experience.
TEXT 4
näräyaëaà namaskåtya
naraà caiva narottamam
devéà sarasvatéà vyäsaà
tato jayam udérayet
näräyaëam—the Personality of Godhead; namaù-kåtya—after offering respectful obeisances; naram ca eva—and Näräyaëa Åñi; nara-uttamam—the supermost human being; devém—the goddess; sarasvatém—the mistress of learning; vyäsam—Vyäsadeva; tataù—thereafter; jayam—all that is meant for conquering; udérayet—be announced.
Before reciting this Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is the very means of conquest, one should offer respectful obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, unto Nara-näräyaëa Åñi, the supermost human being, unto Mother Sarasvaté, the goddess of learning, and unto Çréla Vyäsadeva, the author.
Song-3 Prayers by Arjuna to Lord Krishna (SB 1.7.22-26)


TEXT 22
arjuna uväca
kåñëa kåñëa mahä-bäho
bhaktänäm abhayaìkara
tvam eko dahyamänänäm
apavargo 'si saàsåteù
arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa; kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa; mahä-bäho—He who is the Almighty; bhaktänäm—of the devotees; abhayaìkara—eradicating the fears; tvam—You; ekaù—alone; dahyamänänäm—those who are suffering from; apavargaù—the path of liberation; asi—are; saàsåteù—in the midst of material miseries.
Arjuna said: O my Lord Çré Kåñëa, You are the almighty Personality of Godhead. There is no limit to Your different energies. Therefore only You are competent to instill fearlessness in the hearts of Your devotees. Everyone in the flames of material miseries can find the path of liberation in You only.
TEXT 23
tvam ädyaù puruñaù säkñäd
éçvaraù prakåteù paraù
mäyäà vyudasya cic-chaktyä
kaivalye sthita ätmani
tvam ädyaù—You are the original; puruñaù—the enjoying personality; säkñät—directly; éçvaraù—the controller; prakåteù—to material nature; paraù—transcendental; mäyäm—the material energy; vyudasya—one who has thrown aside; cit-çaktyä—by dint of internal potency; kaivalye—in pure eternal knowledge and bliss; sthitaù—placed; ätmani—own self.
You are the original Personality of Godhead, who expand Yourself all over the creations and are transcendental to material energy. You have cast away the effects of the material energy by dint of Your spiritual potency. You are always situated in eternal bliss and transcendental knowledge.
TEXT 24
sa eva jéva-lokasya
mäyä-mohita-cetasaù
vidhatse svena véryeëa
çreyo dharmädi-lakñaëam
saù—that Transcendence; eva—certainly; jéva-lokasya—of the conditioned living beings; mäyä-mohita—captivated by the illusory energy; cetasaù—by the heart; vidhatse—execute; svena—by Your own; véryeëa—influence; çreyaù—ultimate good; dharma-ädi—four principles of liberation; lakñaëam—characterized by.
And yet, though You are beyond the purview of the material energy, You execute the four principles of liberation characterized by religion and so on for the ultimate good of the conditioned souls.
TEXT 25
tathäyaà cävatäras te
bhuvo bhära-jihérñayä
svänäà cänanya-bhävänäm
anudhyänäya cäsakåt
tathä—thus; ayam—this; ca—and; avatäraù—incarnation; te—Your; bhuvaù—of the material world; bhära—burden; jihérñayä—for removing; svänäm—of the friends; ca ananya-bhävänäm—and of the exclusive devotees; anudhyänäya—for remembering constantly; ca—and; asakåt—repeatedly.
Thus You descend as an incarnation to remove the burden of the world and to benefit Your friends, especially those who are Your exclusive devotees and are constantly rapt in meditation upon You.
TEXT 26
kim idaà svit kuto veti
deva-deva na vedmy aham
sarvato mukham äyäti
tejaù parama-däruëam
kim—what is; idam—this; svit—does it come; kutaù—wherefrom; vä iti—be either; deva-deva—O Lord of lords; na—not; vedmi—do I know; aham—I; sarvataù—all around; mukham—directions; äyäti—coming from; tejaù—effulgence; parama—very much; däruëam—dangerous.
O Lord of lords, how is it that this dangerous effulgence is spreading all around? Where does it come from? I do not understand it.
Song-4 Prayers by Uttara (SB 1.8.9-10)


TEXT 9
uttaroväca
pähi pähi mahä-yogin
deva-deva jagat-pate
nänyaà tvad abhayaà paçye
yatra måtyuù parasparam
uttarä uväca—Uttarä said; pähi pähi—protect, protect; mahä-yogin—the greatest mystic; deva-deva—the worshipable of the worshiped; jagat-pate—O Lord of the universe; na—not; anyam—anyone else; tvat—than You; abhayam—fearlessness; paçye—do I see; yatra—where there is; måtyuù—death; parasparam—in the world of duality.
Uttarä said: O Lord of lords, Lord of the universe! You are the greatest of mystics. Please protect me, protect me, for there is no one else who can save me from the clutches of death in this world of duality.
TEXT 10
abhidravati mäm éça
çaras taptäyaso vibho
kämaà dahatu mäà nätha
mä me garbho nipätyatäm
abhidravati—coming towards; mäm—me; éça—O Lord; çaraù—the arrow; tapta—fiery; ayasaù—iron; vibho—O great one; kämam—desire; dahatu—let it burn; mäm—me; nätha—O protector; mä—not; me—my; garbhaù—embryo; nipätyatäm—be aborted.
O my Lord, You are all-powerful. A fiery iron arrow is coming towards me fast. My Lord, let it burn me personally, if You so desire, but please do not let it burn and abort my embryo. Please do me this favor, my Lord.
Song-5 Prayers by Queen Kunti (SB 1.8.18-43)

TEXT 18
kunty uväca
namasye puruñaà tvädyam
éçvaraà prakåteù param
alakñyaà sarva-bhütänäm
antar bahir avasthitam
kunté uväca—Çrématé Kunté said; namasye—let me bow down; puruñam—the Supreme Person; tvä—You; ädyam—the original; éçvaram—the controller; prakåteù—of the material cosmos; param—beyond; alakñyam—the invisible; sarva—all; bhütänäm—of living beings; antaù—within; bahiù—without; avasthitam—existing.
Çrématé Kunté said: O Kåñëa, I offer my obeisances unto You because You are the original personality and are unaffected by the qualities of the material world. You are existing both within and without everything, yet You are invisible to all.
TEXT 19
mäyä-javanikäcchannam
ajïädhokñajam avyayam
na lakñyase müòha-dåçä
naöo näöyadharo yathä
mäyä—deluding; javanikä—curtain; äcchannam—covered by; ajïä—ignorant; adhokñajam—beyond the range of material conception (transcendental); avyayam—irreproachable; na—not; lakñyase—observed; müòha-dåçä—by the foolish observer; naöaù—artist; näöya-dharaù—dressed as a player; yathä—as.
Being beyond the range of limited sense perception, You are the eternally irreproachable factor covered by the curtain of deluding energy. You are invisible to the foolish observer, exactly as an actor dressed as a player is not recognized.
TEXT 20
tathä paramahaàsänäà
munénäm amalätmanäm
bhakti-yoga-vidhänärthaà
kathaà paçyema hi striyaù
tathä—besides that; paramahaàsänäm—of the advanced transcendentalists; munénäm—of the great philosophers or mental speculators; amala-ätmanäm—those whose minds are competent to discern between spirit and matter; bhakti-yoga—the science of devotional service; vidhäna-artham—for executing; katham—how; paçyema—can observe; hi—certainly; striyaù—women.
You Yourself descend to propagate the transcendental science of devotional service unto the hearts of the advanced transcendentalists and mental speculators, who are purified by being able to discriminate between matter and spirit. How, then, can we women know You perfectly?
TEXT 21
kåñëäya väsudeväya
devaké-nandanäya ca
nanda-gopa-kumäräya
govindäya namo namaù
kåñëäya—the Supreme Lord; väsudeväya—unto the son of Vasudeva; devaké-nandanäya—unto the son of Devaké; ca—and; nanda-gopa—Nanda and the cowherd men; kumäräya—unto their son; govindäya—unto the Personality of Godhead, who enlivens the cows and the senses; namaù—respectful obeisances; namaù—obeisances.
Let me therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who has become the son of Vasudeva, the pleasure of Devaké, the boy of Nanda and the other cowherd men of Våndävana, and the enlivener of the cows and the senses.
TEXT 22
namaù paìkaja-näbhäya
namaù paìkaja-mäline
namaù paìkaja-neträya
namas te paìkajäìghraye
namaù—all respectful obeisances; paìkaja-näbhäya—unto the Lord who has a specific depression resembling a lotus flower in the center of His abdomen; namaù—obeisances; paìkaja-mäline—one who is always decorated with a garland of lotus flowers; namaù—obeisances; paìkaja-neträya—one whose glance is as cooling as a lotus flower; namaù te—respectful obeisances unto You; paìkaja-aìghraye—unto You, the soles of whose feet are engraved with lotus flowers (and who are therefore said to possess lotus feet).
My respectful obeisances are unto You, O Lord, whose abdomen is marked with a depression like a lotus flower, who are always decorated with garlands of lotus flowers, whose glance is as cool as the lotus, and whose feet are engraved with lotuses.
TEXT 23
yathä håñékeça khalena devaké
kaàsena ruddhäticiraà çucärpitä
vimocitähaà ca sahätmajä vibho
tvayaiva näthena muhur vipad-gaëät
yathä—as it were; håñékeça—the master of the senses; khalena—by the envious; devaké—Devaké (the mother of Çré Kåñëa); kaàsena—by King Kaàsa; ruddhä—imprisoned; ati-ciram—for a long time; çuca-arpitä—distressed; vimocitä—released; aham ca—also myself; saha-ätma-jä—along with my children; vibho—O great one; tvayä eva—by Your Lordship; näthena—as the protector; muhuù—constantly; vipat-gaëät—from a series of dangers.
O Håñékeça, master of the senses and Lord of lords, You have released Your mother, Devaké, who was long imprisoned and distressed by the envious King Kaàsa, and me and my children from a series of constant dangers.
TEXT 24
viñän mahägneù puruñäda-darçanäd
asat-sabhäyä vana-väsa-kåcchrataù
mådhe mådhe 'neka-mahärathästrato
drauëy-astrataç cäsma hare 'bhirakñitäù
viñät—from poison; mahä-agneù—from the great fire; puruña-ada—the man-eaters; darçanät—by combating; asat—vicious; sabhäyäù—assembly; vana-väsa—exiled to the forest; kåcchrataù—sufferings; mådhe mådhe—again and again in battle; aneka—many; mahä-ratha—great generals; astrataù—weapons; drauëi—the son of Droëäcärya; astrataù—from the weapon of; ca—and; äsma—indicating past tense; hare—O my Lord; abhirakñitäù—protected completely.
My dear Kåñëa, Your Lordship has protected us from a poisoned cake, from a great fire, from cannibals, from the vicious assembly, from sufferings during our exile in the forest and from the battle where great generals fought. And now You have saved us from the weapon of Açvatthämä.
TEXT 25
vipadaù santu täù çaçvat
tatra tatra jagad-guro
bhavato darçanaà yat syäd
apunar bhava-darçanam
vipadaù—calamities; santu—let there be; täù—all; çaçvat—again and again; tatra—there; tatra—and there; jagat-guro—O Lord of the universe; bhavataù—Your; darçanam—meeting; yat—that which; syät—is; apunaù—not again; bhava-darçanam—seeing repetition of birth and death.
I wish that all those calamities would happen again and again so that we could see You again and again, for seeing You means that we will no longer see repeated births and deaths.
TEXT 26
janmaiçvarya-çruta-çrébhir
edhamäna-madaù pumän
naivärhaty abhidhätuà vai
tväm akiïcana-gocaram
janma—birth; aiçvarya—opulence; çruta—education; çrébhiù—by the possession of beauty; edhamäna—progressively increasing; madaù—intoxication; pumän—the human being; na—never; eva—ever; arhati—deserves; abhidhätum—to address in feeling; vai—certainly; tväm—You; akiïcana-gocaram—one who is approached easily by the materially exhausted man.
My Lord, Your Lordship can easily be approached, but only by those who are materially exhausted, because one who is on the path of [material] progress, trying to improve himself with respectable parentage, great opulence, high education and bodily beauty, cannot address You with sincere feeling.
TEXT 27
namo 'kiïcana-vittäya
nivåtta-guëa-våttaye
ätmärämäya çäntäya
kaivalya-pataye namaù
namaù—all obeisances unto You; akiïcana-vittäya—unto the property of the materially impoverished; nivåtta—completely transcendental to the actions of the material modes; guëa—material modes; våttaye—affection; ätma-ärämäya—one who is self-satisfied; çäntäya—the most gentle; kaivalya-pataye—unto the master of the monists; namaù—bowing down.
My obeisances are unto You, who are the property of the materially impoverished. You have nothing to do with the actions and reactions of the material modes of nature. You are self-satisfied, and therefore You are the most gentle and are master of the monists.
TEXT 28
manye tväà kälam éçänam
anädi-nidhanaà vibhum
samaà carantaà sarvatra
bhütänäà yan mithaù kaliù
manye—I consider; tväm—Your Lordship; kälam—the eternal time; éçänam—the Supreme Lord; anädi-nidhanam—without beginning and end; vibhum—all-pervading; samam—equally merciful; carantam—distributing; sarvatra—everywhere; bhütänäm—of the living beings; yat mithaù—by intercourse; kaliù—dissension.
My Lord, I consider Your Lordship to be eternal time, the supreme controller, without beginning and end, the all-pervasive one. In distributing Your mercy, You are equal to everyone. The dissensions between living beings are due to social intercourse.
TEXT 29
na veda kaçcid bhagavaàç cikérñitaà
tavehamänasya nåëäà viòambanam
na yasya kaçcid dayito 'sti karhicid
dveñyaç ca yasmin viñamä matir nåëäm
na—does not; veda—know; kaçcit—anyone; bhagavan—O Lord; cikérñitam—pastimes; tava—Your; éhamänasya—like the worldly men; nåëäm—of the people in general; viòambanam—misleading; na—never; yasya—His; kaçcit—anyone; dayitaù—object of specific favor; asti—there is; karhicit—anywhere; dveñyaù—object of envy; ca—and; yasmin—unto Him; viñamä—partiality; matiù—conception; nåëäm—of the people.
O Lord, no one can understand Your transcendental pastimes, which appear to be human and so are misleading. You have no specific object of favor, nor do You have any object of envy. People only imagine that You are partial.
TEXT 30
janma karma ca viçvätmann
ajasyäkartur ätmanaù
tiryaì-nèñiñu yädaùsu
tad atyanta-viòambanam
janma—birth; karma—activity; ca—and; viçva-ätman—O soul of the universe; ajasya—of the unborn; akartuù—of the inactive; ätmanaù—of the vital energy; tiryak—animal; nå—human being; åñiñu—in the sages; yädaùsu—in the water; tat—that; atyanta—very; viòambanam—bewildering.
Of course it is bewildering, O soul of the universe, that You work though You are inactive, and that You take birth though You are the vital force and the unborn. You Yourself descend amongst animals, men, sages and aquatics. This is very bewildering.
TEXT 31
gopy ädade tvayi kåtägasi däma tävad
yä te daçäçru-kaliläïjana-sambhramäkñam
vaktraà ninéya bhaya-bhävanayä sthitasya
sä mäà vimohayati bhér api yad bibheti
gopé—the cowherd lady (Yaçodä); ädade—took up; tvayi—on Your; kåta-ägasi—creating disturbances (by breaking the butter pot); däma—rope; tävat—at that time; yä—that which; te—Your; daçä—situation; açru-kalila—overflooded with tears; aïjana—ointment; sambhrama—perturbed; akñam—eyes; vaktram—face; ninéya—downwards; bhaya-bhävanayä—by thoughts of fear; sthitasya—of the situation; sä—that; mäm—me; vimohayati—bewilders; bhéù api—even fear personified; yat—whom; bibheti—is afraid.
My dear Kåñëa, Yaçodä took up a rope to bind You when You committed an offense, and Your perturbed eyes overflooded with tears, which washed the mascara from Your eyes. And You were afraid, though fear personified is afraid of You. This sight is bewildering to me.
TEXT 32
kecid ähur ajaà jätaà
puëya-çlokasya kértaye
yadoù priyasyänvaväye
malayasyeva candanam
kecit—someone; ähuù—says; ajam—the Unborn; jätam—being born; puëya-çlokasya—of the great pious king; kértaye—for glorifying; yadoù—of King Yadu; priyasya—of the dear; anvaväye—in the family of; malayasya—Malaya Hills; iva—as; candanam—sandalwood.
Some say that the Unborn has taken birth for the glorification of the great pious king, and others say that You took birth to please King Yadu, one of Your dearest devotees. You appeared in his family as sandalwood appears in the Malaya Hills.
TEXT 33
apare vasudevasya
devakyäà yäcito 'bhyagät
ajas tvam asya kñemäya
vadhäya ca sura-dviñäm
apare—others; vasudevasya—of Vasudeva; devakyäm—of Devaké; yäcitaù—being prayed for; abhyagät—took birth; ajaù—unborn; tvam—You are; asya—of him; kñemäya—for the good; vadhäya—for the purpose of killing; ca—and; sura-dviñäm—of those who are envious of the demigods.
Others say that since both Vasudeva and Devaké prayed for You, You have taken Your birth as their son. Undoubtedly You are unborn, yet You took Your birth for their welfare and to kill those who are envious of the demigods.
TEXT 34
bhärävatäraëäyänye
bhuvo näva ivodadhau
sédantyä bhüri-bhäreëa
jäto hy ätma-bhuvärthitaù
bhära-avatäraëäya—just to reduce the burden of the world; anye—others; bhuvaù—of the world; nävaù—boat; iva—like; udadhau—on the sea; sédantyäù—aggrieved; bhüri—extremely; bhäreëa—by the burden; jätaù—You were born; hi—certainly; ätma-bhuvä—by Brahmä; arthitaù—being prayed for.
Others say that the world, being overburdened like a boat at sea, was much aggrieved, and that Brahmä, who is Your son, prayed for You, and so You have appeared in order to diminish the trouble.
TEXT 35
bhave 'smin kliçyamänänäm
avidyä-käma-karmabhiù
çravaëa-smaraëärhäëi
kariñyann iti kecana
bhave—in the material creation; asmin—this; kliçyamänänäm—of those who are suffering from; avidyä—nescience; käma—desire; karmabhiù—by execution of fruitive work; çravaëa—hearing; smaraëa—remembering; arhäëi—worshiping; kariñyan—may perform; iti—thus; kecana—others.
And yet others say that You appeared in order to renovate the devotional service of hearing, remembering, worshiping and so on in order that the conditioned souls suffering from material pangs might take advantage and gain liberation.
TEXT 36
çåëvanti gäyanti gåëanty abhékñëaçaù
smaranti nandanti tavehitaà janäù
ta eva paçyanty acireëa tävakaà
bhava-pravähoparamaà padämbujam
çåëvanti—hear; gäyanti—chant; gåëanti—take; abhékñëaçaù—continuously; smaranti—remember; nandanti—take pleasure; tava—Your; éhitam—activities; janäù—people in general; te—they; eva—certainly; paçyanti—can see; acireëa—very soon; tävakam—Your; bhava-praväha—the current of rebirth; uparamam—cessation; pada-ambujam—lotus feet.
O Kåñëa, those who continuously hear, chant and repeat Your transcendental activities, or take pleasure in others' doing so, certainly see Your lotus feet, which alone can stop the repetition of birth and death.
TEXT 37
apy adya nas tvaà sva-kåtehita prabho
jihäsasi svit suhådo 'nujévinaù
yeñäà na cänyad bhavataù padämbujät
paräyaëaà räjasu yojitäàhasäm
api—if; adya—today; naù—us; tvam—You; sva-kåta—self-executed; éhita—all duties; prabho—O my Lord; jihäsasi—giving up; svit—possibly; suhådaù—intimate friends; anujévinaù—living at the mercy of; yeñäm—of whom; na—nor; ca—and; anyat—anyone else; bhavataù—Your; pada-ambujät—from the lotus feet; paräyaëam—dependent; räjasu—unto the kings; yojita—engaged in; aàhasäm—enmity.
O my Lord, You have executed all duties Yourself. Are You leaving us today, though we are completely dependent on Your mercy and have no one else to protect us, now when all kings are at enmity with us?
TEXT 38
ke vayaà näma-rüpäbhyäà
yadubhiù saha päëòaväù
bhavato 'darçanaà yarhi
håñékäëäm iveçituù
ke—who are; vayam—we; näma-rüpäbhyäm—without fame and ability; yadubhiù—with the Yadus; saha—along with; päëòaväù—and the Päëòavas; bhavataù—Your; adarçanam—absence; yarhi—as if; håñékäëäm—of the senses; iva—like; éçituù—of the living being.
As the name and fame of a particular body is finished with the disappearance of the living spirit, similarly if You do not look upon us, all our fame and activities, along with the Päëòavas and Yadus, will end at once. 
TEXT 39
neyaà çobhiñyate tatra
yathedänéà gadädhara
tvat-padair aìkitä bhäti
sva-lakñaëa-vilakñitaiù
na—not; iyam—this land of our kingdom; çobhiñyate—will appear beautiful; tatra—then; yathä—as it is; idäném—now; gadädhara—O Kåñëa; tvat—Your; padaiù—by the feet; aìkitä—marked; bhäti—is dazzling; sva-lakñaëa—Your own marks; vilakñitaiù—by the impressions.
O Gadädhara [Kåñëa], our kingdom is now being marked by the impressions of Your feet, and therefore it appears beautiful. But when You leave, it will no longer be so.
TEXT 40
ime jana-padäù svåddhäù
supakvauñadhi-vérudhaù
vanädri-nady-udanvanto
hy edhante tava vékñitaiù
ime—all these; jana-padäù—cities and towns; svåddhäù—flourished; supakva—nature; auñadhi—herbs; vérudhaù—vegetables; vana—forests; adri—hills; nadé—rivers; udanvantaù—seas; hi—certainly; edhante—increasing; tava—by You; vékñitaiù—seen.
All these cities and villages are flourishing in all respects because the herbs and grains are in abundance, the trees are full of fruits, the rivers are flowing, the hills are full of minerals, and the oceans are full of wealth. And this is all due to Your glancing over them. 
TEXT 41
atha viçveça viçvätman
viçva-mürte svakeñu me
sneha-päçam imaà chindhi
dåòhaà päëòuñu våñëiñu
atha—therefore; viçva-éça—O Lord of the universe; viçva-ätman—O soul of the universe; viçva-mürte—O personality of the universal form; svakeñu—unto my own kinsmen; me—my; sneha-päçam—tie of affection; imam—this; chindhi—cut off; dåòham—deep; päëòuñu—for the Päëòavas; våñëiñu—for the Våñëis also.
O Lord of the universe, soul of the universe, O personality of the form of the universe, please, therefore, sever my tie of affection for my kinsmen, the Päëòavas and the Våñëis.
TEXT 42
tvayi me 'nanya-viñayä
matir madhu-pate 'sakåt
ratim udvahatäd addhä
gaìgevaugham udanvati
tvayi—unto You; me—my; ananya-viñayä—unalloyed; matiù—attention; madhu-pate—O Lord of Madhu; asakåt—continuously; ratim—attraction; udvahatät—may overflow; addhä—directly; gaìgä—the Ganges; iva—like; ogham—flows; udanvati—down to the sea.
O Lord of Madhu, as the Ganges forever flows to the sea without hindrance, let my attraction be constantly drawn unto You without being diverted to anyone else.
TEXT 43
çré-kåñëa kåñëa-sakha våñëy-åñabhävani-dhrug-
räjanya-vaàça-dahanänapavarga-vérya
govinda go-dvija-surärti-harävatära
yogeçvaräkhila-guro bhagavan namas te
çré-kåñëa—O Çré Kåñëa; kåñëa-sakha—O friend of Arjuna; våñëi—of descendants of Våñëi; åñabha—O chief; avani—the earth; dhruk—rebellious; räjanya-vaàça—dynasties of the kings; dahana—O annihilator; anapavarga—without deterioration; vérya—of prowess; govinda—O proprietor of Golokadhäma; go—of the cows; dvija—the brähmaëas; sura—the demigods; arti-hara—to relieve distress; avatära—O Lord who descend; yoga-éçvara—O master of all mystic powers; akhila—universal; guro—O preceptor; bhagavan—O possessor of all opulences; namaù te—respectful obeisances unto You.
O Kåñëa, O friend of Arjuna, O chief amongst the descendants of Våñëi, You are the destroyer of those political parties which are disturbing elements on this earth. Your prowess never deteriorates. You are the proprietor of the transcendental abode, and You descend to relieve the distresses of the cows, the brähmaëas and the devotees. You possess all mystic powers, and You are the preceptor of the entire universe. You are the almighty God, and I offer You my respectful obeisances.
Song-6 Prayers by Bhismadeva (SB 1.9.32-42)

TEXT 32
çré-bhéñma uväca
iti matir upakalpitä vitåñëä
bhagavati sätvata-puìgave vibhümni
sva-sukham upagate kvacid vihartuà
prakåtim upeyuñi yad-bhava-pravähaù
çré-bhéñmaù uväca—Çré Bhéñmadeva said; iti—thus; matiù—thinking, feeling and willing; upakalpitä—invested; vitåñëä—freed from all sense desires; bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead; sätvata-puìgave—unto the leader of the devotees; vibhümni—unto the great; sva-sukham—self-satisfaction; upagate—unto Him who has attained it; kvacit—sometimes; vihartum—out of transcendental pleasure; prakåtim—in the material world; upeyuñi—do accept it; yat-bhava—from whom the creation; pravähaù—is made and annihilated.
Bhéñmadeva said: Let me now invest my thinking, feeling and willing, which were so long engaged in different subjects and occupational duties, in the all-powerful Lord Çré Kåñëa. He is always self-satisfied, but sometimes, being the leader of the devotees, He enjoys transcendental pleasure by descending to the material world, although it is from Him only that the material world is created.
TEXT 33
tri-bhuvana-kamanaà tamäla-varëaà
ravi-kara-gaura-varämbaraà dadhäne
vapur alaka-kulävåtänanäbjaà
vijaya-sakhe ratir astu me 'navadyä
tri-bhuvana—three statuses of planetary systems; kamanam—the most desirable; tamäla-varëam—bluish like the tamäla tree; ravi-kara—sunrays; gaura—golden color; varämbaram—glittering dress; dadhäne—one who wears; vapuù—body; alaka-kula-ävåta—covered with paintings of sandalwood pulp; änana-abjam—face like a lotus; vijaya-sakhe—unto the friend of Arjuna; ratiù astu—may attraction be reposed upon Him; me—my; anavadyä—without desire for fruitive results.
Çré Kåñëa is the intimate friend of Arjuna. He has appeared on this earth in His transcendental body, which resembles the bluish color of the tamäla tree. His body attracts everyone in the three planetary systems [upper, middle and lower]. May His glittering yellow dress and His lotus face, covered with paintings of sandalwood pulp, be the object of my attraction, and may I not desire fruitive results.
TEXT 34
yudhi turaga-rajo-vidhümra-viñvak-
kaca-lulita-çramaväry-alaìkåtäsye
mama niçita-çarair vibhidyamäna-
tvaci vilasat-kavace 'stu kåñëa ätmä
yudhi—on the battlefield; turaga—horses; rajaù—dust; vidhümra—turned an ashen color; viñvak—waving; kaca—hair; lulita—scattered; çrama-väri—perspiration due to labor; alaìkåta—decorated with; äsye—unto the face; mama—my; niçita—sharp; çaraiù—by the arrows; vibhidyamäna—pierced by; tvaci—in the skin; vilasat—enjoying pleasure; kavace—protective armor; astu—let there be; kåñëe—unto Çré Kåñëa; ätmä—mind.
On the battlefield [where Çré Kåñëa attended Arjuna out of friendship], the flowing hair of Lord Kåñëa turned ashen due to the dust raised by the hoofs of the horses. And because of His labor, beads of sweat wetted His face. All these decorations, intensified by the wounds on His skin dealt by my sharp arrows, were enjoyed by Him. Let my mind thus go unto Çré Kåñëa.
TEXT 35
sapadi sakhi-vaco niçamya madhye
nija-parayor balayo rathaà niveçya
sthitavati para-sainikäyur akñëä
håtavati pärtha-sakhe ratir mamästu
sapadi—on the battlefield; sakhi-vacaù—command of the friend; niçamya—after hearing; madhye—in the midst; nija—His own; parayoù—and the opposite party; balayoù—strength; ratham—chariot; niveçya—having entered; sthitavati—while staying there; para-sainika—of the soldiers on the opposite side; äyuù—duration of life; akñëä—by looking over; håtavati—act of diminishing; pärtha—of Arjuna, son of Påthä (Kunté); sakhe—unto the friend; ratiù—intimate relation; mama—my; astu—let there be.
In obedience to the command of His friend, Lord Çré Kåñëa entered the arena of the Battlefield of Kurukñetra between the soldiers of Arjuna and Duryodhana, and while there He shortened the life spans of the opposite party by His merciful glance. This was done simply by His looking at the enemy. Let my mind be fixed upon that Kåñëa.
TEXT 36
vyavahita-påtanä-mukhaà nirékñya
sva-jana-vadhäd vimukhasya doña-buddhyä
kumatim aharad ätma-vidyayä yaç
caraëa-ratiù paramasya tasya me 'stu
vyavahita—standing at a distance; påtanä—soldiers; mukham—faces; nirékñya—by looking upon; sva-jana—kinsmen; vadhät—from the act of killing; vimukhasya—one who is reluctant; doña-buddhyä—by polluted intelligence; kumatim—poor fund of knowledge; aharat—eradicated; ätma-vidyayä—by transcendental knowledge; yaù—He who; caraëa—to the feet; ratiù—attraction; paramasya—of the Supreme; tasya—for Him; me—my; astu—let there be.
When Arjuna was seemingly polluted by ignorance upon observing the soldiers and commanders before him on the battlefield, the Lord eradicated his ignorance by delivering transcendental knowledge. May His lotus feet always remain the object of my attraction.
TEXT 37
sva-nigamam apahäya mat-pratijïäm
åtam adhikartum avapluto rathasthaù
dhåta-ratha-caraëo 'bhyayäc caladgur
harir iva hantum ibhaà gatottaréyaù
sva-nigamam—own truthfulness; apahäya—for nullifying; mat-pratijïäm—my own promise; åtam—factual; adhi—more; kartum—for doing it; avaplutaù—getting down; ratha-sthaù—from the chariot; dhåta—taking up; ratha—chariot; caraëaù—wheel; abhyayät—went hurriedly; caladguù—trampling the earth; hariù—lion; iva—like; hantum—to kill; ibham—elephant; gata—leaving aside; uttaréyaù—covering cloth.
Fulfilling my vow and sacrificing His own promise, He got down from the chariot, took up its wheel, and ran towards me hurriedly, just as a lion goes to kill an elephant. He even dropped His outer garment on the way.
TEXT 38
çita-viçikha-hato viçérëa-daàçaù
kñataja-paripluta ätatäyino me
prasabham abhisasära mad-vadhärthaà
sa bhavatu me bhagavän gatir mukundaù
çita—sharp; viçikha—arrows; hataù—wounded by; viçérëa-daàçaù—scattered shield; kñataja—by wounds; pariplutaù—smeared with blood; ätatäyinaù—the great aggressor; me—my; prasabham—in an angry mood; abhisasära—began to move on; mat-vadha-artham—for the purpose of killing me; saù—He; bhavatu—may become; me—my; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; gatiù—destination; mukundaù—who awards salvation.
May He, Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, who awards salvation, be my ultimate destination. On the battlefield He charged me, as if angry because of the wounds dealt by my sharp arrows. His shield was scattered, and His body was smeared with blood due to the wounds.
TEXT 39
vijaya-ratha-kuöumba ätta-totre
dhåta-haya-raçmini tac-chriyekñaëéye
bhagavati ratir astu me mumürñor
yam iha nirékñya hatä gatäù sva-rüpam
vijaya—Arjuna; ratha—chariot; kuöumbe—the object of protection at all risk; ätta-totre—with a whip in the right hand; dhåta-haya—controlling the horses; raçmini—ropes; tat-çriyä—beautifully standing; ékñaëéye—to look at; bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead; ratiù astu—let my attraction be; me—my; mumürñoù—one who is about to die; yam—upon whom; iha—in this world; nirékñya—by looking; hatäù—those who died; gatäù—attained; sva-rüpam—original form.
At the moment of death, let my ultimate attraction be to Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead. I concentrate my mind upon Arjuna's chariot driver, who stood with a whip in His right hand and a bridle rope in His left, and who was very careful to give protection to Arjuna's chariot by all means. Those who saw Him on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra attained their original forms after death.
TEXT 40
lalita-gati-viläsa-valguhäsa-
praëaya-nirékñaëa-kalpitorumänäù
kåtam anukåtavatya unmadändhäù
prakåtim agan kila yasya gopa-vadhvaù
lalita—attractive; gati—movements; viläsa—fascinating acts; valguhäsa—sweet smiling; praëaya—loving; nirékñaëa—looking upon; kalpita—mentality; urumänäù—highly glorified; kåtam anukåtavatyaù—in the act of copying the movements; unmada-andhäù—gone mad in ecstasy; prakåtim—characteristics; agan—underwent; kila—certainly; yasya—whose; gopa-vadhvaù—the cowherd damsels.
Let my mind be fixed upon Lord Çré Kåñëa, whose motions and smiles of love attracted the damsels of Vrajadhäma [the gopés]. The damsels imitated the characteristic movements of the Lord [after His disappearance from the räsa dance].
TEXT 41
muni-gaëa-nåpa-varya-saìkule 'ntaù-
sadasi yudhiñöhira-räjasüya eñäm
arhaëam upapeda ékñaëéyo
mama dåçi-gocara eña ävir ätmä
muni-gaëa—the great learned sages; nåpa-varya—the great ruling kings; saìkule—in the great assembly of; antaù-sadasi—conference; yudhiñöhira—of Emperor Yudhiñöhira; räja-süye—a royal performance of sacrifice; eñäm—of all the great elites; arhaëam—respectful worship; upapeda—received; ékñaëéyaù—the object of attraction; mama—my; dåçi—sight; gocaraù—within the view of; eñaù äviù—personally present; ätmä—the soul.
At the Räjasüya yajïa [sacrifice] performed by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, there was the greatest assembly of all the elite men of the world, the royal and learned orders, and in that great assembly Lord Çré Kåñëa was worshiped by one and all as the most exalted Personality of Godhead. This happened during my presence, and I remember the incident in order to keep my mind upon the Lord.
TEXT 42
tam imam aham ajaà çaréra-bhäjäà
hådi hådi dhiñöhitam ätma-kalpitänäm
pratidåçam iva naikadhärkam ekaà
samadhigato 'smi vidhüta-bheda-mohaù
tam—that Personality of Godhead; imam—now present before me; aham—I; ajam—the unborn; çaréra-bhäjäm—of the conditioned soul; hådi—in the heart; hådi—in the heart; dhiñöhitam—situated; ätma—the Supersoul; kalpitänäm—of the speculators; pratidåçam—in every direction; iva—like; na ekadhä—not one; arkam—the sun; ekam—one only; samadhigataù asmi—I have undergone trance in meditation; vidhüta—being freed from; bheda-mohaù—misconception of duality.
Now I can meditate with full concentration upon that one Lord, Çré Kåñëa, now present before me because now I have transcended the misconceptions of duality in regard to His presence in everyone's heart, even in the hearts of the mental speculators. He is in everyone's heart. The sun may be perceived differently, but the sun is one.
Song-7 Glorification of Krishna by the women of Hastinapura (SB 1.10.21-30)

TEXT 21
sa vai kiläyaà puruñaù purätano
ya eka äséd aviçeña ätmani
agre guëebhyo jagad-ätmanéçvare
nimélitätman niçi supta-çaktiñu
saù—He (Kåñëa); vai—as we remember; kila—definitely; ayam—this; puruñaù—Personality of Godhead; purätanaù—the original; yaù—who; ekaù—only one; äsét—existed; aviçeñaù—materially unmanifested; ätmani—own self; agre—before creation; guëebhyaù—of the modes of nature; jagat-ätmani—unto the Supersoul; éçvare—unto the Supreme Lord; nimélita—merged into; ätman—the living entity; niçi supta—inactive at night; çaktiñu—of the energies.
The ladies said: Here He is, the original Personality of Godhead as we definitely remember Him. He alone existed before the manifested creation of the modes of nature, and into Him only, because He is the Supreme Lord, all living beings merge, as if sleeping at night, their energy suspended.
TEXT 22
sa eva bhüyo nija-vérya-coditäà
sva-jéva-mäyäà prakåtià sisåkñatém
anäma-rüpätmani rüpa-nämané
vidhitsamäno 'nusasära çästra-kåt
saù—He; eva—thus; bhüyaù—again; nija—own personal; vérya—potency; coditäm—performance of; sva—own; jéva—living being; mäyäm—external energy; prakåtim—unto material nature; sisåkñatém—while re-creating; anäma—without mundane designation; rüpa-ätmani—forms of the soul; rüpa-nämané—forms and names; vidhitsamänaù—desiring to award; anusasära—entrusted; çästra-kåt—the compiler of revealed scripture.
The Personality of Godhead, again desiring to give names and forms to His parts and parcels, the living entities, placed them under the guidance of material nature. By His own potency, material nature is empowered to re-create.
TEXT 23
sa vä ayaà yat padam atra sürayo
jitendriyä nirjita-mätariçvanaù
paçyanti bhakty-utkalitämalätmanä
nanv eña sattvaà parimärñöum arhati
saù—He; vai—by providence; ayam—this; yat—that which; padam atra—here is the same Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa; sürayaù—great devotees; jita-indriyäù—who have overcome the influence of the senses; nirjita—thoroughly controlled; mätariçvanaù—life; paçyanti—can see; bhakti—by dint of devotional service; utkalita—developed; amala-ätmanä—those whose minds are thoroughly cleansed; nanu eñaù—certainly by this only; sattvam—existence; parimärñöum—for purifying the mind completely; arhati—deserve.
Here is the same Supreme Personality of Godhead whose transcendental form is experienced by the great devotees who are completely cleansed of material consciousness by dint of rigid devotional service and full control of life and the senses. And that is the only way to purify one's existence.
TEXT 24
sa vä ayaà sakhy anugéta-sat-katho
vedeñu guhyeñu ca guhya-vädibhiù
ya eka éço jagad-ätma-lélayä
såjaty avaty atti na tatra sajjate
saù—He; vai—also; ayam—this; sakhi—O my friend; anugéta—described; sat-kathaù—the excellent pastimes; vedeñu—in the Vedic literatures; guhyeñu—confidentially; ca—as also; guhya-vädibhiù—by the confidential devotees; yaù—one who; ekaù—one only; éçaù—the supreme controller; jagat—of the complete creation; ätma—Supersoul; lélayä—by manifestation of pastimes; såjati—creates; avati atti—also maintains and annihilates; na—never; tatra—there; sajjate—becomes attached to it.
O dear friends, here is that very Personality of Godhead whose attractive and confidential pastimes are described in the confidential parts of Vedic literature by His great devotees. It is He only who creates, maintains and annihilates the material world and yet remains unaffected.
TEXT 25
yadä hy adharmeëa tamo-dhiyo nåpä
jévanti tatraiña hi sattvataù kila
dhatte bhagaà satyam åtaà dayäà yaço
bhaväya rüpäëi dadhad yuge yuge
yadä—whenever; hi—assuredly; adharmeëa—against the principles of God's will; tamaù-dhiyaù—persons in the lowest material modes; nåpäù—kings and administrators; jévanti—live like animals; tatra—thereupon; eñaù—He; hi—only; sattvataù—transcendental; kila—certainly; dhatte—is manifested; bhagam—supreme power; satyam—truth; åtam—positiveness; dayäm—mercy; yaçaù—wonderful activities; bhaväya—for the maintenance; rüpäëi—in various forms; dadhat—manifesting; yuge—different periods; yuge—and ages.
Whenever there are kings and administrators living like animals in the lowest modes of existence, the Lord in His transcendental form manifests His supreme power, the Truth Positive, shows special mercy to the faithful and performs wonderful activities. He thus manifests various transcendental forms in different periods and ages, as necessary.
TEXT 26
aho alaà çläghyatamaà yadoù kulam
aho alaà puëyatamaà madhor vanam
yad eña puàsäm åñabhaù çriyaù patiù
sva-janmanä caìkramaëena cäïcati
aho—oh; alam—verily; çläghya-tamam—supremely glorified; yadoù—of King Yadu; kulam—dynasty; aho—oh; alam—verily; puëya-tamam—supremely virtuous; madhoù vanam—the land of Mathurä; yat—because; eñaù—this; puàsäm—of all the living beings; åñabhaù—supreme leader; çriyaù—of the goddess of fortune; patiù—husband; sva-janmanä—by His appearance; caìkramaëena—by crawling; ca aïcati—glories.
Oh, how supremely glorified is the dynasty of King Yadu, and how virtuous is the land of Mathurä, where the supreme leader of all living beings, the husband of the goddess of fortune, has taken His birth and wandered in His childhood.
TEXT 27
aho bata svar-yaçasas tiraskaré
kuçasthalé puëya-yaçaskaré bhuvaù
paçyanti nityaà yad anugraheñitaà
smitävalokaà sva-patià sma yat-prajäù
aho bata—how wonderful this is; svaù-yaçasaù—the glories of the heavenly planets; tiraskaré—that which defeats; kuçasthalé—Dvärakä; puëya—virtue; yaçaskaré—famous; bhuvaù—the planet earth; paçyanti—see; nityam—constantly; yat—that which; anugraha-iñitam—to bestow benediction; smita-avalokam—glance with the favor of sweet smiling; sva-patim—unto the soul of the living being (Kåñëa); sma—used to; yat-prajäù—the inhabitants of the place.
Undoubtedly it is wonderful that Dvärakä has defeated the glories of the heavenly planets and has enhanced the celebrity of the earth. The inhabitants of Dvärakä are always seeing the soul of all living beings [Kåñëa] in His loving feature. He glances at them and favors them with sweet smiles.
TEXT 28
nünaà vrata-snäna-hutädineçvaraù
samarcito hy asya gåhéta-päëibhiù
pibanti yäù sakhy adharämåtaà muhur
vraja-striyaù sammumuhur yad-äçayäù
nünam—certainly in the previous birth; vrata—vows; snäna—baths; huta—sacrifices in the fire; ädinä—by all these; éçvaraù—the Personality of Godhead; samarcitaù—perfectly worshiped; hi—certainly; asya—His; gåhéta-päëibhiù—by the married wives; pibanti—relish; yäù—those who; sakhi—O friends; adhara-amåtam—the nectar from His lips; muhuù—again and again; vraja-striyaù—the damsels of Vrajabhümi; sammumuhuù—often fainted; yat-äçayäù—expecting to be favored in that way.
O friends, just think of His wives, whose hands He has accepted. How they must have undergone vows, taken baths, and performed fire sacrifices and perfect worship of the Lord of the universe to constantly relish now the nectar from His lips [by kissing]. The damsels of Vrajabhümi would often faint just by expecting such favors.
TEXT 29
yä vérya-çulkena håtäù svayaàvare
pramathya caidya-pramukhän hi çuñmiëaù
pradyumna-sämbämba-sutädayo 'parä
yäç cähåtä bhauma-vadhe sahasraçaù
yä—the lady; vérya—prowess; çulkena—by payment of the price; håtäù—taken away by force; svayaàvare—in the open selection of the bridegroom; pramathya—harassing; caidya—King Çiçupäla; pramukhän—headed by; hi—positively; çuñmiëaù—all very powerful; pradyumna—Pradyumna (Kåñëa's son); sämba—Sämba; amba—Amba; suta-ädayaù—children; aparäù—other ladies; yäù—those; ca—also; ähåtäù—similarly brought; bhauma-vadhe—after killing Bhaumäsura; sahasraçaù—by the thousands.
The children of these ladies are Pradyumna, Sämba, Amba, etc. Ladies like Rukmiëé, Satyabhämä and Jämbavaté were forcibly taken away by Him from their svayaàvara ceremonies after He defeated many powerful kings, headed by Çiçupäla. And other ladies were also forcibly taken away by Him after He killed Bhaumäsura and thousands of his assistants. All of these ladies are glorious.
TEXT 30
etäù paraà strétvam apästapeçalaà
nirasta-çaucaà bata sädhu kurvate
yäsäà gåhät puñkara-locanaù patir
na jätv apaity ähåtibhir hådi spåçan
etäù—all these women; param—highest; strétvam—womanhood; apästapeçalam—without independence; nirasta—without; çaucam—purity; bata sädhu—auspiciously glorified; kurvate—do they make; yäsäm—from whose; gåhät—homes; puñkara-locanaù—the lotus-eyed; patiù—husband; na jätu—never at any time; apaiti—goes away; ähåtibhiù—by presentation; hådi—in the heart; spåçan—endeared.
All these women auspiciously glorified their lives despite their being without independence or purity. Their husband, the lotus-eyed Personality of Godhead, never left them alone at home. He always pleased their hearts by making valuable presentations.
Song-8 Prayers by the citizens of Dvaraka(SB 1.11.6-10)

TEXT 6
natäù sma te nätha sadäìghri-paìkajaà
viriïca-vairiïcya-surendra-vanditam
paräyaëaà kñemam ihecchatäà paraà
na yatra kälaù prabhavet paraù prabhuù
natäù—bowed down; sma—we had done so; te—unto You; nätha—O Lord; sadä—always; aìghri-paìkajam—the lotus feet; viriïca—Brahmä, the first living being; vairiïcya—sons of Brahmä like Sanaka and Sanätana; sura-indra—the king of heaven; vanditam—worshiped by; paräyaëam—the supreme; kñemam—welfare; iha—in this life; icchatäm—one who so desires; param—the highest; na—never; yatra—wherein; kälaù—inevitable time; prabhavet—can exert its influence; paraù—transcendental; prabhuù—the Supreme Lord.
The citizens said: O Lord, You are worshiped by all demigods like Brahmä, the four Sanas and even the king of heaven. You are the ultimate rest for those who are really aspiring to achieve the highest benefit of life. You are the supreme transcendental Lord, and inevitable time cannot exert its influence upon You.
TEXT 7
bhaväya nas tvaà bhava viçva-bhävana
tvam eva mätätha suhåt-patiù pitä
tvaà sad-gurur naù paramaà ca daivataà
yasyänuvåttyä kåtino babhüvima
bhaväya—for welfare; naù—for us; tvam—Your Lordship; bhava—just become; viçva-bhävana—the creator of the universe; tvam—Your Lordship; eva—certainly; mätä—mother; atha—as also; suhåt—well-wisher; patiù—husband; pitä—father; tvam—Your Lordship; sat-guruù—spiritual master; naù—our; paramam—the supreme; ca—and; daivatam—worshipable Deity; yasya—whose; anuvåttyä—following in the footsteps; kåtinaù—successful; babhüvima—we have become.
O creator of the universe, You are our mother, well-wisher, Lord, father, spiritual master and worshipable Deity. By following in Your footsteps we have become successful in every respect. We pray, therefore, that You continue to bless us with Your mercy.
TEXT 8
aho sa-näthä bhavatä sma yad vayaà
traiviñöapänäm api düra-darçanam
prema-smita-snigdha-nirékñaëänanaà
paçyema rüpaà tava sarva-saubhagam
aho—oh, it is our good luck; sa-näthäù—to be under the protection of the master; bhavatä—by Your good self; sma—as we have become; yat vayam—as we are; traiviñöa-pänäm—by the demigods; api—also; düra-darçanam—very rarely seen; prema-smita—smiling with love; snigdha—affectionate; nirékñaëa-änanam—face looking in that mode; paçyema—let us look; rüpam—beauty; tava—Your; sarva—all; saubhagam—auspiciousness.
Oh, it is our good luck that we have come again today under Your protection by Your presence. Although Your Lordship is rarely visited even by the denizens of heaven, now it is possible for us to look upon Your smiling face, which is full of affectionate glances. We can now see Your transcendental form, full of all auspiciousness.
TEXT 9
yarhy ambujäkñäpasasära bho bhavän
kurün madhün vätha suhåd-didåkñayä
taträbda-koöi-pratimaù kñaëo bhaved
ravià vinäkñëor iva nas taväcyuta
yarhi—whenever; ambuja-akña—O lotus-eyed one; apasasära—You go away; bho—oh; bhavän—Yourself; kurün—the descendants of King Kuru; madhün—the inhabitants of Mathurä (Vrajabhümi); vä—either; atha—therefore; suhåt-didåkñayä—for meeting them; tatra—at that time; abda-koöi—millions of years; pratimaù—like; kñaëaù—moments; bhavet—becomes; ravim—the sun; vinä—without; akñëoù—of the eyes; iva—like that; naù—ours; tava—Your; acyuta—O infallible one.
O lotus-eyed Lord, whenever You go away to Mathurä-Våndävana or Hastinäpura to meet Your friends and relatives, every moment of Your absence seems like millions of years. O infallible one, at that time our eyes become useless, as if bereft of the sun.
TEXT 10
kathaà vayaà nätha ciroñite tvayi
prasanna-dåñöyäkhila-täpa-çoñaëam
jévema te sundara-häsa-çobhitam
apaçyamänä vadanaà manoharam
iti codéritä väcaù
prajänäà bhakta-vatsalaù
çåëväno 'nugrahaà dåñöyä
vitanvan präviçat puram
katham—how; vayam—we; nätha—O Lord; ciroñite—being abroad almost always; tvayi—by You; prasanna—satisfaction; dåñöyä—by the glance; akhila—universal; täpa—miseries; çoñaëam—vanquishing; jévema—shall be able to live; te—Your; sundara—beautiful; häsa—smiling; çobhitam—decorated; apaçyamänäù—without seeing; vadanam—face; manoharam—attractive; iti—thus; ca—and; udéritäù—speaking; väcaù—words; prajänäm—of the citizens; bhakta-vatsalaù—kind to the devotees; çåëvänaù—thus learning; anugraham—kindness; dåñöyä—by glances; vitanvan—distributing; präviçat—entered; puram—Dvärakäpuré.
O master, if You live abroad all the time, then we cannot look at Your attractive face, whose satisfied smiles vanquish all our sufferings. How can we exist without Your presence? 
Son
