Part   Canto Five


Song Prayers by Rtvija to the Lord Who Appears in King Nabhi's Yajna (SB 5.3.4-15)
TEXTS 4–5
‰iTvJa Ocu"
AhRiSa MauhurhRtaMaahR<aMaSMaak-MaNauPaQaaNaa& NaMaae NaMa wTYaeTaavTSaduPaiXai+aTa&
k-ae_hRiTa PauMaaNa( Pa[k*-iTaGau<aVYaiTak-rMaiTarNaqXa wRìrSYa ParSYa Pa[k*-iTaPauåzYaae
rvaR¢-Naai>aNaaRMaæPaak*-iTa>aq æPaiNaæPa<aMa( )) 4 )) Sak-l/JaNaiNak-aYav*iJaNa‚
iNarSaNaiXavTaMaPa[vrGau<aGa<aEk-deXak-QaNaad*Tae )) 5 ))
åtvija ücuù
arhasi muhur arhattamärhaëam asmäkam anupathänäà namo nama ity etävat sad-upaçikñitaà ko 'rhati pumän prakåti-guëa-vyatikara-matir anéça éçvarasya parasya prakåti-puruñayor arväktanäbhir näma-rüpäkåtibhé rüpa-nirüpaëam; sakala-jana-nikäya-våjina-nirasana-çivatama-pravara-guëa-gaëaika-deça-kathanäd åte.
åtvijaù ücuù—the priests said; arhasi—please (accept); muhuù—again and again; arhat-tama—O most exalted, worshipable person; arhaëam—offering of worship; asmäkam—of us; anupathänäm—who are Your servants; namaù—respectful obeisances; namaù—respectful obeisances; iti—thus; etävat—so far; sat—by exalted personalities; upaçikñitam—instructed; kaù—what; arhati—is able (to make); pumän—man; prakåti—of material nature; guëa—of the modes; vyatikara—in the transformations; matiù—whose mind (is absorbed); anéçaù—who is most incapable; éçvarasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parasya—beyond; prakåti-puruñayoù—the jurisdiction of the three modes of material nature; arväktanäbhiù—which do not reach up to, or which are of this material world; näma-rüpa-äkåtibhiù—by names, forms and qualities; rüpa—of Your nature or position; nirüpaëam—ascertainment, perception; sakala—all; jana-nikäya—of mankind; våjina—sinful actions; nirasana—which wipe out; çivatama—most auspicious; pravara—excellent; guëa-gaëa—of the transcendental qualities; eka-deça—one part; kathanät—by speaking; åte—except.
The priests began to offer prayers to the Lord, saying: O most worshipable one, we are simply Your servants. Although You are full in Yourself, please, out of Your causeless mercy, accept a little service from us, Your eternal servants. We are not actually aware of Your transcendental form, but we can simply offer our respectful obeisances again and again, as instructed by the Vedic literatures and authorized äcäryas. Materialistic living entities are very much attracted to the modes of material nature, and therefore they are never perfect, but You are above the jurisdiction of all material conceptions. Your name, form and qualities are all transcendental and beyond the conception of experimental knowledge. Indeed, who can conceive of You? In the material world we can perceive only material names and qualities. We have no other power than to offer our respectful obeisances and prayers unto You, the transcendental person. The chanting of Your auspicious transcendental qualities will wipe out the sins of all mankind. That is the most auspicious activity for us, and we can thus partially understand Your supernatural position.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has nothing to do with material perception. Even the impersonalist Çaìkaräcärya says, näräyaëaù paro 'vyaktät: "Näräyaëa. the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is beyond the material conception." We cannot concoct the form and attributes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. We must simply accept the description given in Vedic literatures about the Lord's form and activities. As stated in Brahma-saàhitä (5.29):
cintämaëi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-våkña-
lakñävåteñu surabhér abhipälayantam
lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who is tending the cows, yielding all desires, in abodes built with spiritual gems and surrounded by millions of purpose trees. He is always served with great reverence and affection by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune." We can have some conception of the Absolute Truth, His form and His attributes simply by reading the descriptions given in Vedic literatures and authoritative statements given by exalted personalities like Brahmä, Närada, Çukadeva Gosvämé and others. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says, ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù: [Cc. Madhya 17.136] "We cannot conceive the name, form and qualities of Çré Kåñëa through our material senses." Because of this, other names for the Lord are adhokñaja and apräkåta, which indicate that He is beyond any material senses. Out of His causeless mercy upon His devotees, the Lord appeared before Mahäräja Näbhi. Similarly, when we are engaged in the Lord's devotional service, the Lord reveals Himself to us. Sevonmukhe hi jihvädau svayam eva sphuraty adaù. This is the only way to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù: [Bg. 18.55] one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead through devotional service. There is no other way. We have to hear from the authorities and from the çästras and consider the Supreme Lord in terms of their statements. We cannot imagine or concoct forms and attributes of the Lord.
TEXT 6
PairJaNaaNauraGaivricTaXabl/Sa&XaBdSail/l/iSaTaik-Sal/YaTaul/iSak-adUvaRx(ku==rEriPa
SaM>a*TaYaa SaPaYaRYaa ik-l/ ParMa PairTauZYaiSa )) 6 ))
 parijanänuräga-viracita-çabala-saàçabda-salila-sita-kisalaya-tulasikä-dürväìkurair api sambhåtayä saparyayä kila parama parituñyasi.
parijana—by Your servants; anuräga—in great ecstasy; viracita—executed; çabala—with a faltering voice; saàçabda—with prayers; salila—water; sita-kisalaya—twigs bearing new leaves; tulasikä—tulasé leaves; dürvä-aìkuraiù—and with newly grown grass; api—also; sambhåtayä—performed; saparyayä—by worship; kila—indeed; parama—O Supreme Lord; parituñyasi—You become satisfied.
O Supreme Lord, You are full in every respect. You are certainly very satisfied when Your devotees offer You prayers with faltering voices and in ecstasy bring You tulasé leaves, water, twigs bearing new leaves, and newly grown grass. This surely makes You satisfied.
One does not need great wealth, education or opulence to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one is fully absorbed in love and ecstasy, he need offer only a flower and a little water. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà yo me bhaktyä prayacchati: "If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will accept it." (Bg. 9.26)
The Supreme Lord can be pleased only by devotional service: therefore it is said here that the Lord is surely satisfied by devotion and nothing else. Quoting from the Gautaméya-tantra, the Hari-bhakti-viläsa states:
tulasé-dala-mätreëa
jalasya culukena vä
vikréëéte svam ätmänaà
bhaktebhyo bhakta-vatsalaù
"Çré Kåñëa, who is very affectionate toward His devotees, sells Himself to a devotee who offers merely a tulasé leaf and a palmful of water." The Supreme Lord is causelessly merciful upon His devotee, so much so that even the poorest of men can offer Him a little water and a flower in devotion and thus please Him. This is due to His affectionate dealings with His devotees.
TEXT 7
AQaaNaYaaiPa Na >avTa wJYaYaaeå>aar>arYaa SaMauicTaMaQaRiMahaePal/>aaMahe )) 7 ))
athänayäpi na bhavata ijyayoru-bhära-bharayä samucitam artham ihopalabhämahe.
atha—otherwise; anayä—this; api—even; na—not; bhavataù—of Your exalted personality; ijyayä—by performance of sacrifice; urubhära-bharayä—encumbered by much paraphernalia; samucitam—required; artham—use; iha—here; upalabhämahe—we can see.
We have engaged in Your worship with many things and have offered sacrifices unto You, but we think that there is no need for so many arrangements to please Your Lordship.
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says that if one is offered varied foods but has no appetite, the offering has no value. In a big sacrificial ceremony there may be many things accumulated to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but if there is no devotion, attachment or love for the Lord, the arrangement is useless. The Lord is complete in Himself, and He does not need anything from us. However, if we offer Him a little water, a flower and a tulasi leaf, He will accept them. Bhakti, devotional service, is the main way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is not a question of arranging huge sacrifices. The priests were regretful, thinking that they were not on the path of devotional service and that their sacrifice was not pleasing to the Lord.
TEXT 8
AaTMaNa WvaNauSavNaMaÅSaaVYaiTareke-<a bae>aUYaMaaNaaXaezPauåzaQaRSvæPaSYa ik-NTau
NaaQaaiXaz AaXaaSaaNaaNaaMaeTadi>aSa&raDaNaMaa}a& >aivTauMahRiTa )) 8 ))
ätmana evänusavanam aïjasävyatirekeëa bobhüyamänäçeña-puruñärtha-svarüpasya kintu näthäçiña äçäsänänäm etad abhisaàrädhana-mätraà bhavitum arhati.
ätmanaù—self-sufficiently; eva—certainly; anusavanam—at every moment; aïjasä—directly; avyatirekeëa—without stopping; bobhüyamäna—increasing; açeña—unlimitedly; puruña-artha—the goals of life; sva-rüpasya—Your actual identity; kintu—but; nätha—O Lord; äçiñaù—benedictions for material enjoyment; äçäsänänäm—of us, who are always desiring; etat—this; abhisaàrädhana—for getting Your mercy; mätram—only; bhavitum arhati—can be.
All of life's goals and opulences are directly, self-sufficiently, unceasingly and unlimitedly increasing in You at every moment. Indeed, You are unlimited enjoyment and blissful existence itself. As far as we are concerned, O Lord, we are always after material enjoyment. You do not need all these sacrificial arrangements, but they are meant for us so that we may be benedicted by Your Lordship. All these sacrifices are performed for our fruitive results, and they are not actually needed by You.
Being self-sufficient, the Supreme Lord does not need huge sacrifices. Fruitive activity for a more opulent life is for those who desire such material opulence for their interest. Yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko 'yaà karma-bandhanaù: [Bg. 3.9] if we do not act to satisfy the Supreme Lord, we engage in mäyä's activities. We may construct a gorgeous temple and spend thousands of dollars, but such a temple is not required by the Lord. The Lord has many millions of temples for His residence, and He does not need our attempt. He does not require opulent activity at all. Such engagement is meant for our benefit. If we engage our money in constructing a gorgeous temple, we are freed from the reactions of our endeavors. This is for our benefit. In addition, if we attempt to do something nice for the Supreme Lord, He is pleased with us and gives us His benediction. In conclusion, the gorgeous arrangements are not for the Lord's sake but for our own. If we somehow or other receive blessings and benedictions from the Lord, our consciousness can be purified and we can become eligible to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 9
TaÛQaa bail/XaaNaa& SvYaMaaTMaNa" é[eYa" ParMaivduza& ParMaParMaPauåz Pa[k-zR‚
k-å<aYaa SvMaihMaaNa& caPavGaaR:YaMauPak-LPaiYaZYaNa( SvYa& NaaPaicTa WveTar‚
vidhaePal/i+aTa" )) 9 ))
tad yathä bäliçänäà svayam ätmanaù çreyaù param aviduñäà parama-parama-puruña prakarña-karuëayä sva-mahimänaà cäpavargäkhyam upakalpayiñyan svayaà näpacita evetaravad ihopalakñitaù.
tat—that; yathä—as; bäliçänäm—of the fools; svayam—by Yourself; ätmanaù—own; çreyaù—welfare; param—ultimate; aviduñäm—of persons who do not know; parama-parama-puruña—O Lord of lords; prakarña-karuëayä—by abundant causeless mercy; sva-mahimänam—Your personal glory; ca—and; apavarga-äkhyam—called apavarga (liberation); upakalpayiñyan—desiring to give; svayam—personally; na apacitaù—not properly worshiped; eva—although; itara-vat—like an ordinary person; iha—here; upalakñitaù—(You are) present and seen (by us).
O Lord of lords, we are completely ignorant of the execution of dharma, artha, käma and mokña, the process of liberation, because we do not actually know the goal of life. You have appeared personally before us like a person soliciting worship, but actually You are present here just so we can see You. You have come out of Your abundant and causeless mercy in order to serve our purpose, our interest, and give us the benefit of Your personal glory called apavarga, liberation. You have come, although You are not properly worshiped by us due to our ignorance.
Lord Viñëu was personally present at the sacrificial arena, but this does not mean that He had any interest in His own personal benefit. Similarly, the arcä-vigraha, the Deity in the temple, is present for the same purpose. Out of His causeless mercy, the Supreme Personality of Godhead presents Himself before us so that we can see Him. Since we have no transcendental vision, we cannot see the spiritual sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1] of the Lord; therefore, out of His causeless mercy He comes in a form we can see. We can only see material things like stone and wood, and therefore He accepts a form of stone and wood and thus accepts our service in the temple. This is an exhibition of the Lord's causeless mercy. Although He has no interest in such things, in order to receive our loving service He agrees to act as He does. We cannot actually offer suitable paraphernalia for the Lord's worship because we are completely ignorant. It was out of His causeless mercy that the Lord appeared in the sacrificial arena of Mahäräja Näbhi.
TEXT 10
AQaaYaMaev vrae ùhRtaMa YaihR bihRiz raJazeRvRrdzR>aae >avaiàJaPauåze+a<aivzYa
AaSaqTa( )) 10 ))
athäyam eva varo hy arhattama yarhi barhiñi räjarñer varadarñabho bhavän nija-puruñekñaëa-viñaya äsét.
atha—then; ayam—this; eva—certainly; varaù—benediction; hi—indeed; arhat-tama—O most worshipable of the worshipable; yarhi—because; barhiñi—in the sacrifice; räja-åñeù—of King Näbhi; varada-åñabhaù—the best of the benefactors; bhavän—Your Lordship; nija-puruña—of Your devotees; ékñaëa-viñayaù—the object of the sight; äsét—has become.
O most worshipable of all, You are the best of all benefactors, and Your appearance at saintly King Näbhi's sacrificial arena is meant for our benediction. Because You have been seen by us, You have bestowed upon us the most valuable benediction.
Nija-puruña-ékñaëa-viñaya. In Bhagavad-gétä (9.29) Kåñëa says, samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu: "I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend to him."
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is equal to everyone. In that sense, He has no enemies and no friends. Everyone is enjoying the fruitive reactions of his own work, and the Lord, within everyone's heart, is observing and giving everyone the desired result. However, just as the devotees are always anxious to see the Supreme Lord satisfied in every way, similarly the Supreme Lord is very anxious to present Himself before His devotees. Çré Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.8):
pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
sambhavämi yuge yuge
"To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after millennium."
Thus Kåñëa's appearance is for the deliverance and satisfaction of His devotees. Actually He does not advent Himself simply to kill the demons, for that can be done by His agents. Lord Viñëu's appearance at the sacrificial arena of Mahäräja Näbhi was just to please the king and his assistants. Otherwise there was no reason for His being present there.
TEXT 11
ASa(r)iNaiXaTajaNaaNal/ivDaUTaaXaezMal/aNaa& >avTa(Sv>aavaNaaMaaTMaaraMaa<aa& MauNaq‚
NaaMaNavrTaPairGaui<aTaGau<aGa<a ParMaMa(r)l/aYaNaGau<aGa<ak-QaNaae_iSa )) 11 ))
asaìga-niçita-jïänänala-vidhütäçeña-malänäà bhavat-svabhävänäm ätmärämäëäà munénäm anavarata-pariguëita-guëa-gaëa parama-maìgaläyana-guëa-gaëa-kathano 'si.
asaìga—by detachment; niçita—strengthened; jïäna—of knowledge; anala—by the fire; vidhüta—removed; açeña—unlimited; malänäm—whose dirty things; bhavat-svabhävänäm—who have attained Your qualities; ätma-ärämäëäm—who are self-satisfied; munénäm—of great sages; anavarata—incessantly; pariguëita—recounted; guëa-gaëa—O Lord, whose spiritual qualities; parama-maìgala—supreme bliss; äyana—produces; guëa-gaëa-kathanaù—He, the chanting of whose attributes; asi—You are.
Dear Lord, all the great sages who are thoughtful and saintly persons incessantly recount Your spiritual qualities. These sages have already burned up all the unlimited dirty things and, by the fire of knowledge, strengthened their detachment from the material world. Thus they have attained Your qualities and are self-satisfied. Yet even for those who feel spiritual bliss in chanting Your attributes, Your personal presence is very rare.
The priests in Mahäräja Näbhi's sacrificial arena appreciated the personal presence of the Supreme Lord Viñëu, and they considered themselves very much obliged. The Lord's appearance is rare even for great saintly persons who have become completely detached from this material world and whose hearts are clean due to constantly chanting the glories of the Lord. Such people are satisfied by chanting the transcendental qualities of the Lord. The Lord's personal presence is not actually required. The priests are pointing out that the Lord's personal presence is very rare even for such elevated sages but that He was so kind to them that now He was personally present. Therefore the priests were very much obliged.
TEXT 12
AQa k-QaiÄTS%l/Na+auTPaTaNaJa*M>a<adurvSQaaNaaidzu ivvXaaNaa& Na" SMar<aaYa
JvrMar<adXaaYaaMaiPa Sak-l/k-XMal/iNarSaNaaiNa Tav Gau<ak*-TaNaaMaDaeYaaiNa vcNa‚
Gaaecrai<a >avNTau )) 12 ))
atha kathaïcit skhalana-kñut-patana-jåmbhaëa-duravasthänädiñu vivaçänäà naù smaraëäya jvara-maraëa-daçäyäm api sakala-kaçmala-nirasanäni tava guëa-kåta-nämadheyäni vacana-gocaräëi bhavantu.
atha—still; kathaïcit—somehow or other; skhalana—stumbling; kñut—hunger; patana—falling down; jåmbhaëa—yawning; duravasthäna—because of being placed in an undesirable position; ädiñu—and so on; vivaçänäm—unable; naù—of ourselves; smaraëäya—to remember; jvara-maraëa-daçäyäm—in the case of having a high fever at the time of death; api—also; sakala—all; kaçmala—sins; nirasanäni—which can dispel; tava—Your; guëa—attributes; kåta—activities; nämadheyäni—names; vacana-gocaräëi—possible to be uttered; bhavantu—let them become.
Dear Lord, we may not be able to remember Your name, form and qualities due to stumbling, hunger, falling down, yawning or being in a miserable diseased condition at the time of death when there is a high fever. We therefore pray unto You, O Lord, for You are very affectionate to Your devotees. Please help us remember You and utter Your holy names, attributes and activities, which can dispel all the reactions of our sinful lives.
The real success in life is ante näräyaëa-småti—remembering the holy name, attributes, activities and form of the Lord at the time of death. Although we may be engaged in the Lord's devotional service in the temple, material conditions are so tough and inevitable that we may forget the Lord at the time of death due to a diseased condition or mental derangement. Therefore we should pray to the Lord to be able to remember His lotus feet without fail at the time of death, when we are in such a precarious condition. In this regard, one may also see Çrémad-Bhägavatam 6.2.9–10 and 14–15.
TEXT 13
ik-ÄaYa& raJaizRrPaTYak-aMa" Pa[Jaa& >avad*XaqMaaXaaSaaNa wRìrMaaiXaza&
SvGaaRPavGaRYaaeriPa >avNTaMauPaDaaviTa Pa[JaaYaaMaQaRPa[TYaYaae DaNadiMavaDaNa"
f-l/Ik-r<aMa( )) 13 ))
kiïcäyaà räjarñir apatya-kämaù prajäà bhavädåçém äçäsäna éçvaram äçiñäà svargäpavargayor api bhavantam upadhävati prajäyäm artha-pratyayo dhanadam ivädhanaù phalékaraëam.
kiïca—moreover; ayam—this; räja-åñiù—pious King (Näbhi); apatya-kämaù—desiring offspring; prajäm—a son; bhavädåçém—exactly like You; äçäsänaù—hoping for; éçvaram—the supreme controller; äçiñäm—of benedictions; svarga-apavargayoù—of the heavenly planets and liberation; api—although; bhavantam—You; upadhävati—worships; prajäyäm—children; artha-pratyayaù—regarding as the ultimate goal of life; dhana-dam—unto a person who can give immense wealth as charity; iva—like; adhanaù—a poor man; phalékaraëam—a little husk.
Dear Lord, here is the great King Näbhi, whose ultimate goal in life is to have a son like You. Your Lordship, his position is like that of a person approaching a very rich man and begging for a little grain. Mahäräja Näbhi is so desirous of having a son that he is worshiping You for a son, although You can offer him any exalted position, including elevation to the heavenly planets or liberation back to Godhead.
The priests were a little ashamed that King Näbhi was performing a great sacrifice just to ask the Lord's benediction for a son. The Lord could offer him promotion to the heavenly planets or the Vaikuëöha planets. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has taught us how to approach the Supreme Lord and ask Him for the ultimate benediction. He said: na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà kavitäà vä jagad-éça kämaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4]. He did not want to ask the Supreme Lord for anything material. Material opulence means riches, a nice family, a good wife and many followers, but an intelligent devotee doesn't ask the Supreme Lord for anything material. His only prayer is: mama janmani janmanéçvare bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi. He wants to be engaged perpetually in the loving service of the Lord. He does not want promotion to the heavenly planets or mukti, liberation from material bondage. If this were the case, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu would not have said, mama janmani janmani. It doesn't matter to a devotee whether or not he takes birth life after life, as long as he remains a devotee. Actually eternal liberty means returning home, back to Godhead. A devotee is never concerned about anything material. Although Näbhi Mahäräja wanted a son like Viñëu, wanting a son like God is also a form of sense gratification. A pure devotee wants only to engage in the Lord's loving service.
TEXT 14
k-ae va wh Tae_ParaiJaTaae_ParaiJaTaYaa MaaYaYaaNaviSaTaPadVYaaNaav*TaMaiTaivRzYa‚
ivzrYaaNaav*TaPa[k*-iTarNauPaaiSaTaMahÀr<a" )) 14 ))
ko vä iha te 'paräjito 'paräjitayä mäyayänavasita-padavyänävåta-matir viñaya-viña-rayänävåta-prakåtir anupäsita-mahac-caraëaù.
kaù vä—who is that person; iha—within this material world; te—of Your Lordship; aparäjitaù—not conquered; aparäjitayä—by the unconquerable; mäyayä—illusory energy; anavasita-padavya—whose path cannot be ascertained; anävåta-matiù—whose intelligence is not bewildered; viñaya-viña—of material enjoyment, which is like poison; raya—by the course; anävåta—not covered; prakåtiù—whose nature; anupäsita—without worshiping; mahat-caraëaù—the lotus feet of great devotees.
Dear Lord, unless one worships the lotus feet of great devotees, one will be conquered by the illusory energy, and his intelligence will be bewildered. Indeed, who has not been carried away by the waves of material enjoyment, which are like poison? Your illusory energy is unconquerable. No one can see the path of this material energy or tell how it is working.
Mahäräja Näbhi was inclined to performing great sacrifices for begetting a son. The son might be as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but such a material desire—be it great or insignificant—is brought about by the influence of mäyä. A devotee does not at all desire anything for sense gratification. Devotion is therefore explained as devoid of material desires (anyäbhiläñitä-çünya). Everyone is subjected to the influence of mäyä and entangled in all kinds of material desire, and Mahäräja Näbhi was no exception. Freedom from mäyä's influence is possible when one engages in the service of the great devotees (mahac-caraëa-sevä). Without worshiping the lotus feet of a great devotee, one cannot be freed from mäyä's influence. Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura therefore says, chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä nistära päyeche kebä: "Who has been freed from mäyä's clutches without serving the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava?" Mäyä is aparäjita, and her influence is also aparäjita. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14):
daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome."
Only a devotee can surpass mäyä's great influence. It was no fault on Mahäräja Näbhi's part that he wanted a son. He wanted a son like the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the best of all sons. By the association of the Lord's devotee, one no longer desires material opulence. This is confirmed in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.54):
"sädhu-saìga", "sädhu-saìga" sarva-çästre kaya
lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya
and [Cc. Madhya 22.51]:
mahat-kåpä vinä kona karme 'bhakti' naya
kåñëa-bhakti düre rahu, saàsära nahe kñaya
If one is serious about escaping mäyä's influence and returning home, back to Godhead, one must associate with a sädhu (devotee). That is the verdict of all scriptures. By the slight association of a devotee, one can be freed from the clutches of mäyä. Without the mercy of the pure devotee, one cannot get freedom by any means. Certainly a pure devotee's association is necessary in order to obtain the loving service of the Lord. One cannot be freed from mäyä's clutches without sädhu-saìga [Cc. Madhya 22.83], the benediction of a great devotee. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (7.5.32) Prahläda Mahäräja says:
naiñäà matis tävad urukramäìghrià
spåçaty anarthäpagamo yad arthaù
mahéyasäà päda-rajo-'bhiñekaà
niñkiïcanänäà na våëéta yävat
One cannot become the Lord's pure devotee without taking the dust of a great devotee on his head (päda-rajo-'bhiñekam). A pure devotee is niñkiïcana; he has no material desire to enjoy the material world. One has to take shelter of such a pure devotee in order to attain his qualities. The pure devotee is always free from the clutches of mäyä and her influence.
TEXT 15
Yadu h vav Tav PauNard>a]k-TaRirh SaMaahUTaSTa}aaQaRiDaYaa& MaNdaNaa& NaSTaÛ‚
Õevhel/Na& devdevahRiSa SaaMYaeNa SavaRNa( Pa[iTavae!uMaivduzaMa( )) 15 ))
yad u ha väva tava punar adabhra-kartar iha samähütas taträrtha-dhiyäà mandänäà nas tad yad deva-helanaà deva-devärhasi sämyena sarvän prativoòhum aviduñäm.
yat—because; u ha väva—indeed; tava—Your; punaù—again; adabhra-kartaù—O Lord, who perform many activities; iha—here, in this arena of sacrifice; samähütaù—invited; tatra—therefore; artha-dhiyäm—who aspire to fulfill material desires; mandänäm—not very intelligent; naù—of us; tat—that; yat—which; deva-helanam—disrespect of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; deva-deva—Lord of lords; arhasi—please; sämyena—because of Your equipoised position; sarvän—everything; prativoòhum—tolerate; aviduñäm—of us, who are all ignorant.
O Lord, You perform many wonderful activities. Our only aim was to acquire a son by performing this great sacrifice; therefore our intelligence is not very sharp. We are not experienced in ascertaining life's goal. By inviting You to this negligible sacrifice for some material motive, we have certainly committed a great offense at Your lotus feet. Therefore, O Lord of lords, please excuse our offense because of Your causeless mercy and equal mind.
The priests were certainly unhappy to have called the Supreme Lord from Vaikuëöha for such an insignificant reason. A pure devotee never wants to see the Lord unnecessarily. The Lord is engaged in various activities, and the pure devotee does not want to see Him whimsically, for his own sense gratification. The pure devotee simply depends on the Lord's mercy, and when the Lord is pleased, he can see Him face to face. The Lord is unseen even by demigods like Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva. By calling on the Supreme Lord, the priests of Näbhi Mahäräja proved themselves unintelligent; nonetheless, the Lord came out of His causeless mercy. All of them therefore wanted to be excused by the Lord.
Worship of the Supreme Lord for material gain is not approved by authorities. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.16):
catur-vidhä bhajante mäà
janäù sukåtino 'rjuna
ärto jijïäsur arthärthé
jïäné ca bharatarñabha
"O best among the Bhäratas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render devotional service unto Me—the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute."
Initiation into bhakti begins when one is in a distressed condition or in want of money, or when one is inquisitive to understand the Absolute Truth. Nonetheless, people who approach the Supreme Lord in this way are not actually devotees. They are accepted as pious (sukåtinaù) due to their inquiring about the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Not knowing the various activities and engagements of the Lord, such people unnecessarily disturb the Lord for material gain. However, the Lord is so kind that even though disturbed, He fulfills the desires of such beggars. The pure devotee is anyäbhiläñitä-çünya; he has no motive behind his worship. He is not conducted by the influence of mäyä in the form of karma or jïäna. The pure devotee is always prepared to execute the order of the Lord without personal consideration. The åtvijaù, the priests at the sacrifice, knew very well the distinction between karma and bhakti, and because they considered themselves under the influence of karma, fruitive activity, they begged the Lord's pardon. They knew that the Lord had been invited to come for some paltry reason.

Song Prayers Offered by Lord Siva to Lord Sankarsana in Ilavrta-varsa (SB 5.17.17-24)
TEXT 17
é[q>aGavaNauvac
p NaMaae >aGavTae MahaPauåzaYa SavRGau<aSa&:YaaNaaYaaNaNTaaYaaVYa¢-aYa NaMa
wiTa )) 17 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
oà namo bhagavate mahä-puruñäya sarva-guëa-saìkhyänäyänantäyävyaktäya nama iti.
çré-bhagavän uväca—the most powerful Lord Çiva says; om namo bhagavate—O Supreme Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; mahä-puruñäya—who are the Supreme person; sarva-guëa-saìkhyänäya—the reservoir of all transcendental qualities; anantäya—the unlimited; avyaktäya—not manifested within the material world; namaù—my respectful obeisances; iti—thus.
The most powerful Lord Çiva says: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You in Your expansion as Lord Saìkarñaëa. You are the reservoir of all transcendental qualities. Although You are unlimited, You remain unmanifest to the nondevotees.
TEXT 18
>aJae >aJaNYaar<aPaadPaªJa&
 >aGaSYa k*-TòSYa Par& ParaYa<aMa( )
>a¢e-Zvl&/ >aaivTa>aUTa>aavNa&
 >avaPah& Tva >av>aavMaqìrMa( )) 18 ))
bhaje bhajanyäraëa-päda-paìkajaà
bhagasya kåtsnasya paraà paräyaëam
bhakteñv alaà bhävita-bhüta-bhävanaà
bhaväpahaà tvä bhava-bhävam éçvaram
bhaje—I worship; bhajanya—O worshipable Lord; araëa-päda-paìkajam—whose lotus feet protect His devotees from all fearful situations; bhagasya—of opulences; kåtsnasya—of all different varieties (wealth, fame, strength, knowledge, beauty and renunciation); param—the best; paräyaëam—the ultimate shelter; bhakteñu—to the devotees; alam—beyond value; bhävita-bhüta-bhävanam—who manifests His different forms for the satisfaction of His devotees; bhava-apaham—who stops the devotees' repetition of birth and death; tvä—unto You; bhava-bhävam—who is the origin of the material creation; éçvaram—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
O my Lord, You are the only worshipable person, for You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all opulences. Your secure lotus feet are the only source of protection for all Your devotees, whom You satisfy by manifesting Yourself in various forms. O my Lord, You deliver Your devotees from the clutches of material existence. Nondevotees, however, remain entangled in material existence by Your will. Kindly accept me as Your eternal servant.
TEXT 19
Na YaSYa MaaYaaGau<aictav*itai>a‚
 iNaRrq+aTaae ù<viPa d*iírJYaTae )
wRXae YaQaa Naae_iJaTaMaNYaur&hSaa&
 k-STa& Na MaNYaeTa iJaGaqzuraTMaNa" )) 19 ))
na yasya mäyä-guëa-citta-våttibhir
nirékñato hy aëv api dåñöir ajyate
éçe yathä no 'jita-manyu-raàhasäà
kas taà na manyeta jigéñur ätmanaù
na—never; yasya—whose; mäyä—of the illusory energy; guëa—in the qualities; citta—of the heart; våttibhiù—by the activities (thinking, feeling and willing); nirékñataù—of Him who is glancing; hi—certainly; aëu—slightly; api—even; dåñöiù—vision; ajyate—is affected; éçe—for the purpose of regulating; yathä—as; naù—of us; ajita—who have not conquered; manyu—of anger; raàhasäm—the force; kaù—who; tam—unto Him (the Supreme Lord); na—not; manyeta—would worship; jigéñuù—aspiring to conquer; ätmanaù—the senses.
We cannot control the force of our anger. Therefore when we look at material things, we cannot avoid feeling attraction or repulsion for them. But the Supreme Lord is never affected in this way. Although He glances over the material world for the purpose of creating, maintaining and destroying it, He is not affected, even to the slightest degree. Therefore, one who desires to conquer the force of the senses must take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. Then he will be victorious.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always equipped with inconceivable potencies. Although creation takes place by His glancing over the material energy, He is not affected by the modes of material nature. Because of His eternally transcendental position, when the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears in this material world the modes of material nature cannot affect Him. Therefore the Supreme Lord is called Transcendence, and anyone who wants to be secure from the influence of the modes of material nature must take shelter of Him.
TEXT 20
ASad(d*Xaae Ya" Pa[iTa>aaiTa MaaYaYaa
 +aqbev MaßaSavTaaMa]l/aecNa" )
Na NaaGavßae_hR<a wRiXare ihYaa
 YaTPaadYaae" SPaXaRNaDaizRTaeiNd]Yaa" )) 20 ))
asad-dåço yaù pratibhäti mäyayä
kñébeva madhv-äsava-tämra-locanaù
na näga-vadhvo 'rhaëa éçire hriyä
yat-pädayoù sparçana-dharñitendriyäù
asat-dåçaù—for a person with polluted vision; yaù—who; pratibhäti—appears; mäyayä—the influence of mäyä; kñébaù—one who is inebriated or angry; iva—like; madhu—by honey; äsava—and liquor; tämra-locanaù—having eyes reddish like copper; na—not; näga-vadhvaù—the wives of the serpent demon; arhaëe—in worshiping; éçire—were unable to proceed; hriyä—because of bashfulness; yat-pädayoù—of whose lotus feet; sparçana—by the touching; dharñita—agitated; indriyäù—whose senses.
For persons with impure vision, the Supreme Lord's eyes appear like those of someone who indiscriminately drinks intoxicating beverages. Thus bewildered, such unintelligent persons become angry at the Supreme Lord, and due to their angry mood the Lord Himself appears angry and very fearful. However, this is an illusion. When the wives of the serpent demon were agitated by the touch of the Lord's lotus feet, due to shyness they could proceed no further in their worship of Him. Yet the Lord remained unagitated by their touch, for He is equipoised in all circumstances. Therefore who will not worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead?
Anyone who remains unagitated even in the presence of cause for agitation is called dhéra, or equipoised. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being always in a transcendental position, is never agitated by anything. Therefore someone who wants to become dhéra must take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä (2.13) Kåñëa says, dhéras tatra na muhyati: a person who is equipoised in all circumstances is never bewildered. Prahläda Mahäräja is a perfect example of a dhéra. When the fierce form of Nåsiàhadeva appeared in order to kill Hiraëyakaçipu, Prahläda was unagitated. He remained calm and quiet, whereas others, including even Lord Brahmä, were frightened by the features of the Lord.
TEXT 21
YaMaahurSYa iSQaiTaJaNMaSa&YaMa&
 i}ai>aivRhqNa& YaMaNaNTaMa*zYa" )
Na ved iSaÖaQaRiMav KviciTSQaTa&
 >aUMa<@l&/ MaUDaRSahóDaaMaSau )) 21 ))
yam ähur asya sthiti-janma-saàyamaà
tribhir vihénaà yam anantam èñayaù
na veda siddhärtham iva kvacit sthitaà
bhü-maëòalaà mürdha-sahasra-dhämasu
yam—whom; ähuù—they said; asya—of the material world; sthiti—the maintenance; janma—creation; saàyamam—annihilation; tribhiù—these three; vihénam—without; yam—which; anantam—unlimited; èñayaù—all the great sages; na—not; veda—feels; siddha-artham—a mustard seed; iva—like; kvacit—where; sthitam—situated; bhü-maëòalam—the universe; mürdha-sahasra-dhämasu—on the hundreds and thousands of hoods of the Lord.
Lord Çiva continued: All the great sages accept the Lord as the source of creation, maintenance and destruction, although He actually has nothing to do with these activities. Therefore the Lord is called unlimited. Although the Lord in His incarnation as Çeña holds all the universes on His hoods, each universe feels no heavier than a mustard seed to Him. Therefore, what person desiring perfection will not worship the Lord?
The incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead known as Çeña or Ananta has unlimited strength, fame, wealth, knowledge, beauty and renunciation. As described in this verse, Ananta's strength is so great that the innumerable universes rest on His hoods. He has the bodily features of a snake with thousands of hoods, and since His strength is unlimited, all the universes resting on His hoods feel no heavier than mustard seeds. We can just imagine how insignificant a mustard seed is on the hood of a serpent. In this connection, the reader is referred to Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä, Chapter Five, verses 117-125. There it is stated that Lord Viñëu's incarnation as the serpentine Ananta Çeña Näga supports all the universes on His hoods. By our calculation, a universe may be very, very heavy, but because the Lord is ananta (unlimited), He feels the weight to be no heavier than a mustard seed.
TEXTS 22–23
YaSYaaÛ AaSaqd( Gau<aivGa]hae MahaNa(
 ivjaNaiDaZ<Yaae >aGavaNaJa" ik-l/ )
YaTSaM>avae_h& i}av*Taa SvTaeJaSaa
 vEk-airk&- TaaMaSaMaEiNd]Ya& Sa*Jae )) 22 ))
WTae vYa& YaSYa vXae MahaTMaNa"
 iSQaTaa" Xaku-NTaa wv SaU}aYaiN}aTaa" )
MahaNah& vEk*-TaTaaMaSaeiNd]Yaa"
 Sa*JaaMa SaveR YadNauGa]haiddMa( )) 23 ))
yasyädya äséd guëa-vigraho mahän
vijïäna-dhiñëyo bhagavän ajaù kila
yat-sambhavo 'haà tri-våtä sva-tejasä
vaikärikaà tämasam aindriyaà såje
ete vayaà yasya vaçe mahätmanaù
sthitäù çakuntä iva sütra-yantritäù
mahän ahaà vaikåta-tämasendriyäù
såjäma sarve yad-anugrahäd idam
yasya—from whom; ädyaù—the beginning; äsét—there was; guëa-vigrahaù—the incarnation of the material qualities; mahän—the total material energy; vijïäna—of full knowledge; dhiñëyaù—the reservoir; bhagavän—the most powerful; ajaù—Lord Brahmä; kila—certainly; yat—from whom; sambhavaù—born; aham—I; tri-våtä—having three varieties according to the three modes of nature; sva-tejasä—by my material strength; vaikärikam—all the demigods; tämasam—material elements; aindriyam—the senses; såje—I create; ete—all of these; vayam—we; yasya—of whom; vaçe—under the control; mahä-ätmanaù—great personalities; sthitäù—situated; çakuntäù—vultures; iva—like; sütra-yantritäù—bound by rope; mahän—the mahat-tattva; aham—I; vaikåta—the demigods; tämasa—the five material elements; indriyäù—senses; såjämaù—we create; sarve—all of us; yat—of whom; anugrahät—by the mercy; idam—this material world.
From that Supreme Personality of Godhead appears Lord Brahmä, whose body is made from the total material energy, the reservoir of intelligence predominated by the passionate mode of material nature. From Lord Brahmä, I myself am born as a representation of false ego known as Rudra. By my own power I create all the other demigods, the five elements and the senses. Therefore, I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than any of us and under whose control are situated all the demigods, material elements and senses, and even Lord Brahmä and I myself, like birds bound by a rope. Only by the Lord's grace can we create, maintain and annihilate the material world. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Being.
A summary of creation is given in this verse. From Saìkarñaëa, Mahä-Viñëu expands, and from Mahä-Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu expands. Lord Brahmä, who was born of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, fathers Lord Çiva, from whom all the other demigods gradually evolve. Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and Lord Viñëu are incarnations of the different material qualities. Lord Viñëu is actually above all material qualities, but He accepts control of sattva-guëa (the mode of goodness) to maintain the universe. Lord Brahmä is born from the mahat-tattva. Brahmä creates the entire universe, Lord Viñëu maintains it, and Lord Çiva annihilates it. The Supreme Personality of Godhead controls all the most important demigods—especially Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva—exactly as the owner of a bird controls it by binding it with a rope. Sometimes vultures are controlled in this way.
TEXT 24
YaiàiMaRTaa& k-ùRiPa k-MaRPavR<aq&
 MaaYaa& JaNaae_Ya& Gau<aSaGaRMaaeihTa" )
Na ved iNaSTaar<aYaaeGaMaÅSaa
 TaSMaE NaMaSTae ivl/YaaedYaaTMaNae )) 24 ))
yan-nirmitäà karhy api karma-parvaëéà
mäyäà jano 'yaà guëa-sarga-mohitaù
na veda nistäraëa-yogam aïjasä
tasmai namas te vilayodayätmane
yat—by whom; nirmitäm—created; karhi api—at any time; karma-parvaëém—which ties the knots of fruitive activity; mäyäm—the illusory energy; janaù—a person; ayam—this; guëa-sarga-mohitaù—bewildered by the three modes of material nature; na—not; veda—knows; nistäraëa-yogam—the process of getting out of material entanglement; aïjasä—soon; tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme); namaù—respectful obeisances; te—unto You; vilaya-udaya-ätmane—in whom everything is annihilated and from whom everything is again manifested.
The illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead binds all of us conditioned souls to this material world. Therefore, without being favored by Him, persons like us cannot understand how to get out of that illusory energy. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who is the cause of creation and annihilation.
Kåñëa clearly states in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14):
daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te
"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily cross beyond it." All conditioned souls working within the illusory energy of the Lord consider the body to be the self, and thus they continuously wander throughout the universe, taking birth in different species of life and creating more and more problems. Sometimes they become disgusted with the problems and seek out a process by which they can get out of this entanglement. Unfortunately, such so-called research workers are unaware of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His illusory energy, and thus all of them work only in darkness, never finding a way out. So-called scientists and advanced research scholars are ludicrously trying to find the cause of life. They take no notice of the fact that life is already being produced. What will be their credit if they find out the chemical composition of life? All their chemicals are nothing but different transformations of the five elements—earth, water, fire, air and ether. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.20), the living entity is never created (na jäyate mriyate vä kadäcin). There are five gross material elements and three minor material elements (mind, intelligence and ego), and there are eternal living entities. The living entity desires a certain type of body, and by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that body is created from material nature, which is nothing but a kind of machine handled by the Supreme Lord. The Lord gives the living entity a particular type of mechanical body, and the living entity must work with it according to the law of fruitive activities. Fruitive activities are described in this verse: karma-parvaëéà mäyäm. The living entity is seated on a machine (the body), and according to the order of the Supreme Lord, he operates the machine. This is the secret of transmigration of the soul from one body to another. The living entity thus becomes entangled in fruitive activities in this material world. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (15.7), manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi prakåti-sthäni karñati: the living entity is struggling very hard against the six senses, which include the mind.
In all the activities of creation and annihilation, the living entity is entangled in fruitive activities, which are executed by the illusory energy, mäyä. He is exactly like a computer handled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The so-called scientists say that nature acts independently, but they cannot explain what nature is. Nature is nothing but a machine operated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one understands the operator, his problems of life are solved. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19):
bahünäà janmanäm ante
jïänavän mäà prapadyate
väsudevaù sarvam iti
sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù
"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul is very rare." A sane man, therefore, surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus gets out of the clutches of the illusory energy, mäyä.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Seventeenth Chapter of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Descent of the River Ganges."
Song Prayers by Bhadraśravā to Lord Hayasīrṣa in Bhadrāśva-varsa (SB 5.18.2-6)
TEXT 2
>ad]é[vSa Ocu"
p NaMaae >aGavTae DaMaaRYaaTMaivXaaeDaNaaYa NaMa wiTa )) 2 ))
bhadraçravasa ücuù
oà namo bhagavate dharmäyätma-viçodhanäya nama iti.
bhadraçravasaù ücuù—the ruler Bhadraçravä and his intimate associates said; om—O Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dharmäya—the source of all religious principles; ätma-viçodhanäya—who purifies us of material contamination; namaù—our obeisances; iti—thus.
The ruler Bhadraçravä and his intimate associates utter the following prayer: We offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all religious principles, who cleanses the heart of the conditioned soul in this material world. Again and again we offer our respectful obeisances unto Him.
Foolish materialistic persons do not know how they are being controlled and punished at every step by the laws of nature. They think they are very happy in the conditioned state of material life, not knowing the purpose of repeated birth, death, old age and disease. Therefore in Bhagavad-gétä (7.15) Lord Kåñëa describes such materialistic persons as müòhas (rascals): na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù prapadyante narädhamäù. These müòhas do not know that if they want to purify themselves they must worship Lord Väsudeva (Kåñëa) by performing penances and austerities. This purification is the aim of human life. This life is not meant for blind indulgence in sense gratification. In the human form, the living being must engage himself in Kåñëa consciousness to purify his existence: tapo divyaà putrakä yena sattvaà çuddhyet [SB 5.5.1]. This is the instruction of King Åñabhadeva to His sons. In the human form of life, one must undergo all kinds of austerities to purify his existence. Yasmäd brahma-saukhyaà tv anantam. We are all seeking happiness, but because of our ignorance and foolishness, we cannot know what unobstructed happiness really is. Unobstructed happiness is called brahma-saukhya, spiritual happiness. Although we may get some so-called happiness in this material world, that happiness is temporary. The foolish materialists cannot understand this. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja points out, mäyä-sukhäya bharam udvahato vimüòhän: [SB 7.9.43] merely for temporary materialistic happiness, these rascals are making huge arrangements, and thus they are baffled life after life.
TEXT 3
Ahae ivic}a& >aGaviÜceiíTa&
 ganNTa& JaNaae_Ya& ih iMazà PaXYaiTa )
DYaaYaàSaÛihR ivk-MaR SaeivTau&
 iNaôRTYa Pau}a& iPaTar& iJaJaqivziTa )) 3 ))
aho vicitraà bhagavad-viceñöitaà
ghnantaà jano 'yaà hi miñan na paçyati
dhyäyann asad yarhi vikarma sevituà
nirhåtya putraà pitaraà jijéviñati
aho—alas; vicitram—wonderful; bhagavat-viceñöitam—the pastimes of the Lord; ghnantam—death; janaù—a person; ayam—this; hi—certainly; miñan—although seeing; na paçyati—does not see; dhyäyan—thinking about; asat—material happiness; yarhi—because; vikarma—forbidden activities; sevitum—to enjoy; nirhåtya—burning; putram—sons; pitaram—the father; jijéviñati—desires a long life.
Alas! How wonderful it is that the foolish materialist does not heed the great danger of impending death! He knows that death will surely come, yet he is nevertheless callous and neglectful. If his father dies, he wants to enjoy his father's property, and if his son dies, he wants to enjoy his son's possessions as well. In either case, he heedlessly tries to enjoy material happiness with the acquired money.
Material happiness means to have good facilities for eating, sleeping, sexual intercourse and defense. Within this world, the materialistic person lives only for these four principles of sense gratification, not caring for the impending danger of death. After his father's death, a son tries to inherit his money and use it for sense gratification. Similarly, one whose son dies tries to enjoy the possessions of his son. Sometimes the father of a dead son even enjoys his son's widow. Materialistic persons behave in this way. Thus Çukadeva Gosvämé says, "How wonderful are these pastimes of material happiness transacted by the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead!" In other words, materialistic persons want to commit all kinds of sinful activities, but without the sanction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, no one can do anything. Why does the Supreme Personality of Godhead permit sinful activities? The Supreme Lord does not want any living being to act sinfully, and He begs him through his good conscience to refrain from sin. But when someone insists upon acting sinfully, the Supreme Lord gives him the sanction to act at his own risk (mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca [Bg. 15.15]). No one can do anything without the sanction of the Lord, but He is so kind that when the conditioned soul persists in doing something, the Lord permits the individual soul to act at his own risk.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, sons always outlive their fathers in other planetary systems and other lands in this universe, especially on Svargaloka. However, on this planet earth a son often dies before his father, and the materialistic father is pleased to enjoy the possessions of his son. Neither the father nor the son can see the reality—that both of them are awaiting death. When death comes, however, all their plans for material enjoyment are finished.
TEXT 4
vdiNTa ivì& k-vYa" SMa Naìr&
 PaXYaiNTa caDYaaTMaivdae ivPaiêTa" )
TaQaaiPa MauùiNTa TavaJa MaaYaYaa
 SauiviSMaTa& k*-TYaMaJa& NaTaae_iSMa TaMa( )) 4 ))
vadanti viçvaà kavayaù sma naçvaraà
paçyanti cädhyätmavido vipaçcitaù
tathäpi muhyanti taväja mäyayä
su-vismitaà kåtyam ajaà nato 'smi tam
vadanti—they say authoritatively; viçvam—the entire material creation; kavayaù—great learned sages; sma—certainly; naçvaram—perishable; paçyanti—they see in trance; ca—also; adhyätma-vidaù—who have realized spiritual knowledge; vipaçcitaù—very learned scholars; tathä api—still; muhyanti—become illusioned; tava—your; aja—O unborn one; mäyayä—by the illusory energy; su-vismitam—most wonderful; kåtyam—activity; ajam—unto the supreme unborn one; nataù asmi—I offer my obeisances; tam—unto Him.
O unborn one, learned Vedic scholars who are advanced in spiritual knowledge certainly know that this material world is perishable, as do other logicians and philosophers. In trance they realize the factual position of this world, and they preach the truth as well. Yet even they are sometimes bewildered by Your illusory energy. This is Your own wonderful pastime. Therefore, I can understand that Your illusory energy is very wonderful, and I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Not only does the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead act on the conditioned soul within this material world, but sometimes it also acts on the most advanced learned scholars, who factually know the constitutional position of this material world through realization. As soon as someone thinks, "I am this material body (ahaà mameti [SB 5.5.8]) and everything in relationship with this material body is mine," he is in illusion (moha). This illusion caused by the material energy acts especially on the conditioned souls, but it sometimes also acts on liberated souls as well. A liberated soul is a person who has sufficient knowledge of this material world and is therefore unattached to the bodily conception of life. But because of association with the modes of material nature for a very long time, even liberated souls sometimes become captivated by the illusory energy due to inattentiveness in the transcendental position. Therefore Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14), mäm eva ye prapadyante mäyäm etäà taranti te: "Only those who surrender unto Me can overcome the influence of the material energy." Therefore no one should think of himself as a liberated person immune to the influence of mäyä. Everyone should very cautiously execute devotional service by rigidly following regulative principles. Thus he will remain fixed at the lotus feet of the Lord. Otherwise, a little inattention will create havoc. We have already seen an example of this in the case of Mahäräja Bharata. Mahäräja Bharata was undoubtedly a great devotee, but because he turned his attention slightly toward a small deer, he had to suffer two more births, one as a deer and another as the brähmaëa Jaòa Bharata. Afterward he was liberated and went back home, back to Godhead.
The Lord is always prepared to excuse His devotee, but if a devotee takes advantage of the Lord's leniency and purposefully commits mistakes again and again, the Lord will certainly punish him by letting him fall down into the clutches of the illusory energy. In other words, theoretical knowledge acquired by studying the Vedas is insufficient to protect one from the clutches of mäyä. One must strongly adhere to the lotus feet of the Lord in devotional service. Then one's position is secure.
TEXT 5
ivìaeÙvSQaaNaiNaraeDak-MaR Tae
 ùk-TauRr(r)qk*-TaMaPYaPaav*Ta" )
Yau¢&- Na ic}a& TviYa k-aYaRk-ar<ae
 SavaRTMaiNa VYaiTair¢e- c vSTauTa" )) 5 ))
viçvodbhava-sthäna-nirodha-karma te
hy akartur aìgékåtam apy apävåtaù
yuktaà na citraà tvayi kärya-käraëe
sarvätmani vyatirikte ca vastutaù
viçva—of the whole universe; udbhava—of the creation; sthäna—of the maintenance; nirodha—of the annihilation; karma—these activities; te—of You (O dear Lord); hi—indeed; akartuù—aloof; aìgékåtam—still accepted by the Vedic literature; api—although; apävåtaù—untouched by all these activities; yuktam—befitting; na—not; citram—wonderful; tvayi—in You; kärya-käraëe—the original cause of all effects; sarva-ätmani—in all respects; vyatirikte—set apart; ca—also; vastutaù—the original substance.
O Lord, although You are completely detached from the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material world and are not directly affected by these activities, they are all attributed to You. We do not wonder at this, for Your inconceivable energies perfectly qualify You to be the cause of all causes. You are the active principle in everything, although You are separate from everything. Thus we can realize that everything is happening because of Your inconceivable energy.
TEXT 6
vedaNa( YauGaaNTae TaMaSaa iTarSk*-TaaNa(
 rSaaTal/aÛae Na*Taur(r)ivGa]h" )
Pa[TYaadde vE k-vYae_i>aYaacTae
 TaSMaE NaMaSTae_ivTaQaeihTaaYa wiTa )) 6 ))
vedän yugänte tamasä tiraskåtän
rasätaläd yo nå-turaìga-vigrahaù
pratyädade vai kavaye 'bhiyäcate
tasmai namas te 'vitathehitäya iti
vedän—the four Vedas; yuga-ante—at the end of the millennium; tamasä—by the demon of ignorance personified; tiraskåtän—stolen away; rasätalät—from the lowest planetary system (Rasätala); yaù—who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); nå-turaìga-vigrahaù—assuming the form of half-horse, half-man; pratyädade—returned; vai—indeed; kavaye—to the supreme poet (Lord Brahmä); abhiyä-cate—when he asked for them; tasmai—unto Him (the form of Hayagréva); namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—to You; avitatha-éhitäya—whose resolution never fails; iti—thus.
At the end of the millennium, ignorance personified assumed the form of a demon, stole all the Vedas and took them down to the planet of Rasätala. The Supreme Lord, however, in His form of Hayagréva retrieved the Vedas and returned them to Lord Brahmä when he begged for them. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord, whose determination never fails.
Although Vedic knowledge is imperishable, within this material world it is sometimes manifest and sometimes not. When the people of this material world become too absorbed in ignorance, the Vedic knowledge disappears. Lord Hayagréva or Lord Matsya, however, always protects the Vedic knowledge, and in due course of time it is again distributed through the medium of Lord Brahmä. Brahmä is the trustworthy representative of the Supreme Lord. Therefore when he again asked for the treasure of Vedic knowledge, the Lord fulfilled his desire.

Song Prayers by Prahlada Mahārāja to Lord Nrsimhadeva in Hari-varsa (SB 5.18.8-14) 
TEXT 8
p NaMaae >aGavTae NariSa&haYa NaMaSTaeJaSTaeJaSae Aaivraiv>aRv vJa]Na% vJa]d&í\
k-MaaRXaYaaNa( rNDaYa rNDaYa TaMaae Ga]Sa Ga]Sa p Svaha ) A>aYaMa>aYaMaaTMaiNa
>aUiYaïa p +a]aEMa( )) 8 ))
oà namo bhagavate narasiàhäya namas tejas-tejase ävir-ävirbhava vajra-nakha vajra-daàñöra karmäçayän randhaya randhaya tamo grasa grasa oà svähä; abhayam abhayam ätmani bhüyiñöhä oà kñraum.
om—O Lord; namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-siàhäya—known as Lord Nåsiàha; namaù—obeisances; tejaù-tejase—the power of all power; äviù-ävirbhava—please be fully manifest; vajra-nakha—O You who possess nails like thunderbolts; vajra-daàñöra—O You who possess teeth like thunderbolts; karma-äçayän—demoniac desires to be happy by material activities; randhaya randhaya—kindly vanquish; tamaù—ignorance in the material world; grasa—kindly drive away; grasa—kindly drive away; om—O my Lord; svähä—respectful oblations; abhayam—fearlessness; abhayam—fearlessness; ätmani—in my mind; bhüyiñöhäù—may You appear; om—O Lord; kñraum—the béja, or seed, of mantras offering prayers to Lord Nåsiàha.
I offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Nåsiàhadeva, the source of all power. O my Lord who possess nails and teeth just like thunderbolts, kindly vanquish our demonlike desires for fruitive activity in this material world. Please appear in our hearts and drive away our ignorance so that by Your mercy we may become fearless in the struggle for existence in this material world.
In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (4.22.39) Sanat-kumära speaks the following words to Mahäräja Påthu:
yat-päda-paìkaja-paläça-viläsa-bhaktyä
karmäçayaà grathitam udgrathayanti santaù
tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo 'pi ruddha-
srotogaëäs tam araëaà bhaja väsudevam
"Devotees always engaged in the service of the toes of the Lord's lotus feet can very easily become free from hard-knotted desires for fruitive activities. Because this is very difficult, the nondevotees—the jïänés and yogés—cannot stop the waves of sense gratification, although they try to do so. Therefore you are advised to engage in the devotional service of Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva."
Every living being within this material world has a strong desire to enjoy matter to his fullest satisfaction. For this purpose, the conditioned soul must accept one body after another, and thus his strongly fixed fruitive desires continue. One cannot stop the repetition of birth and death without being completely desireless. Therefore Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé describes pure bhakti (devotional service) as follows:
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänu-
çélanaà bhaktir uttamä
 [Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service." Unless one is completely freed of all material desires, which are caused by the dense darkness of ignorance, one cannot fully engage in the devotional service of the Lord. Therefore we should always offer our prayers to Lord Nåsiàhadeva, who killed Hiraëyakaçipu, the personification of material desire. Hiraëya means "gold," and kaçipu means "a soft cushion or bed." Materialistic persons always desire to make the body comfortable, and for this they require huge amounts of gold. Thus Hiraëyakaçipu was the perfect representative of materialistic life. He was therefore the cause of great disturbance to the topmost devotee, Prahläda Mahäräja, until Lord Nåsiàhadeva killed him. Any devotee aspiring to be free of material desires should offer his respectful prayers to Nåsiàhadeva as Prahläda Mahäräja did in this verse.
TEXT 9
SvSTYaSTau ivìSYa %l/" Pa[SaqdTaa&
 DYaaYaNTau >aUTaaiNa iXav& iMaQaae iDaYaa )
MaNaê >ad]& >aJaTaadDaae+aJae
 AaveXYaTaa& Naae MaiTarPYahETauk-I )) 9 ))
svasty astu viçvasya khalaù prasédatäà
dhyäyantu bhütäni çivaà mitho dhiyä
manaç ca bhadraà bhajatäd adhokñaje
äveçyatäà no matir apy ahaituké
svasti—auspiciousness; astu—let there be; viçvasya—of the entire universe; khalaù—the envious (almost everyone); prasédatäm—let them be pacified; dhyäyantu—let them consider; bhütäni—all the living entities; çivam—auspiciousness; mithaù—mutual; dhiyä—by their intelligence; manaù—the mind; ca—and; bhadram—calmness; bhajatät—let it experience; adhokñaje—in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the perception of mind, intelligence and senses; äveçyatäm—let it be absorbed; naù—our; matiù—intelligence; api—indeed; ahaituké—without any motive.
May there be good fortune throughout the universe, and may all envious persons be pacified. May all living entities become calm by practicing bhakti-yoga, for by accepting devotional service they will think of each other's welfare. Therefore let us all engage in the service of the supreme transcendence, Lord Çré Kåñëa, and always remain absorbed in thought of Him.
The following verse describes a Vaiñëava:
väïchä-kalpa-tarubhyaç ca
kåpä-sindhubhya eva ca
patitänäà pävanebhyo
vaiñëavebhyo namo namaù
Just like a desire tree, a Vaiñëava can fulfill all the desires of anyone who takes shelter of his lotus feet. Prahläda Mahäräja is a typical Vaiñëava. He prays not for himself but for all living entities—the gentle, the envious and the mischievous. He always thought of the welfare of mischievous persons like his father, Hiraëyakaçipu. Prahläda Mahäräja did not ask for anything for himself; rather, he prayed for the Lord to excuse his demoniac father. This is the attitude of a Vaiñëava, who always thinks of the welfare of the entire universe.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and bhägavata-dharma are meant for persons who are completely free of envy (parama-nirmatsaräëäm). Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja prays in this verse, khalaù prasédatäm: "May all the envious persons be pacified." The material world is full of envious persons, but if one frees himself of envy, he becomes liberal in his social dealings and can think of others' welfare. Anyone who takes up Kåñëa consciousness and engages himself completely in the service of the Lord cleanses his mind of all envy (manaç ca bhadraà bhajatäd adhokñaje). Therefore we should pray to Lord Nåsiàhadeva to sit in our hearts. We should pray, bahir nåsiàho hådaye nåsiàhaù: "Let Lord Nåsiàhadeva sit in the core of my heart, killing all my bad propensities. Let my mind become clean so that I may peacefully worship the Lord and bring peace to the entire world."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has given us a very fine purport in this regard. Whenever one offers a prayer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one always requests some benediction from Him. Even pure (niñkäma) devotees pray for some benediction, as instructed by Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu in His Çikñäñöaka:
ayi nanda-tanüja kiìkaraà
patitaà mäà viñame bhavämbudhau
kåpayä tava päda-paìkaja-
sthita-dhülé-sadåçaà vicintaya
 [Cc. Antya 20.32, Çikñäñöaka 5]
"O son of Mahäräja Nanda [Kåñëa], I am Your eternal servitor, yet somehow or other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick Me up from the ocean of death and place Me as one of the atoms at Your lotus feet." In another prayer Lord Caitanya says, mama janmani janmanéçvare bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi: [Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4] "Life after life, kindly let Me have unalloyed love and devotion at Your Lordship's lotus feet." When Prahläda Mahäräja chants oà namo bhagavate narasiàhäya, he prays for a benediction from the Lord, but because he is also an exalted Vaiñëava, he wants nothing for his personal sense gratification. The first desire expressed in his prayer is svasty astu viçvasya: "Let there be good fortune throughout the entire universe." Prahläda Mahäräja thus requested the Lord to be merciful to everyone, including his father, a most envious person. According to Cäëakya Paëòita, there are two kinds of envious living entities: one is a snake, and the other is the man like Hiraëyakaçipu, who is by nature envious of everyone, even of his father or son. Hiraëyakaçipu was envious of his little son Prahläda, but Prahläda Mahäräja asked a benediction for the benefit of his father. Hiraëyakaçipu was very envious of devotees, but Prahläda wished that his father and other demons like him would give up their envious nature by the grace of the Lord and stop harassing the devotees (khalaù prasédatäm). The difficulty is that the khala (envious living entity) is rarely pacified. One kind of khala, the snake, can be pacified simply by mantras or by the action of a particular herb (mantrauñadhi-vaçaù sarpaù khalakena niväryate). An envious person, however, cannot be pacified by any means. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja prays that all envious persons may undergo a change of heart and think of the welfare of others.
If the Kåñëa consciousness movement spreads all over the world, and if by the grace of Kåñëa everyone accepts it, the thinking of envious people will change. Everyone will think of the welfare of others. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja prays, çivaà mitho dhiyä. In material activities, everyone is envious of others, but in Kåñëa consciousness no one is envious of anyone else; everyone thinks of the welfare of others. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja prays that everyone's mind may become gentle by being fixed at the lotus feet of Kåñëa (bhajatäd adhokñaje). As indicated elsewhere in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]) and as advised by Lord Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä (18.65), man-manä bhava mad-bhaktaù, one should constantly think of the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa. Then one's mind will certainly be cleansed (ceto-darpaëa-märjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]). Materialists always think of sense gratification, but Prahläda Mahäräja prays that the Lord's mercy will change their minds and they will stop thinking of sense gratification. If they think of Kåñëa always, everything will be all right. Some people argue that if everyone thought of Kåñëa in that way then the whole universe would be vacated because everyone would go back home, back to Godhead. However, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that this is impossible because the living entities are innumerable. If one set of living entities is actually delivered by the Kåñëa consciousness movement, another set will fill the entire universe.
TEXT 10
MaaGaardaraTMaJaivtabNDauzu
 Sa(r)ae Yaid SYaaÙGaviTPa[Yaezu Na" )
Ya" Pa[a<av*tYaa PairTauí AaTMavaNa(
 iSaÖyTYadUraà TaQaeiNd]YaiPa[Ya" )) 10 ))
mägära-därätmaja-vitta-bandhuñu
saìgo yadi syäd bhagavat-priyeñu naù
yaù präëa-våttyä parituñöa ätmavän
siddhyaty adürän na tathendriya-priyaù
mä—not; agära—house; dära—wife; ätma-ja—children; vitta—bank balance; bandhuñu—among friends and relatives; saìgaù—association or attachment; yadi—if; syät—there must be; bhagavat-priyeñu—among persons to whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very dear; naù—of us; yaù—anyone who; präëa-våttyä—by the bare necessities of life; parituñöaù—satisfied; ätma-vän—who has controlled his mind and realized his self; siddhyati—becomes successful; adürät—very soon; na—not; tathä—so much; indriya-priyaù—a person attached to sense gratification.
My dear Lord, we pray that we may never feel attraction for the prison of family life, consisting of home, wife, children, friends, bank balance, relatives and so on. If we do have some attachment, let it be for devotees, whose only dear friend is Kåñëa. A person who is actually self-realized and who has controlled his mind is perfectly satisfied with the bare necessities of life. He does not try to gratify his senses. Such a person quickly advances in Kåñëa consciousness, whereas others, who are too attached to material things, find advancement very difficult.
When Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu was requested to explain the duty of a Vaiñëava, a Kåñëa conscious person, He immediately said, asat-saìga-tyäga-ei vaiñëava-äcära [Cc. Madhya 22.87]. The first business of a Vaiñëava is to give up the association of persons who are not devotees of Kåñëa and who are too attached to material things—wife, children, bank balance and so on. Prahläda Mahäräja also prays to the Personality of Godhead that he may avoid the association of nondevotees attached to the materialistic way of life. If he must be attached to someone, he prays to be attached only to a devotee.
A devotee is not interested in unnecessarily increasing the demands of the senses for gratification. Of course, as long as one is in this material world, one must have a material body, and it must be maintained for executing devotional service. The body can be maintained very easily by eating kåñëa-prasäda. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.26):
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
açnämi prayatätmanaù
"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will accept it." Why should the menu be unnecessarily increased for the satisfaction of the tongue? Devotees should eat as simply as possible. Otherwise, attachment for material things will gradually increase, and the senses, being very strong, will soon require more and more material enjoyment. Then the real business of life—to advance in Kåñëa consciousness—will stop.
TEXT 11
YaTSa(r)l/BDa& iNaJavqYaRvE>av&
 TaqQa| Mauhu" Sa&SPa*XaTaa& ih MaaNaSaMa( )
hrTYaJaae_NTa" é[uiTai>aGaRTaae_(r)Ja&
 k-ae vE Na SaeveTa Mauku-Ndiv§-MaMa( )) 11 ))
yat-saìga-labdhaà nija-vérya-vaibhavaà
térthaà muhuù saàspåçatäà hi mänasam
haraty ajo 'ntaù çrutibhir gato 'ìgajaà
ko vai na seveta mukunda-vikramam
yat—of whom (the devotees); saìga-labdham—achieved by the association; nija-vérya-vaibhavam—whose influence is uncommon; tértham—holy places like the Ganges; muhuù—repeatedly; saàspåçatäm—of those touching; hi—certainly; mänasam—the dirty things in the mind; harati—vanquishes; ajaù—the supreme unborn one; antaù—in the core of the heart; çrutibhiù—by the ears; gataù—entered; aìga-jam—dirty things or infections of the body; kaù—who; vai—indeed; na—not; seveta—would serve; mukunda-vikramam—the glorious activities of Mukunda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
By associating with persons for whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mukunda, is the all in all, one can hear of His powerful activities and soon come to understand them. The activities of Mukunda are so potent that simply by hearing of them one immediately associates with the Lord. For a person who constantly and very eagerly hears narrations of the Lord's powerful activities, the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead in the form of sound vibrations, enters within his heart and cleanses it of all contamination. On the other hand, although bathing in the Ganges diminishes bodily contaminations and infections, this process and the process of visiting holy places can cleanse the heart only after a long time. Therefore who is the sane man who will not associate with devotees to quickly perfect his life?
Bathing in the Ganges can certainly cure one of many infectious diseases, but it cannot cleanse one's materially attached mind, which creates all kinds of contaminations in material existence. However, one who directly associates with the Supreme Lord by hearing of His activities cleanses the dirt from his mind and very soon comes to Kåñëa consciousness. Süta Gosvämé confirms this in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.17):
çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù
hådy antaù-stho hy abhadräëi
vidhunoti suhåt-satäm
The Supreme Lord within everyone's heart becomes very pleased when a person hears narrations of His activities, and He personally cleanses the dirt from the mind of the listener. Hådy antaù-stho hy abhadräëi vidhunoti: He washes off all dirt from the mind. Material existence is caused by dirty things within the mind. If one can cleanse his mind, he immediately comes to his original position of Kåñëa consciousness, and thus his life becomes successful. Therefore all the great saints in the devotional line very strongly recommend the process of hearing. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu introduced the congregational chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra to give everyone a chance to hear Kåñëa's holy name, for simply by hearing Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare / Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, one becomes purified (ceto-darpaëa-märjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]). Therefore our Kåñëa consciousness movement is chiefly engaged in chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra all over the world.
After one's mind becomes cleansed by chanting Hare Kåñëa, one gradually comes to the platform of Kåñëa consciousness and then reads books like Bhagavad-gétä, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Caitanya-caritämåta and The Nectar of Devotion. In this way, one becomes more and more purified of material contamination. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.18):
nañöa-präyeñv abhadreñu
nityaà bhägavata-sevayä
bhagavaty uttama-çloke
bhaktir bhavati naiñöhiké
"By regularly hearing the Bhägavatam and rendering service unto the pure devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is practically destroyed, and loving service unto the glorious Lord, who is praised with transcendental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact." In this way, simply by hearing of the powerful activities of the Lord, the devotee's heart becomes almost completely cleansed of material contamination, and thus his original position as an eternal servant who is part and parcel of the Lord becomes manifest. While the devotee engages in devotional service, the passionate and ignorant modes of material nature are gradually vanquished, and then he acts only in the mode of goodness. At that time he becomes happy and gradually advances in Kåñëa consciousness.
All the great äcäryas strongly recommend that people be given a chance to hear about the Supreme Lord. Then success is assured. The more we cleanse the dirt of material attachment from our hearts, the more we will be attracted by Kåñëa's name, form, qualities, paraphernalia and activities. This is the sum and substance of the Kåñëa consciousness movement.
TEXT 12
YaSYaaiSTa >ai¢->aRGavTYaik-ÄNaa
 SavŒGauR<aESTa}a SaMaaSaTae Saura" )
hrav>a¢-SYa ku-Taae Mahd(Gau<aa
 MaNaaerQaeNaaSaiTa DaavTaae bih" )) 12 ))
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëä
manorathenäsati dhävato bahiù
yasya—of whom; asti—there is; bhaktiù—devotional service; bhagavati—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akiïcanä—without any motive; sarvaiù—with all; guëaiù—good qualities; tatra—there (in that person); samäsate—reside; suräù—all the demigods; harau—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; abhaktasya—of a person who is not devoted; kutaù—where; mahat-guëäù—good qualities; manorathena—by mental speculation; asati—in the temporary material world; dhävataù—who is running; bahiù—outside.
All the demigods and their exalted qualities, such as religion, knowledge and renunciation, become manifest in the body of one who has developed unalloyed devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva. On the other hand, a person devoid of devotional service and engaged in material activities has no good qualities. Even if he is adept at the practice of mystic yoga or the honest endeavor of maintaining his family and relatives, he must be driven by his own mental speculations and must engage in the service of the Lord's external energy. How can there be any good qualities in such a man?
As explained in the next verse, Kåñëa is the original source of all living entities. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (15.7), wherein Kåñëa says:
mamaiväàço jéva-loke
jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù
manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi
prakåti-sthäni karñati
"The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses, which include the mind." All living entities are part and parcel of Kåñëa, and therefore when they revive their original Kåñëa consciousness, they possess all the good qualities of Kåñëa in a small quantity. When one engages himself in the nine processes of devotional service (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà päda-sevanam/ arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà sakhyam ätma-nivedanam [SB 7.5.23]), one's heart becomes purified, and he immediately understands his relationship with Kåñëa. He then revives his original quality of Kåñëa consciousness.
In the Ädi-lélä of Caitanya-caritämåta, Chapter Eight, there is a description of some of the qualities of devotees. For example, Çré Paëòita Haridäsa is described as being very well behaved, tolerant, peaceful, magnanimous and grave. In addition, he spoke very sweetly, his endeavors were very pleasing, he was always patient, he respected everyone, he always worked for everyone's benefit, his mind was free of duplicity, and he was completely devoid of all malicious activities. These are all originally qualities of Kåñëa, and when one becomes a devotee they automatically become manifest. Çré Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja, the author of Caitanya-caritämåta, says that all good qualities become manifest in the body of a Vaiñëava and that only by the presence of these good qualities can one distinguish a Vaiñëava from a non-Vaiñëava. Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja lists the following twenty-six good qualities of a Vaiñëava: (1) He is very kind to everyone. (2) He does not make anyone his enemy. (3) He is truthful. (4) He is equal to everyone. (5) No one can find any fault in him. (6) He is magnanimous. (7) He is mild. (8) He is always clean. (9) He is without possessions. (10) He works for everyone's benefit. (11) He is very peaceful. (12) He is always surrendered to Kåñëa. (13) He has no material desires. (14) He is very meek. (15) He is steady. (16) He controls his senses. (17) He does not eat more than required. (18) He is not influenced by the Lord's illusory energy. (19) He offers respect to everyone. (20) He does not desire any respect for himself. (21) He is very grave. (22) He is merciful. (23) He is friendly. (24) He is poetic. (25) He is expert. (26) He is silent.
TEXT 13
hirihR Saa+aaÙGavaNa( Xarqir<aa‚
 MaaTMaa ‡za<aaiMav TaaeYaMaqiPSaTaMa( )
ihTva Maha&STa& Yaid SaÂTae Ga*he
 Tada Mahtv& vYaSaa dMPaTaqNaaMa( )) 13 ))
harir hi säkñäd bhagavän çarériëäm
ätmä jhañäëäm iva toyam épsitam
hitvä mahäàs taà yadi sajjate gåhe
tadä mahattvaà vayasä dampaténäm
hariù—the Lord; hi—certainly; säkñät—directly; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; çarériëäm—of all living entities who have accepted material bodies; ätmä—the life and soul; jhañäëäm—of the aquatics; iva—like; toyam—the vast water; épsitam—is desired; hitvä—giving up; mahän—a great personality; tam—Him; yadi—if; sajjate—becomes attached; gåhe—to household life; tadä—at that time; mahattvam—greatness; vayasä—by age; dam-paténäm—of the husband and wife.
Just as aquatics always desire to remain in the vast mass of water, all conditioned living entities naturally desire to remain in the vast existence of the Supreme Lord. Therefore if someone very great by material calculations fails to take shelter of the Supreme Soul but instead becomes attached to material household life, his greatness is like that of a young, low-class couple. One who is too attached to material life loses all good spiritual qualities.
Although crocodiles are very fierce animals, they are powerless when they venture out of the water onto land. When they are out of the water, they cannot exhibit their original power. Similarly, the all-pervading Supersoul, Paramätmä, is the source of all living entities, and all living entities are part and parcel of Him. When the living entity remains in contact with the all-pervading Väsudeva, the Personality of Godhead, he manifests his spiritual power, exactly as the crocodile exhibits its strength in the water. In other words, the greatness of the living entity can be perceived when he is in the spiritual world, engaged in spiritual activities. Many householders, although well educated in the knowledge of the Vedas, become attached to family life. They are compared herein to crocodiles out of water, for they are devoid of all spiritual strength. Their greatness is like that of a young husband and wife who, though uneducated, praise one another and become attracted to their own temporary beauty. This kind of greatness is appreciated only by low-class men with no qualifications.
Everyone should therefore seek the shelter of the Supreme Soul, the source of all living entities. No one should waste his time in the so-called happiness of materialistic household life. In the Vedic civilization, this type of crippled life is allowed only until one's fiftieth year, when one must give up family life and enter either the order of vänaprastha (independent retired life for cultivation of spiritual knowledge) or sannyäsa (the renounced order, in which one completely takes shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead).
TEXT 14
TaSMaad]JaaeraGaivzadMaNYau‚
 MaaNaSPa*ha>aYadENYaaiDaMaUl/Ma( )
ihTva Ga*h& Sa&Sa*iTac§-val&/
 Na*iSa&hPaad& >aJaTaaku-Taae>aYaiMaiTa )) 14 ))
tasmäd rajo-räga-viñäda-manyu-
mäna-spåhä-bhayadainyädhimülam
hitvä gåhaà saàsåti-cakravälaà
nåsiàha-pädaà bhajatäkutobhayam iti
tasmät—therefore; rajaù—of passion or material desires; räga—attachment for material things; viñäda—then disappointment; manyu—anger; mäna-spåhä—the desire to be respectable in society; bhaya—fear; dainya—of poverty; adhimülam—the root cause; hitvä—giving up; gåham—household life; saàsåti-cakravälam—the cycle of repeated birth and death; nåsiàha-pädam—the lotus feet of Lord Nåsiàhadeva; bhajata—worship; akutaù-bhayam—the shelter of fearlessness; iti—thus.
Therefore, O demons, give up the so-called happiness of family life and simply take shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Nåsiàhadeva, which are the actual shelter of fearlessness. Entanglement in family life is the root cause of material attachment, indefatigable desires, moroseness, anger, despair, fear and the desire for false prestige, all of which result in the repetition of birth and death.

Song Prayers by Lakşmidevi to Lord Kāmadeva (Pradyumna) in Ketumāla-varsa (SB 5.18.18-23) 
TEXT 18
p ha& hq& hU& p NaMaae >aGavTae ôzqke-XaaYa SavRGau<aivXaezEivRl/i+aTaaTMaNae
AakU-TaqNaa& ictaqNaa& ceTaSaa& ivXaeza<aa& caiDaPaTaYae zae@Xak-l/aYa‚
C^NdaeMaYaaYaaàMaYaaYaaMa*TaMaYaaYa SavRMaYaaYa SahSae AaeJaSae bl/aYa k-aNTaaYa
k-aMaaYa NaMaSTae o>aYa}a >aUYaaTa( )) 18 ))
oà hräà hréà hrüà oà namo bhagavate håñékeçäya sarva-guëa-viçeñair vilakñitätmane äküténäà citténäà cetasäà viçeñäëäà cädhipataye ñoòaça-kaläya cchando-mayäyänna-mayäyämåta-mayäya sarva-mayäya sahase ojase baläya käntäya kämäya namas te ubhayatra bhüyät.
om—O Lord; hräm hrém hrüm—the seeds of the mantra, chanted for a successful result; om—O Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; håñékeçäya—unto Håñékeça, the Lord of the senses; sarva-guëa—with all transcendental qualities; viçeñaiù—with all varieties; vilakñita—particularly observed; ätmane—unto the soul of all living entities; äküténäm—of all kinds of activity; citténäm—of all kinds of knowledge; cetasäm—of the functions of the mind, such as determination and mental effort; viçeñäëäm—of their respective objects; ca—and; adhipataye—unto the master; ñoòaça-kaläya—whose parts are the sixteen original ingredients of creation (namely the five objects of the senses and the eleven senses, including the mind); chandaù-mayäya—unto the enjoyer of all ritualistic ceremonies; anna-mayäya—who maintains all living entities by supplying the necessities of life; amåta-mayäya—who awards eternal life; sarva-mayäya—who is all-pervading; sahase—the powerful; ojase—who supplies strength to the senses; baläya—who supplies strength to the body; käntäya—the supreme husband or master of all living entities; kämäya—who supplies all necessities for the devotees; namaù—respectful obeisances; te—unto You; ubhayatra—always (during both day and night, or both in this life and the next); bhüyät—may there be all good fortune.
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Håñékeça, the controller of all my senses and the origin of everything. As the supreme master of all bodily, mental and intellectual activities, He is the only enjoyer of their results. The five sense objects and eleven senses, including the mind, are His partial manifestations. He supplies all the necessities of life, which are His energy and thus nondifferent from Him, and He is the cause of everyone's bodily and mental prowess, which is also nondifferent from Him. Indeed, He is the husband and provider of necessities for all living entities. The purpose of all the Vedas is to worship Him. Therefore let us all offer Him our respectful obeisances. May He always be favorable toward us in this life and the next.
In this verse the word mäyämaya is further explained in regard to how the Lord expands His mercy in different ways. Paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate: [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport] the energies of the Supreme Lord are understood in different ways. In this verse He is described as the original source of everything, even our body, senses, mind, activities, prowess, bodily strength, mental strength and determination for securing the necessities of life. Indeed, the Lord's energies can be perceived in everything. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.8), raso 'ham apsu kaunteya: the taste of water is also Kåñëa. Kåñëa is the active principle of everything we need for our maintenance.
This verse offering respectful obeisances unto the Lord was composed by Ramä, the goddess of fortune, and is full of spiritual power. Under the guidance of a spiritual master, everyone should chant this mantra and thus become a complete and perfect devotee of the Lord. One may chant this mantra for complete liberation from material bondage, and after liberation one may continue to chant it while worshiping the Supreme Lord in Vaikuëöhaloka. All mantras, of course, are meant for this life and the next life, as Kåñëa Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (9.14):
satataà kértayanto mäà
yatantaç ca dåòha-vratäù
namasyantaç ca mäà bhaktyä
nitya-yuktä upäsate
"Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing down before Me, the great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion." A devotee who both in this life and the next chants the mahä-mantra, or any mantra, is called nitya-yuktopäsaka.
TEXT 19
iñYaae v]TaESTva ôzqke-ìr& SvTaae
 ùaraDYa l/aeke- PaiTaMaaXaaSaTae_NYaMa( )
TaaSaa& Na Tae vE PairPaaNTYaPaTYa&
 iPa[Ya& DaNaaYaU&iz YaTaae_SvTaN}aa" )) 19 ))
striyo vratais tvä håñékeçvaraà svato
hy ärädhya loke patim äçäsate 'nyam
täsäà na te vai paripänty apatyaà
priyaà dhanäyüàñi yato 'sva-tanträù
striyaù—all women; vrataiù—by observing fasting and other vows; tvä—you; håñékeçvaram—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, master of the senses; svataù—of your own accord; hi—certainly; ärädhya—worshiping; loke—in the world; patim—a husband; äçäsate—ask for; anyam—another; täsäm—of all those women; na—not; te—the husbands; vai—indeed; paripänti—able to protect; apatyam—the children; priyam—very dear; dhana—the wealth; äyüàñi—or the duration of life; yataù—because; asva-tanträù—dependent.
My dear Lord, You are certainly the fully independent master of all the senses. Therefore all women who worship You by strictly observing vows because they wish to acquire a husband to satisfy their senses are surely under illusion. They do not know that such a husband cannot actually give protection to them or their children. Nor can he protect their wealth or duration of life, for he himself is dependent on time, fruitive results and the modes of nature, which are all subordinate to You.
In this verse, Lakñmédevé (Ramä) shows compassion toward women who worship the Lord for the benediction of possessing a good husband. Although such women desire to be happy with children, wealth, a long duration of life and everything dear to them, they cannot possibly do so. In the material world, a so-called husband is dependent on the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are many examples of a woman whose husband, being dependent on the result of his own fruitive actions, cannot maintain his wife, her children, her wealth or her duration of life. Therefore, factually the only real husband of all women is Kåñëa, the supreme husband. Because the gopés were liberated souls, they understood this fact. Therefore they rejected their material husbands and accepted Kåñëa as their real husband. Kåñëa is the real husband not only of the gopés but of every living entity. Everyone should perfectly understand that Kåñëa is the real husband of all living entities, who are described in the Bhagavad-gétä as prakåti (female), not puruña (male). In Bhagavad-gétä (10.12), only Kåñëa is addressed as puruña:
paraà brahma paraà dhäma
pavitraà paramaà bhavän
puruñaà çäçvataà divyam
ädi-devam ajaà vibhum
"You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-pervading beauty."
Kåñëa is the original puruña, and the living entities are prakåti. Thus Kåñëa is the enjoyer, and all living entities are meant to be enjoyed by Him. Therefore any woman who seeks a material husband for her protection, or any man who desires to become the husband of a woman, is under illusion. To become a husband means to maintain a wife and children nicely by supplying wealth and security. However, a material husband cannot possibly do this, for he is dependent on his karma. Karmaëä-daiva-netreëa: [SB 3.31.1] his circumstances are determined by his past fruitive activities. Therefore if one proudly thinks he can protect his wife, he is under illusion. Kåñëa is the only husband, and therefore the relationship between a husband and wife in this material world cannot be absolute. Because we have the desire to marry, Kåñëa mercifully allows the so-called husband to possess a wife, and the wife to possess a so-called husband, for mutual satisfaction. In the Éçopaniñad it is said, tena tyaktena bhuïjéthä: [Éço mantra 1] the Lord provides everyone with his quota. Actually, however, every living entity is prakåti, or female, and Kåñëa is the only husband.
ekale éçvara kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya
yäre yaiche näcäya, se taiche kare nåtya
 [Cc. Ädi 5.142]
Kåñëa is the original master or husband of everyone, and all other living entities, having taken the form of so-called husbands, or wives, are dancing according to His desire. A so-called husband may unite with his wife for sense gratification, but his senses are conducted by Håñékeça, the master of the senses, who is therefore the actual husband.
TEXT 20
Sa vE PaiTa" SYaadku-Taae>aYa" SvYa&
 SaMaNTaTa" PaaiTa >aYaaTaur& JaNaMa( )
Sa Wk- WveTarQaa iMaQaae >aYa&
 NaEvaTMal/a>aadiDa MaNYaTae ParMa( )) 20 ))
sa vai patiù syäd akutobhayaù svayaà
samantataù päti bhayäturaà janam
sa eka evetarathä mitho bhayaà
naivätmaläbhäd adhi manyate param
saù—he; vai—indeed; patiù—a husband; syät—would be; akutaù-bhayaù—who is not fearful of anyone; svayam—self-sufficient; samantataù—entirely; päti—maintains; bhaya-äturam—who is very afraid; janam—a person; saù—therefore he; ekaù—one; eva—only; itarathä—otherwise; mithaù—from one another; bhayam—fear; na—not; eva—indeed; ätma-läbhät—than the attainment of You; adhi—greater; manyate—is accepted; param—other thing.
He alone who is never afraid but who, on the contrary, gives complete shelter to all fearful persons can actually become a husband and protector. Therefore, my Lord, you are the only husband, and no one else can claim this position. If you were not the only husband, You would be afraid of others. Therefore persons learned in all Vedic literature accept only Your Lordship as everyone's master, and they think no one else a better husband and protector than You.
Here the meaning of husband or guardian is clearly explained, people want to become a husband, a guardian, a governor or a political leader without knowing the actual meaning of such a superior position. There are many people all over the world—indeed, throughout the universe—who claim for some time that they are husbands, political leaders or guardians, but in due course of time the Supreme Lord desires their removal from their posts, and their careers are immediately finished. Therefore those who are actually learned and advanced in spiritual life do not accept any leader, husband or maintainer other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Lord Kåñëa personally states in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66), ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo mokñayiñyämi: "I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions." Kåñëa is not afraid of anyone. On the contrary, everyone is afraid of Kåñëa. Therefore He can actually give protection to a subordinate living entity. Since so-called leaders or dictators are completely under the control of material nature, they can never give complete protection to others, although they claim this ability due to false prestige. Na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum: [SB 7.5.31] people do not know that real advancement in life consists of accepting the Supreme Personality of Godhead as one's master. Instead of deceiving themselves and others by pretending to be all-powerful, all political leaders, husbands and guardians should spread the Kåñëa consciousness movement so that everyone can learn how to surrender to Kåñëa, the supreme husband.
TEXT 21
Yaa TaSYa Tae PaadSaraeåhahR<a&
 iNak-aMaYaeTSaai%l/k-aMal/MPa$=a )
Tadev raSaqiPSaTaMaqiPSaTaae_icRTaae
 YaÙGanYaaÁa >aGavNa( Pa[TaPYaTae )) 21 ))
yä tasya te päda-saroruhärhaëaà
nikämayet säkhila-käma-lampaöä
tad eva räsépsitam épsito 'rcito
yad-bhagna-yäcïä bhagavan pratapyate
yä—a woman who; tasya—of Him; te—of You; päda-saroruha—of the lotus feet; arhaëam—the worship; nikämayet—fully desires; sä—such a woman; akhila-käma-lampaöä—although maintaining all kinds of material desire; tat—that; eva—only; räsi—You award; épsitam—some other desired benediction; épsitaù—being looked to for; arcitaù—worshiped; yat—from which; bhagna-yäcïä—one who desires objects other than Your lotus feet and who thus becomes broken; bhagavan—O my Lord; pratapyate—is pained.
My dear Lord, You automatically fulfill all the desires of a woman who worships Your lotus feet in pure love. However, if a woman worships Your lotus feet for a particular purpose, You also quickly fulfill her desires, but in the end she becomes broken-hearted and laments. Therefore one need not worship Your lotus feet for some material benefit.
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé describes pure devotional service as anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. One should not worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead to fulfill some material desire for success in fruitive activities or mental speculation. To serve the lotus feet of the Lord means to serve Him exactly as He desires. The neophyte devotee is therefore ordered to worship the Lord strictly according to the regulative principles given by the spiritual master and the çästras. By executing devotional service in that way, he gradually becomes attached to Kåñëa, and when his original dormant love for the Lord becomes manifest, he spontaneously serves the Lord without any motive. This condition is the perfect stage of one's relationship with the Lord. The Lord then looks after the comfort and security of His devotee without being asked. Kåñëa promises in Bhagavad-gétä (9.22):
ananyäç cintayanto mäà
ye janäù paryupäsate
teñäà nityäbhiyuktänäà
yoga-kñemaà vahämy aham
The Supreme Lord personally takes care of anyone who is completely engaged in His devotional service. Whatever he has, the Lord protects, and whatever he needs, the Lord supplies. Therefore why should one bother the Lord for something material? Such prayers are unnecessary.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that even if a devotee wishes the Lord to fulfill a particular desire, the devotee should not be considered a sakäma-bhakta (a devotee with some motive). In the Bhagavad-gétä (7.16) Kåñëa says:
catur-vidhä bhajante mäà
janäù sukåtino 'rjuna
ärto jijïäsur arthärthé
jïäné ca bharatarñabha
"O best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render devotional service unto Me—the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute." The ärta and the arthärthé, who approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead for relief from misery or for some money, are not sakäma-bhaktas, although they appear to be. Being neophyte devotees, they are simply ignorant. Later in Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says, udäräù sarva evaite: [Bg. 7.18] they are all magnanimous (udäräù). Although in the beginning a devotee may harbor some desire, in due course of time it will vanish. Therefore the Çrémad-Bhägavatam enjoins:
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"A person who has broader intelligence, whether he is full of all material desire, is free from material desire, or has a desire for liberation, must by all means worship the supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead." (SB 2.3.10)
Even if one wants something material, he should pray to no one but the Lord to fulfill his desire. If one approaches a demigod for the fulfillment of his desires, he is to be considered nañöa-buddhi, bereft of all good sense. Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.20):
kämais tais tair håta-jïänäù
prapadyante 'nya-devatäù
taà taà niyamam ästhäya
prakåtyä niyatäù svayä
"Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to their own natures."
Lakñmédevé advises all devotees who approach the Lord with material desires that according to her practical experience the Lord is Kämadeva, and thus there is no need to ask Him for anything material. She says that everyone should simply serve the Lord without any motive. Since the Supreme Personality of Godhead is sitting in everyone's heart, He knows everyone's thoughts, and in due course of time He will fulfill all desires. Therefore let us completely depend on the service of the Lord without bothering Him with our material requests.
TEXT 22
MaTPa[aáYae_JaeXaSauraSauradYa‚
 STaPYaNTa oGa]& TaPa WeiNd]YaeiDaYa" )
‰Tae >avTPaadParaYa<aaà Maa&
 ivNdNTYah& Tvd(Da*dYaa YaTaae_iJaTa )) 22 ))
mat-präptaye 'jeça-suräsurädayas
tapyanta ugraà tapa aindriye dhiyaù
åte bhavat-päda-paräyaëän na mäà
vindanty ahaà tvad-dhådayä yato 'jita
mat-präptaye—to obtain my mercy; aja—Lord Brahmä; éça—Lord Çiva; sura—the other demigods, headed by King Indra, Candra and Varuëa; asura-ädayaù—as well as the demons; tapyante—undergo; ugram—severe; tapaù—austerity; aindriye dhiyaù—whose minds are absorbed in thoughts of superior sense gratification; åte—unless; bhavat-päda-paräyaëät—one who is wholly and solely engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord's lotus feet; na—not; mäm—me; vindanti—obtain; aham—I; tvat—in You; hådayäù—whose hearts; yataù—therefore; ajita—O unconquerable one.
O supreme unconquerable Lord, when they become absorbed in thoughts of material enjoyment, Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, as well as other demigods and demons, undergo severe penances and austerities to receive my benedictions. But I do not favor anyone, however great he may be; unless he is always engaged in the service of Your lotus feet. Because I always keep You within my heart, I cannot favor anyone but a devotee.
In this verse the goddess of fortune, Lakñmédevé, clearly states that she does not bestow her favor on any materialistic person. Although sometimes a materialist becomes very opulent in the eyes of another materialist, such opulence is bestowed upon him by the goddess Durgädevé, a material expansion of the goddess of fortune, not by Lakñmédevé herself. Those who desire material wealth worship Durgädevé with the following mantra: dhanaà dehi rüpaà dehi rupavati bharyam dehi. "O worshipable mother Durgädevé, please give me wealth, strength, fame, a good wife and so on." By pleasing goddess Durgä one can obtain such benefits, but since they are temporary, they result only in mäyä-sukha (illusory happiness). As stated by Prahläda Mahäräja, mäyä-sukhäya bharam udvahato vimüòhän: [SB 7.9.43] those who work very hard for material benefits are vimüòhas, foolish rascals, because such happiness will not endure. On the other hand, devotees like Prahläda and Dhruva Mahäräja achieved extraordinary material opulences, but such opulences were not mäyä-sukha. When a devotee acquires unparalleled opulences, they are the direct gifts of the goddess of fortune, who resides in the heart of Näräyaëa.
The material opulences a person obtains by offering prayers to the goddess Durgä are temporary. As described in Bhagavad-gétä (7.23), antavat tu phalaà teñäà tad bhavaty alpa-medhasäm: men of meager intelligence desire temporary happiness. We have actually seen that one of the disciples of Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura wanted to enjoy the property of his spiritual master, and the spiritual master, being merciful toward him, gave him the temporary property, but not the power to preach the cult of Caitanya Mahäprabhu all over the world. That special mercy of the power to preach is given to a devotee who does not want anything material from his spiritual master but wants only to serve him. The story of the demon Rävaëa illustrates this point. Although Rävaëa tried to abduct the goddess of fortune Sétädevé from the custody of Lord Rämacandra, he could not possibly do so. The Sétädevé he forcibly took with him was not the original Sétädevé but an expansion of mäyä, or Durgädevé. As a result, instead of winning the favor of the real goddess of fortune, Rävaëa and his whole family were vanquished by the power of Durgädevé (såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä [Bs. 5.44]).
TEXT 23
Sa Tv& MaMaaPYaCYauTa XaqiZ<aR viNdTa&
 k-raMbuJa& YatvdDaaiYa SaaTvTaaMa( )
ib>aizR Maa& l/+Ma vre<Ya MaaYaYaa
 k- wRìrSYaeihTaMaUihTau& iv>auiriTa )) 23 ))
sa tvaà mamäpy acyuta çérñëi vanditaà
karämbujaà yat tvad-adhäyi sätvatäm
bibharñi mäà lakñma vareëya mäyayä
ka éçvarasyehitam ühituà vibhur iti
saù—that; tvam—You; mama—of me; api—also; acyuta—O infallible one; çérñëi—on the head; vanditam—worshiped; kara-ambujam—Your lotus hand; yat—which; tvat—by You; adhäyi—placed; sätvatäm—on the head of the devotees; bibharñi—You maintain; mäm—me; lakñma—as an insignia on Your chest; vareëya—O worshipable one; mäyayä—with deceit; kaù—who; éçvarasya—of the supremely powerful controller; éhitam—the desires; ühitum—to understand by reason and argument; vibhuù—is able; iti—thus.
O infallible one, Your lotus palm is the source of all benediction. Therefore Your pure devotees worship it, and You very mercifully place Your hand on their heads. I wish that You may also place Your hand on My head, for although You already bear my insignia of golden streaks on Your chest, I regard this honor as merely a kind of false prestige for me. You show Your real mercy to Your devotees, not to me. Of course, You are the supreme absolute controller, and no one can understand Your motives.
In many places, the çästras describe the Supreme Personality of Godhead as being more inclined toward His devotees than toward His wife, who always remains on His chest. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.14.15) it is stated:
na tathä me priyatama
ätma-yonir na çaìkaraù
na ca saìkarñaëo na çrér
naivätmä ca yathä bhavän
Here Kåñëa plainly says that His devotees are more dear to Him than Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, Lord Saìkarñaëa (the original cause of creation), the goddess of fortune or even His own Self. Elsewhere in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.9.20) Çukadeva Gosvämé says,
nemam viriïco na bhavo
na çrér apy aìga saàçrayä
prasädaà lebhire gopé
yat tat präpa vimuktidät
The Supreme Lord, who can award liberation to anyone, showed more mercy toward the gopés than to Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva or even the goddess of fortune, who is His own wife and is associated with His body. Similarly, Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.47.60) also states:
näyaà çriyo 'ìga u nitänta-rateù prasädaù
svar-yoñitäà nalina-gandha-rucäà kuto 'nyäù
räsotsave 'sya bhuja-daëòa-gåhéta-kaëöha-
labdhäçiñäà ya udagäd vraja-sundaréëäm
"The gopés received benedictions from the Lord that neither Lakñmédevé nor the most beautiful dancers in the heavenly planets could attain. In the räsa dance, the Lord showed His favor to the most fortunate gopés by placing His arms on their shoulders and dancing with each of them individually. No one can compare with the gopés, who received the causeless mercy of the Lord."
In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is said that no one can receive the real favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead without following in the footsteps of the gopés. Even the goddess of fortune could not receive the same favor as the gopés, although she underwent severe austerities and penances for many years. Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu discusses this point with Vyeìkaöa Bhaööa in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 9.111-131): "The Lord inquired from Vyeìkaöa Bhaööa, 'Your worshipable goddess of fortune, Lakñmé, always remains on the chest of Näräyaëa, and she is certainly the most chaste woman in the creation. However, My Lord is Lord Çré Kåñëa, a cowherd boy engaged in tending cows. Why is it that Lakñmé, being such a chaste wife, wants to associate with My Lord? Just to associate with Kåñëa, Lakñmé abandoned all transcendental happiness in Vaikuëöha and for a long time accepted vows and regulative principles and performed unlimited austerities.'
"Vyeìkaöa Bhaööa replied, 'Lord Kåñëa and Lord Näräyaëa are one and the same, but the pastimes of Kåñëa are more relishable due to their sportive nature. They are very pleasing for Kåñëa's çaktis. Since Kåñëa and Näräyaëa are both the same personality, Lakñmé's association with Kåñëa did not break her vow of chastity. Rather, it was in great fun that the goddess of fortune wanted to associate with Lord Kåñëa. The goddess of fortune considered that her vow of chastity would not be damaged by her relationship with Kåñëa. Rather, by associating with Kåñëa she could enjoy the benefit of the räsa dance. If she wanted to enjoy herself with Kåñëa what fault is there? Why are you joking so about this?'
"Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu replied, 'I know that there is no fault in the goddess of fortune, but still she could not enter into the räsa dance. We hear this from revealed scriptures. The authorities of Vedic knowledge met Lord Rämacandra in Daëòakäraëya, and by their penances and austerities they were allowed to enter into the räsa dance. But can you tell me why the goddess of fortune, Lakñmé, could not get that opportunity? '
"To this Vyeìkaöa Bhaööa replied, 'I cannot enter into the mystery of this incident. I am an ordinary living being. My intelligence is limited, and I am always disturbed. How can I understand the pastimes of the Supreme Lord? They are deeper than millions of oceans.'
"Lord Caitanya replied, 'Lord Kåñëa has a specific characteristic. He attracts everyone's heart by the mellow of His personal conjugal love. By following in the footsteps of the inhabitants of the planet known as Vrajaloka or Goloka Våndävana, one can attain the shelter of the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa. However, the inhabitants of that planet do not know that Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unaware that Kåñëa is the Supreme Lord, the residents of Våndävana like Nanda Mahäräja, Yaçodädevé and the gopés treat Kåñëa as their beloved son or lover. Mother Yaçodä accepts Him as her son and sometimes binds Him to a grinding mortar. Kåñëa's cowherd boy friends think He is an ordinary boy and get up on His shoulders. In Goloka Våndävana no one has any desire other than to love Kåñëa.' "
The conclusion is that one cannot associate with Kåñëa unless he has fully received the favor of the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi. Therefore if one wants to be delivered by Kåñëa directly, he must take to the service of the residents of Våndävana, who are unalloyed devotees of the Lord.

Song Prayers by Manu to Matsya in Ramyaka-varsa (SB 5.18.25-28)
TEXT 25
p NaMaae >aGavTae Mau:YaTaMaaYa NaMa" SatvaYa Pa[a<aaYaaEJaSae SahSae bl/aYa
MahaMaTSYaaYa NaMa wiTa )) 25 ))
oà namo bhagavate mukhyatamäya namaù sattväya präëäyaujase sahase baläya mahä-matsyäya nama iti.
om—O my Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mukhya-tamäya—the first incarnation to appear; namaù—my respectful obeisances; sattväya—unto the pure transcendence; präëäya—the origin of life; ojase—the source of the potency of the senses; sahase—the origin of all mental power; baläya—the origin of bodily strength; mahä-matsyäya—unto the gigantic fish incarnation; namaù—respectful obeisances; iti—thus.
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is pure transcendence. He is the origin of all life, bodily strength, mental power and sensory ability. Known as Matsyävatära, the gigantic fish incarnation, He appears first among all the incarnations. Again I offer my obeisances unto Him.
Çréla Jayadeva Gosvämé sings:
pralaya-payodhi-jale dhåtavän asi vedaà
vihita-vahitra-caritram akhedam
keçava dhåta-ména-çaréra jaya jagad-éça hare
Soon after the cosmic creation, the entire universe was inundated with water. At that time Lord Kåñëa (Keçava) incarnated as a gigantic fish to protect the Vedas. Therefore Manu addresses Lord Matsya as mukhyatama, the first incarnation to appear. Fish are generally considered a mixture of the modes of ignorance and passion, but we must understand that every incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is completely transcendental. There is never any deterioration of the Supreme Lord's original transcendental quality. Therefore the word sattväya is used here, meaning pure goodness on the transcendental platform. There are many incarnations of the Supreme Lord: Varäha mürti (the boar form), Kürma mürti (the tortoise form), Hayagréva mürti (the form of a horse) and so on. Yet we should never think any of Them material. They are always situated on the platform of çuddha-sattva, pure transcendence.
TEXT 26
ANTabRihêai%l/l/aek-Paal/kE-‚
 rd*íæPaae ivcrSYauåSvNa" )
Sa wRìrSTv& Ya wd& vXae_NaYa‚
 àaMNaa YaQaa daåMaYaq& Nar" iñYaMa( )) 26 ))
antar bahiç cäkhila-loka-pälakair
adåñöa-rüpo vicarasy uru-svanaù
sa éçvaras tvaà ya idaà vaçe 'nayan
nämnä yathä därumayéà naraù striyam
antaù—within; bahiù—without; ca—also; akhila-loka-pälakaiù—by the leaders of the different planets, societies, kingdoms and so on; adåñöa-rüpaù—not seen; vicarasi—You wander; uru—very great; svanaù—whose sounds (Vedic mantras); saù—He; éçvaraù—the supreme controller; tvam—You; yaù—who; idam—this; vaçe—under control; anayat—has brought; nämnä—by different names like brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra; yathä—exactly like; därumayém—made of wood; naraù—a man; striyam—a doll.
My dear Lord, just as a puppeteer controls his dancing dolls and a husband controls his wife, Your Lordship controls all the living entities in the universe, such as the brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras. Although You are in everyone's heart as the supreme witness and commander and are outside everyone as well, the so-called leaders of societies, communities and countries cannot realize You. Only those who hear the vibration of the Vedic mantras can appreciate You.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is antarbahiù, present within and without everything. One must overcome the delusion caused by the Lord's external energy and realize His presence both externally and internally. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.8.19) Çrématé Kuntédevé has explained that Kåñëa appears in this world naöo näöyadharo yathä, "exactly like an actor dressed as a player." In Bhagavad-gétä (18.61) Kåñëa says, éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati: "The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna." The Lord is situated within everyone's heart, and outside as well. Within the heart He is the Supersoul, the incarnation who acts as the adviser and witness. Yet although God is residing within their hearts, foolish people say, "I cannot see God. Please show Him to me."
Everyone is under the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, exactly like dancing dolls controlled by a puppeteer or a woman controlled by her husband. A woman is compared to a doll (därumayé) because she has no independence. She should always be controlled by a man. Still, due to false prestige, a class of women wants to remain independent. What to speak of women, all living entities are prakåti (female) and therefore dependent on the Supreme Lord, as Kåñëa Himself explains in Bhagavad-gétä (apareyam itas tv anyäà prakåtià viddhi me paräm [Bg. 7.5]). The living entity is never independent. Under all circumstances, he is dependent on the mercy of the Lord. The Lord creates the social divisions of human society—brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras—and ordains that they follow rules and regulations suited to their particular position. In this way, all members of society remain always under the Supreme Lord's control. Still, some people foolishly deny the existence of God.
Self-realization means to understand one's subordinate position in relation to the Lord. When one is thus enlightened, he surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is liberated from the clutches of the material energy. In other words, unless one surrenders to the lotus feet of the Lord, the material energy in its many varieties will continue to control him. No one in the material world can deny that he is under control. The Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa, who is beyond this material existence, controls everyone. The following Vedic mantra confirms this point: eko ha vai näräyaëa äsét. Foolish persons think Näräyaëa to be on the platform of ordinary material existence. Because they do not realize the natural constitutional position of the living entity, they concoct names like daridra-näräyaëa, svämi-näräyaëa or mithyä-näräyaëa. However, Näräyaëa is actually the supreme controller of everyone. This understanding is self-realization.
TEXT 27
Ya& l/aek-Paal/a" ik-l/ MaTSarJvra
 ihTva YaTaNTaae_iPa Pa*Qak( SaMaeTYa c )
PaaTau& Na Xaeku-iÜRPadêTauZPad"
 SarqSa*Pa& SQaa<au Yad}a d*XYaTae )) 27 ))
yaà loka-päläù kila matsara-jvarä
hitvä yatanto 'pi påthak sametya ca
pätuà na çekur dvi-padaç catuñ-padaù
sarésåpaà sthäëu yad atra dåçyate
yam—whom (You); loka-päläù—the great leaders of the universe, beginning with Lord Brahmä; kila—what to speak of others; matsara-jvaräù—who are suffering from the fever of envy; hitvä—leaving aside; yatantaù—endeavoring; api—although; påthak—separately; sametya—combined; ca—also; pätum—to protect; na—not; çekuù—able; dvi-padaù—two-legged; catuù-padaù—four-legged; sarésåpam—reptiles; sthäëu—not moving; yat—whatever; atra—within this material world; dåçyate—is visible.
My Lord, from the great leaders of the universe, such as Lord Brahmä and other demigods, down to the political leaders of this world, all are envious of Your authority. Without Your help, however, they could neither separately nor concertedly maintain the innumerable living entities within the universe. You are actually the only maintainer of all human beings, of animals like cows and asses, and of plants, reptiles, birds, mountains and whatever else is visible within this material world.
It is fashionable for materialistic persons to compete with the power of God. When so-called scientists try to manufacture living entities in their laboratories, their only purpose is to defy the talent and ability of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is called illusion. It exists even in the higher planetary systems, where great demigods like Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and others reside. In this world everyone is puffed up with false prestige despite the failure of all his endeavors. When so-called philanthropists, who supposedly want to help the poor, are approached by members of the Kåñëa consciousness movement, they say, "You are simply wasting your time, while I am feeding vast masses of starving people." Unfortunately, their meager efforts, either singly or together, do not solve anyone's problems.
Sometimes so-called svämés are very eager to feed poor people, thinking them to be daridra-näräyaëa, the Lord's incarnations as beggars. They prefer to serve the manufactured daridra-näräyaëa than the original, supreme Näräyaëa. They say, "Don't encourage service to Lord Näräyaëa. It is better to serve the starving people of the world." Unfortunately such materialists, either singly or combined in the form of the United Nations, cannot fulfill their plans. The truth is that the many millions of human beings, animals, birds and trees—indeed, all living entities—are maintained solely by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän: one person, the Supreme Lord, is supplying the necessities of life for all other living entities. To challenge the authority of Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the business of asuras (demons). Yet sometimes suras, or devotees, are also bewildered by the illusory energy and falsely claim to be the maintainer of the entire universe. Such incidents are described in the Tenth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, where Çukadeva Gosvämé tells how Lord Brahmä and King Indra became puffed up and were eventually chastised by Kåñëa.
TEXT 28
>avaNa( YauGaaNTaa<aRv OiMaRMaail/iNa
 +aae<aqiMaMaaMaaeziDavqåDaa& iNaiDaMa( )
MaYaa Sahaeå §-MaTae_Ja AaeJaSaa
 TaSMaE JaGaTPa[a<aGa<aaTMaNae NaMa wiTa )) 28 ))
bhavän yugäntärëava ürmi-mälini
kñoëém imäm oñadhi-vérudhäà nidhim
mayä sahoru kramate 'ja ojasä
tasmai jagat-präëa-gaëätmane nama iti
bhavän—Your Lordship; yuga-anta-arëave—in the water of devastation at the end of the millennium; ürmi-mälini—possessing rows of big waves; kñoëém—the planet earth; imäm—this; oñadhi-vérudhäm—of all kinds of herbs and drugs; nidhim—the storehouse; mayä—me; saha—with; uru—great; kramate—You roamed; aja—O unborn one; ojasä—with speed; tasmai—unto Him; jagat—of the entire universe; präëa-gaëa-ätmane—the ultimate source of life; namaù—my respectful obeisances; iti—thus.
O almighty Lord, at the end of the millennium this planet earth, which is the source of all kinds of herbs, drugs and trees, was inundated by water and drowned beneath the devastating waves. At that time, You protected me along with the earth and roamed the sea with great speed. O unborn one, You are the actual maintainer of the entire universal creation, and therefore You are the cause of all living entities. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Envious persons cannot appreciate how wonderfully the Lord creates, maintains and annihilates the universe, but devotees of the Lord can understand this perfectly well. Devotees can see how the Lord is acting behind the wonderful workings of the material nature. In Bhagavad-gétä (9.10) the Lord says:
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again." All the wonderful transformations of nature are happening under the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Envious persons cannot see this, but a devotee, even though very humble and even if uneducated, knows that behind all the activities of nature is the supreme hand of the Supreme Being.

Song Prayers by Aryamā to Lord Kūrma in Hiranmaya-varsa (SB 5.18.30-33)
TEXT 30
p NaMaae >aGavTae AkU-PaaraYa SavRSatvGau<aivXaez<aaYaaNauPal/i+aTaSQaaNaaYa NaMaae
vZMaR<ae NaMaae >aUMNae NaMaae NaMaae_vSQaaNaaYa NaMaSTae )) 30 ))
oà namo bhagavate aküpäräya sarva-sattva-guëa-viçeñaëäyänupalakñita-sthänäya namo varñmaëe namo bhümne namo namo 'vasthänäya namas te.
om—O my Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aküpäräya—in the form of a tortoise; sarva-sattva-guëa-viçeñaëäya—whose form consists of çuddha-sattva, transcendental goodness; anupalakñita-sthänäya—unto You, whose position is not discernible; namaù—my respectful obeisances; varñmaëe—unto You who, although the oldest, are unaffected by time; namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhümne—to the great one who can go everywhere; namaù namaù—repeated obeisances; avasthänäya—the shelter of everything; namaù—respectful obeisances; te—unto You.
O my Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who have assumed the form of a tortoise. You are the reservoir of all transcendental qualities, and being entirely untinged by matter, You are perfectly situated in pure goodness. You move here and there in the water, but no one can discern Your position. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. Because of Your transcendental position, You are not limited by past, present and future. You are present everywhere as the shelter of all things, and therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You again and again.
In the Brahma-saàhitä it is said, goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhütaù: [Bs. 5.37] The Lord always remains in Goloka, the topmost planet in the spiritual world. At the same time, He is all-pervading. This paradox is only possible for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full of all opulences. The Lord's all-pervasiveness is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61) where Kåñëa states, éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati: "The Supreme Lord is seated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna." Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) the Lord says, sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: "I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." Therefore, although the Lord is present everywhere, He cannot be seen with ordinary eyes. As Aryamä says, the Lord is anupalakñita-sthäna: no one can locate Him. This is the greatness of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 31
Yad]UPaMaeTaiàJaMaaYaYaaiPaRTa‚
 MaQaRSvæPa& bhuæPaæiPaTaMa( )
Sa&:Yaa Na YaSYaaSTYaYaQaaePal/M>aNaaTa(
 TaSMaE NaMaSTae_VYaPadeXaæiPa<ae )) 31 ))
yad-rüpam etan nija-mäyayärpitam
artha-svarüpaà bahu-rüpa-rüpitam
saìkhyä na yasyästy ayathopalambhanät
tasmai namas te 'vyapadeça-rüpiëe
yat—of whom; rüpam—the form; etat—this; nija-mäyayä arpitam—manifested by Your personal potency; artha-svarüpam—this entire visible cosmic manifestation; bahu-rüpa-rüpitam—manifested in various forms; saìkhyä—the measurement; na—not; yasya—of which; asti—there is; ayathä—falsely; upalambhanät—from perceiving; tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme Lord); namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—unto You; avyapadeça—cannot be ascertained by mental speculation; rüpiëe—whose real form.
My dear Lord, this visible cosmic manifestation is a demonstration of Your own creative energy. Since the countless varieties of forms within this cosmic manifestation are simply a display of Your external energy, this viräö-rüpa [universal body] is not Your real form. Except for a devotee in transcendental consciousness, no one can perceive Your actual form. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Mäyävädé philosophers think the universal form of the Lord to be real and His personal form illusory. We can understand their mistake by a simple example. A fire consists of three elements: heat and light, which are the energy of the fire, and the fire itself. Anyone can understand that the original fire is the reality and that the heat and light are simply the fire's energy. Heat and light are the formless energies of fire, and in that sense they are unreal. Only the fire has form, and therefore it is the real form of the heat and light. As Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä (9.4), mayä tatam idaà sarvaà jagad avyakta-mürtinä: "By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded." Thus the impersonal conception of the Lord is like the expansion of heat and light from a fire. In Bhagavad-gétä the Lord also says, mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni na cähaà teñv avasthitaù: the entire material creation is resting on Kåñëa's energy, either material, spiritual or marginal, but because His form is absent from the expansion of His energy, He is not personally present. This inconceivable expansion of the Supreme Lord's energy is called acintya-çakti. Therefore no one can understand the real form of the Lord without becoming His devotee.
TEXT 32
JaraYauJa& SvedJaMa<@JaaeiÙd&
 cracr& devizRiPaTa*>aUTaMaEiNd]YaMa( )
ÛaE" %& i+aiTa" XaEl/SairTSaMaud]‚
 ÜqPaGa]h+aeRTYai>aDaeYa Wk-" )) 32 ))
jaräyujaà svedajam aëòajodbhidaà
caräcaraà devarñi-pitå-bhütam aindriyam
dyauù khaà kñitiù çaila-sarit-samudra-
dvépa-graharkñety abhidheya ekaù
jaräyu-jam—one born from a womb; sveda-jam—one born from perspiration; aëòa-ja—one born from an egg; udbhidam—one born of the earth; cara-acaram—the moving and the stationary; deva—the demigods; åñi—the great sages; pitå—the inhabitants of Pitåloka; bhütam—the material elements air, fire, water and earth; aindriyam—all the senses; dyauù—the higher planetary systems; kham—the sky; kñitiù—the earthly planets; çaila—the hills and mountains; sarit—the rivers; samudra—the oceans; dvépa—the islands; graha-åkña—the stars and planets; iti—thus; abhidheyaù—to be variously named; ekaù—one.
My dear Lord, You manifest Your different energies in countless forms: as living entities born from wombs, from eggs and from perspiration; as plants and trees that grow out of the earth; as all living entities, both moving and standing, including the demigods, the learned sages and the pitäs; as outer space; as the higher planetary system containing the heavenly planets; and as the planet earth with its hills, rivers, seas, oceans and islands. Indeed, all the stars and planets are simply manifestations of Your different energies, but originally You are one without a second. Therefore there is nothing beyond You. This entire cosmic manifestation is therefore not false but is simply a temporary manifestation of Your inconceivable energy.
This verse completely rejects the theory of brahma satyaà jagan mithyä, which states that spirit, or Brahman, is real, whereas the manifested material world, with its great variety of things, is false. Nothing is false. One thing may be permanent and another temporary, but both the permanent and the temporary are facts. For example, if someone becomes angry for a certain period, no one can say that his anger is false. It is simply temporary. Everything we experience in our daily lives is of this same character; it is temporary but real.
The different kinds of living entities coming from various sources are very clearly described in this verse. Some are born from a womb and some (like certain insects) from human perspiration. Others hatch from eggs, and still others sprout from the earth. A living entity takes birth under different circumstances according to his past activities (karma). Although the body of the living entity is material, it is never false. No one will accept the argument that since a person's material body is false, murder has no repercussions. Our temporary bodies are given to us according to our karma, and we must remain in our given bodies to enjoy the pains and pleasures of life. Our bodies cannot be called false; they are only temporary. In other words, the energy of the Supreme Lord is as permanent as the Lord Himself, although His energy is sometimes manifest and sometimes not. As summarized in the Vedas, sarvaà khalv idaà brahma: "Everything is Brahman."
TEXT 33
YaiSMaàSa&:YaeYaivXaezNaaMa‚
 æPaak*-TaaE k-ivi>a" k-iLPaTaeYaMa( )
Sa&:Yaa YaYaa Tatvd*XaaPaNaqYaTae
 TaSMaE NaMa" Saa&:YaiNadXaRNaaYa Tae wiTa )) 33 ))
yasminn asaìkhyeya-viçeña-näma-
rüpäkåtau kavibhiù kalpiteyam
saìkhyä yayä tattva-dåçäpanéyate
tasmai namaù säìkhya-nidarçanäya te iti
yasmin—in You (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); asaìkhyeya—innumerable; viçeña—particular; näma—names; rüpa—forms; äkåtau—possessing bodily features; kavibhiù—by great learned persons; kalpitä—imagined; iyam—this; saìkhyä—number; yayä—by whom; tattva—of the truth; dåçä—by knowledge; apanéyate—is extracted; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—respectful obeisances; säìkhya-nidarçanäya—who is the revealer of this numerical knowledge; te—unto You; iti—thus.
O my Lord, Your name, form and bodily features are expanded in countless forms. No one can determine exactly how many forms exist, yet You Yourself, in Your incarnation as the learned scholar Kapiladeva, have analyzed the cosmic manifestation as containing twenty-four elements. Therefore if one is interested in Säìkhya philosophy, by which one can enumerate the different truths, he must hear it from You. Unfortunately, nondevotees simply count the different elements and remain ignorant of Your actual form. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Philosophers and scientists have been trying to study the entire cosmic situation and have been theorizing and calculating in different ways for millions and millions of years. However, the speculative research work of a so-called scientist or philosopher is always interrupted when he dies, and the laws of nature go on without regard for his work.
For billions of years changes take place in the material creation, until at last the whole universe is dissolved and remains in an unmanifested state. Constant change and destruction (bhütvä bhütvä praléyate [Bg. 8.19]) is perpetually going on in nature, yet the material scientists want to study natural laws without knowing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the background of nature. As Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10):
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again."
Now the material creation is manifest, eventually it will be annihilated and remain for many millions of years in a dormant state, and finally it will again be created. This is the law of nature.

Song Prayers by Bhūmi Devi to Lord Varāha in Jambüdvipa (SB 5.18.35-39) 
TEXT 35
p NaMaae >aGavTae MaN}aTatvil/(r)aYa Yaj§-Tave MahaßravYavaYa MahaPauåzaYa
NaMa" k-MaRXau(c)-aYa i}aYauGaaYa NaMaSTae )) 35 ))
oà namo bhagavate mantra-tattva-liìgäya yajïa-kratave mahä-dhvarävayaväya mahä-puruñäya namaù karma-çukläya tri-yugäya namas te.
om—O Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mantra-tattva-liìgäya—who is understood in truth by different mantras; yajïa—in the form of animal sacrifices; kratave—and animal sacrifice; mahä-dhvara—great sacrifices; avayaväya—whose limbs and bodily parts; mahä-puruñäya—unto the Supreme Person; namaù—respectful obeisances; karma-çukläya—who purifies the fruitive activities of the living entities; tri-yugäya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full with six opulences and who appears in three yugas (remaining concealed in the fourth yuga); namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—unto You.
O Lord, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You as the gigantic person. Simply by chanting mantras, we shall be able to understand You fully. You are yajïa [sacrifice], and You are the kratu [ritual]. Therefore all the ritualistic ceremonies of sacrifice are part of Your transcendental body, and You are the only enjoyer of all sacrifices. Your form is composed of transcendental goodness. You are known as tri-yuga because in Kali-yuga You appear as a concealed incarnation and because You always fully possess the three pairs of opulences.
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is the incarnation for this Age of Kali, as confirmed in many places throughout the Puräëas, the Mahäbhärata, Çrémad-Bhägavatam and the Upaniñads. The summary of His appearance is given in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 6.99) as follows:
kali-yuge lélävatära nä kare bhagavän
ataeva 'tri-yuga' kari' kahi tära näma
In this Age of Kali, the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Bhagavän) does not appear as a lélävatära, an incarnation to display pastimes. Therefore He is known as tri-yuga. Unlike other incarnations, Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu appears in this Age of Kali as a devotee of the Lord. Therefore He is called a concealed incarnation (channävatära).
TEXT 36
YaSYa SvæPa& k-vYaae ivPaiêTaae
 Gau<aezu daåiZvv JaaTavedSaMa( )
MaQNaiNTa MaQNaa MaNaSaa idd*+avae
 GaU!& i§-YaaQaŒNaRMa wRirTaaTMaNae )) 36 ))
yasya svarüpaà kavayo vipaçcito
guëeñu däruñv iva jäta-vedasam
mathnanti mathnä manasä didåkñavo
güòhaà kriyärthair nama éritätmane
yasya—whose; sva-rüpam—form; kavayaù—the greatly learned sages; vipaçcitaù—expert in ascertaining the Absolute Truth; guëeñu—in the material manifestation, consisting of the three modes of nature; däruñu—in wood; iva—like; jäta—manifested; vedasam—fire; mathnanti—stir; mathnä—with a piece of wood used for producing fire; manasä—by the mind; didåkñavaù—who are inquisitive; güòham—hidden; kriyä-arthaiù—by fruitive activities and their results; namaù—respectful obeisances; érita-ätmane—unto the Lord, who is manifested.
By manipulating a fire-generating stick, great saints and sages can bring forth the fire lying dormant within wood. In the same way, O Lord, those expert in understanding the Absolute Truth try to see You in everything—even in their own bodies. Yet you remain concealed. You are not to be understood by indirect processes involving mental or physical activities. Because You are self-manifested, only when You see that a person is wholeheartedly engaged in searching for You do You reveal Yourself. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
The word kriyärthaiù means "by performing ritualistic ceremonies to satisfy the demigods." The word vipaçcitaù is explained in the Taittiréya Upaniñad as follows: satyaà jïänam anantaà brahma, yo veda nihitaà guhäyäà parame vyoman. so 'çnute sarvän kämän saha brahmaëä vipaçciteti. As Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19), bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän mäà prapadyate: "After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me." When one understands that the Lord is situated in everyone's heart and actually sees the Lord present everywhere, he has perfect knowledge. The word jäta-vedaù means "fire which is produced by rubbing wood." In Vedic times, learned sages could bring forth fire from wood. Jäta-vedaù also indicates the fire in the stomach, which digests everything we eat and which produces an appetite. The word güòha is explained in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad. Eko devaù sarva-bhüteñu güòhaù: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is understood by chanting the Vedic mantras. Sarva-vyäpé sarva-bhütäntar-ätmä: He is all-pervading, and He is within the heart of living entities. Karmädhyakñaù sarva-bhütädhiväsaù: He witnesses all activities of the living entity. Säkñé cetä kevalo nirguëaç ca: The Supreme Lord is the witness as well as the living force, yet He is transcendental to all material qualities.
TEXT 37
d]VYai§-YaaheTvYaNaeXak-Ta*Ri>a‚
 MaaRYaaGau<aEvRSTauiNarqi+aTaaTMaNae )
ANvq+aYaa(r)aiTaXaYaaTMabuiÖi>a‚
 iNaRrSTaMaaYaak*-TaYae NaMaae NaMa" )) 37 ))
dravya-kriyä-hetv-ayaneça-kartåbhir
mäyä-guëair vastu-nirékñitätmane
anvékñayäìgätiçayätma-buddhibhir
nirasta-mäyäkåtaye namo namaù
dravya—by the objects of sense enjoyment; kriyä—the activities of the senses; hetu—the predominating deities of sensory activities; ayana—the body; éça—the predominating time; kartåbhiù—by false egotism; mäyä-guëaiù—by the modes of material nature; vastu—as a fact; nirékñita—being observed; ätmane—unto the Supreme Soul; anvékñayä—by careful consideration; aìga—by the limbs of yogic practice; atiçaya-ätma-buddhibhiù—by those whose intelligence has become fixed; nirasta—completely freed from; mäyä—the illusory energy; äkåtaye—whose form; namaù—all respectful obeisances; namaù—respectful obeisances.
The objects of material enjoyment [sound, form, taste, touch and smell], the activities of the senses, the controllers of sensory activities [the demigods], the body, eternal time and egotism are all creations of Your material energy. Those whose intelligence has become fixed by perfect execution of mystic yoga can see that all these elements result from the actions of Your external energy. They can also see Your transcendental form as Supersoul in the background of everything. Therefore I repeatedly offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
The objects of material enjoyment, the sensory activities, attachment to sensual pleasure, the body, false egotism and so on are produced by the Lord's external energy, mäyä. The background of all these activities is the living being, and the director of the living beings is the Supersoul. The living being is not the all in all. He is directed by the Supersoul. In Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) Kåñëa confirms this:
sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca
"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." The living entity depends on the Supersoul for directions. A person advanced in spiritual knowledge, or a person expert in the practice of mystic yoga (yama, niyama, äsana and so on) can understand transcendence either as Paramätmä or as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord is the original cause of all natural events. Therefore He is described as sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1], the cause of all causes. Behind everything visible to our material eyes is some cause, and one who can see the original cause of all causes, Lord Kåñëa, can actually see. Kåñëa, the sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], is the background of everything, as He Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10):
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again."
TEXT 38
k-raeiTa ivìiSQaiTaSa&YaMaaedYa&
 YaSYaeiPSaTa& NaeiPSaTaMaqi+aTauGauR<aE" )
MaaYaa YaQaaYaae >a]MaTae Tadaé[Ya&
 Ga]aV<aae NaMaSTae Gau<ak-MaRSaai+a<ae )) 38 ))
karoti viçva-sthiti-saàyamodayaà
yasyepsitaà nepsitam ékñitur guëaiù
mäyä yathäyo bhramate tad-äçrayaà
grävëo namas te guëa-karma-säkñiëe
karoti—performing; viçva—of the universe; sthiti—the maintenance; saàyama—winding up; udayam—creation; yasya—of whom; épsitam—desired; na—not; épsitam—desired; ékñituù—of the one glancing over; guëaiù—with the modes of material nature; mäyä—the material energy; yathä—as much as; ayaù—iron; bhramate—moves; tat-äçrayam—placed near that; grävëaù—a magnetic stone; namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—unto You; guëa-karma-säkñiëe—the witness of the actions and reactions of material nature.
O Lord, You do not desire the creation, maintenance or annihilation of this material world, but You perform these activities for the conditioned souls by Your creative energy. Exactly as a piece of iron moves under the influence of a lodestone, inert matter moves when You glance over the total material energy.
Sometimes the question arises why the Supreme Lord has created this material world, which is so full of suffering for the living entities entrapped in it. The answer given herein is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not wish to create this material world just to inflict suffering on the living entities. The Supreme Lord creates this world only because the conditioned souls want to enjoy it.
The workings of nature are not going on automatically. It is only because the Lord glances over the material energy that it acts in wonderful ways, just as a lodestone causes a piece of iron to move here and there. Because materialistic scientists and so-called Säìkhya philosophers do not believe in God, they think that material nature is working without supervision. But that is not the fact. In Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 6.18-19) the creation of the material world is explained as follows:
yadyapi säìkhya mäne 'pradhäna'—käraëa
jaòa ha-ite kabhu nahe jagat-såjana
nija-såñöi-çakti prabhu saïcäre pradhäne
éçvarera çaktye tabe haye ta' nirmäëe
"Atheistic Säìkhya philosophers think that the total material energy causes the cosmic manifestation, but they are wrong. Dead matter has no moving power, and therefore it cannot act independently. The Lord infuses the material ingredients with His own creative potency. Then, by the power of the Lord, matter moves and interacts." Sea waves are moved by the air, the air is created from ether, the ether is produced by the agitation of the three modes of material nature, and the three modes of material nature interact due to the Supreme Lord's glance over the total material energy. Therefore the background of all natural occurrences is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram [Bg. 9.10]). This is also further explained in Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 5.59-61):
jagat-käraëa nahe prakåti jaòa-rüpä
çakti saïcäriyä täre kåñëa kare kåpä
kåñëa-çaktye prakåti haya gauëa käraëa
agni-çaktye lauha yaiche karaye järaëa
ataeva kåñëa müla-jagat-käraëa
prakåti—käraëa yaiche ajä-gala-stana
"Because prakåti [material nature] is dull and inert, it cannot actually be the cause of the material world. Lord Kåñëa shows His mercy by infusing His energy into the dull, inert material nature. Thus prakåti, by the energy of Lord Kåñëa, becomes the secondary cause, just as iron becomes red-hot by the energy of fire. Therefore Lord Kåñëa is the original cause of the cosmic manifestation, prakåti is like the nipples on the neck of a goat, for they cannot give any milk." Thus it is a great mistake on the part of the material scientists and philosophers to think that matter moves independently.
TEXT 39
Pa[MaQYa dETYa& Pa[iTavar<a& Ma*Dae
 Yaae Maa& rSaaYaa JaGadaidSaUk-r" )
k*-TvaGa]d&í\e iNarGaadudNvTa"
 §-I@iàve>a" Pa[<aTaaiSMa Ta& iv>auiMaiTa )) 39 ))
pramathya daityaà prativäraëaà mådhe
yo mäà rasäyä jagad-ädi-sükaraù
kåtvägra-daàñöre niragäd udanvataù
kréòann ivebhaù praëatäsmi taà vibhum iti
pramathya—after killing; daityam—the demon; prativäraëam—most formidable opponent; mådhe—in the fight; yaù—He who; mäm—me (the earth); rasäyäù—fallen to the bottom of the universe; jagat—in this material world; ädi-sükaraù—the original form of a boar; kåtvä—keeping it; agra-daàñöre—on the end of the tusk; niragät—came out of the water; udanvataù—from the Garbhodaka Ocean; kréòan—playing; iva—like; ibhaù—elephant; praëatä asmi—I bow down; tam—to Him; vibhum—the Supreme Lord; iti—thus.
My Lord, as the original boar within this universe, You fought and killed the great demon Hiraëyakña. Then You lifted me [the earth] from the Garbhodaka Ocean on the end of Your tusk, exactly as a sporting elephant plucks a lotus flower from the water. I bow down before You.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Eighteenth Chapter of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "The prayers Offered to the Lord by the Residents of Jambüdvépa."

Song Prayers by Hanumān and others in Kimpuruşa-varsa (SB 5.19.2-8)
TEXT 2
AaiíRze<aeNa Sah GaNDavŒrNauGaqYaMaaNaa& ParMak-LYaa<aq& >aTa*R>aGavTk-Qaa& SaMau‚
Paé*<aaeiTa SvYa& ced& GaaYaiTa )) 2 ))
ärñöiñeëena saha gandharvair anugéyamänäà parama-kalyäëéà bhartå-bhagavat-kathäà samupaçåëoti svayaà cedaà gäyati.
ärñöiñeëena—Ärñöiñeëa, the chief personality of Kimpuruña-varña; saha—along with; gandharvaiù—by a company of Gandharvas; anugéyamänäm—being chanted; parama-kalyäëém—most auspicious; bhartå-bhagavat-kathäm—the glories of his master, who is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead; samupaçåëoti—he hears with great attention; svayam ca—and personally; idam—this; gäyati—chants.
A host of Gandharvas is always engaged in chanting the glories of Lord Rämacandra. That chanting is always extremely auspicious. Along with Ärñöiñeëa, the chief person in Kimpuruña-varña, Hanumänjé constantly hears those glories with complete attention. Hanumän chants the following mantras.
In the Puräëas there are two different opinions concerning Lord Rämacandra. In the Laghu-bhägavatämåta (5.34-36) this is confirmed in the description of the incarnation of Manu.
väsudevädi-rüpäëäm
avatäräù prakértitäù
viñëu-dharmottare räma-
lakñmaëädyäù kramädamé
pädme tu rämo bhagavän
näräyaëa itéritaù
çeñaç cakraà ca çaìkhaç ca
kramät syur lakñmaëädayaù
madhya-deça-sthitäyodhyä-
pure 'sya vasatiù småtä
mahä-vaikuëöhaloke ca
räghavendrasya kértitä
The Viñëu-dharmottara describes that Lord Rämacandra and His brothers—Lakñmaëa, Bharata and Çatrughna—are incarnations of Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha respectively. The Padma Puräëa, however, says that Lord Rämacandra is an incarnation of Näräyaëa and that the other three brothers are incarnations of Çeña, Cakra and Çaìkha. Therefore Çréla Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa has concluded, tad idaà kalpa-bhedenaiva sambhävyam. In other words, these opinions are not contradictory. In some millenniums Lord Rämacandra and His brothers appear as incarnations of Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, and in other millenniums They appear as incarnations of Näräyaëa, Çeña, Cakra and Çaìkha. The residence of Lord Rämacandra on this planet is Ayodhyä. Ayodhyä City is still existing in the district of Faizabad, which is situated on the northern side of Uttar Pradesh.
TEXT 3
p NaMaae >aGavTae otaMaëaek-aYa NaMa AaYaRl/+a<aXaql/v]TaaYa NaMa oPaiXai+a‚
TaaTMaNa oPaaiSaTal/aek-aYa NaMa" SaaDauvadiNak-z<aaYa NaMaae b]ø<YadevaYa
MahaPauåzaYa MaharaJaaYa NaMa wiTa )) 3 ))
oà namo bhagavate uttamaçlokäya nama ärya-lakñaëa-çéla-vratäya nama upaçikñitätmana upäsita-lokäya namaù sädhu-väda-nikañaëäya namo brahmaëya-deväya mahä-puruñäya mahä-räjäya nama iti.
om—O my Lord; namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uttama-çlokäya—who is always worshiped with selected verses; namaù—my respectful obeisances; ärya-lakñaëa-çéla-vratäya—who possesses all the good qualities of advanced personalities; namaù—my respectful obeisances; upaçikñita-ätmane—unto You whose senses are under control; upäsita-lokäya—who is always remembered and worshiped by all the different classes of living entities; namaù—my respectful obeisances; sädhu-väda-nikañaëäya—to the Lord, who is like a stone for examining all the good qualities of a sädhu; namaù—my respectful obeisances; brahmaëya-deväya—who is worshiped by the most qualified brähmaëas; mahä-puruñäya—unto the Supreme Lord, who is worshiped by the puruña-sükta because of being the cause of this material creation; mahä-räjäya—unto the supreme king, or the king of all kings; namaù—my respectful obeisances; iti—thus.
Let me please Your Lordship by chanting the béja-mantra oàkära. I wish to offer my respectful obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead, who is the best among the most highly elevated personalities. Your Lordship is the reservoir of all the good qualities of Äryans, people who are advanced. Your character and behavior are always consistent, and You always control Your senses and mind. Acting just like an ordinary human being, You exhibit exemplary character to teach others how to behave. There is a touchstone that can be used to examine the quality of gold, but You are like a touchstone that can verify all good qualities. You are worshiped by brähmaëas who are the foremost of all devotees. You, the Supreme Person, are the king of kings, and therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 4
YataiÜXauÖaNau>avMaa}aMaek&-
 SvTaeJaSaa ßSTaGau<aVYavSQaMa( )
Pa[TYak( Pa[XaaNTa& SauiDaYaaePal/M>aNa&
 ùNaaMaæPa& iNarh& Pa[PaÛe )) 4 ))
yat tad viçuddhänubhava-mätram ekaà
sva-tejasä dhvasta-guëa-vyavastham
pratyak praçäntaà sudhiyopalambhanaà
hy anäma-rüpaà nirahaà prapadye
yat—which; tat—to that supreme truth; viçuddha—transcendentally pure, without contamination by material nature; anubhava—experience; mätram—that sac-cid-änanda transcendental body; ekam—the one; sva-tejasä—by His own spiritual potency; dhvasta—vanquished; guëa-vyavastham—the influence of the modes of material nature; pratyak—transcendental, not to be seen with material eyes; praçäntam—undisturbed by material agitation; sudhiyä—by Kåñëa consciousness, or purified consciousness, uncontaminated by material desires, fruitive activities and speculative philosophy; upalambhanam—who can be achieved; hi—indeed; anäma-rüpam—without a material name and form; niraham—without a material ego; prapadye—let me offer my respectful obeisances.
The Lord, whose pure form [sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]] is uncontaminated by the modes of material nature, can be perceived by pure consciousness. In the Vedänta He is described as being one without a second. Because of His spiritual potency, He is untouched by the contamination of material nature, and because He is not subjected to material vision, He is known as transcendental. He has no material activities, nor has He a material form or name. Only in pure consciousness, Kåñëa consciousness, can one perceive the transcendental form of the Lord. Let us be firmly fixed at the lotus feet of Lord Rämacandra, and let us offer our respectful obeisances unto those transcendental lotus feet.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, appears in various expansions, as stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.39):
rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan
nänävatäram akarod bhuvaneñu kintu
kåñëaù svayaà samabhavat paramaù pumän yo
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is always situated in various incarnations such as Räma, Nåsiàha and many subincarnations as well but who is the original Personality of Godhead known as Kåñëa and who incarnates personally also." Kåñëa, who is viñëu-tattva, has expanded Himself in many Viñëu forms, of which Lord Rämacandra is one. We know that the viñëu-tattva is carried by the transcendental bird Garuòa and is equipped with different types of weapons in four hands. Therefore we may doubt whether Lord Rämacandra could be in the same category, since He was carried by Hanumän, not by Garuòa, and had neither four hands nor the çaìkha, cakra, gadä and padma. Consequently this verse clarifies that Rämacandra is as good as Kåñëa (rämädi-mürtiñu kalä). Although Kåñëa is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, Rämacandra is not different from Him. Rämacandra is unaffected by the modes of material nature, and therefore He is praçänta, never disturbed by those modes.
Unless one is saturated with love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one cannot appreciate the transcendental value of Lord Rämacandra; one cannot see Him with material eyes. Because demons like Rävaëa have no spiritual vision, they consider Lord Rämacandra an ordinary kñatriya king. Rävaëa therefore attempted to kidnap Lord Rämacandra's eternal consort, Sétädevé. Actually, however, Rävaëa could not carry off Sétädevé in her original form. As soon as she was touched by Rävaëa's hands, she gave him a material form, but she maintained her original form beyond his vision. Therefore in this verse the words pratyak praçäntam indicate that Lord Rämacandra and His potency, the goddess Sétä, keep themselves aloof from the influence of the material energy.
In the Upaniñads it is said: yam evaiña våëute tena labhyaù. (Kaöha Upaniñad 1.2.23.) The Supreme Lord, Paramätmä, the Personality of Godhead, can be seen or perceived only by persons who are saturated with devotional service. As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.38):
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devotee whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternal form of Çyämasundara, situated within the heart of the devotee." Similarly, in the Chändogya Upaniñad it is stated, etäs tisro devatä anena jévena. In this verse of the Chändogya Upaniñad the word anena is used to distinguish the ätmä and Paramätmä as two separate identities. The words tisro devatä indicate that the body of the living entity is made of three material elements—fire, earth and water. Although the Paramätmä enters the heart of the jévätmä, who is influenced and designated by a material body, the Paramätmä has nothing to do with the jévätmä's body. Because the Paramätmä has no material connections, He is described here as anäma-rüpaà niraham. The Paramätmä has no material identity, whereas the jévätmä does. The jévätmä may introduce himself as an Indian, American, German and so on, but the Paramätmä has no such material designations, and therefore He has no material name. The jévätmä is different from his name, but the Paramätmä is not; His name and He Himself are one and the same. This is the meaning of niraham, which means "without material designations." This word cannot possibly be twisted to mean that the Paramätmä has no ahaìkära, no "I-ness" or identity. He has His transcendental identity as the Supreme. This is the explanation given by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé. According to another interpretation, given by Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, niraham means nirniçcayena aham. Niraham does not mean that the Supreme Lord has no identity. Rather, the stress given by the word aham proves strongly that He does have His personal identity because nir not only means "negative" but also means "strong ascertainment."
TEXT 5
MaTYaaRvTaariSTvh MaTYaRiXa+a<a&
 r+aaevDaaYaEv Na ke-vl&/ iv>aae" )
ku-Taae_NYaQaa SYaad]MaTa" Sv AaTMaNa"
 SaqTaak*-TaaiNa VYaSaNaaNaqìrSYa )) 5 ))
martyävatäras tv iha martya-çikñaëaà
rakño-vadhäyaiva na kevalaà vibhoù
kuto 'nyathä syäd ramataù sva ätmanaù
sétä-kåtäni vyasanänéçvarasya
martya—as a human being; avatäraù—whose incarnation; tu—however; iha—in the material world; martya-çikñaëam—for teaching all the living entities, especially human beings; rakñaù-vadhäya—to kill the demon Rävaëa; eva—certainly; na—not; kevalam—only; vibhoù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kutaù—from where; anyathä—otherwise; syät—there would be; ramataù—of one enjoying; sve—in Himself; ätmanaù—the spiritual identity of the universe; sétä—of the wife of Lord Rämacandra; kåtäni—appearing due to the separation; vyasanäni—all the miseries; éçvarasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It was ordained that Rävaëa, chief of the Räkñasas, could not be killed by anyone but a man, and for this reason Lord Rämacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appeared in the form of a human being. Lord Rämacandra's mission, however, was not only to kill Rävaëa but also to teach mortal beings that material happiness centered around sex life or centered around one's wife is the cause of many miseries. He is the self-sufficient Supreme Personality of Godhead, and nothing is lamentable for Him. Therefore why else could He be subjected to tribulations by the kidnapping of mother Sétä?
When the Lord appears in this universe in the form of a human being, He has two purposes, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä [Bg. 4.8]—pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm: to destroy the demons and protect the devotees. To protect the devotees, the Lord not only satisfies them by His personal presence but also teaches them so that they will not fall down from devotional service. By His personal example, Lord Rämacandra taught the devotees that it is better not to enter married life, which is certainly followed by many tribulations. As confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (7.9.45):
yan maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi tucchaà
kaëòüyanena karayor iva duùkha-duùkham
tåpyanti neha kåpaëä bahu-duùkha-bhäjaù
kaëòütivan manasijaà viñaheta-dhéraù
Kåpaëas, those who are not advanced in spiritual knowledge and who are therefore just the opposite of brähmaëas, generally take to family life, which is a concession for sex. Thus they enjoy sex again and again, although that sex is followed by many tribulations. This is a warning to devotees. To teach this lesson to devotees and to human society in general, Lord Çré Rämacandra, although the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, underwent a series of tribulations because He accepted a wife, mother Sétä. Lord Rämacandra underwent these austerities, of course, only to instruct us; actually He never has any reason to lament for anything.
Another aspect of the Lord's instructions is that one who accepts a wife must be a faithful husband and give her full protection. Human society is divided into two classes of men—those who strictly follow the religious principles and those who are devotees. By His personal example, Lord Rämacandra wanted to instruct both of them how to fully adopt the discipline of the religious system and how to be a beloved and dutiful husband. Otherwise He had no reason to undergo apparent tribulations. One who strictly follows religious principles must not neglect to provide all facilities for the complete protection of his wife. There may be some suffering because of this, but one must nevertheless endure it. That is the duty of a faithful husband. By His personal example, Lord Rämacandra demonstrated this duty. Lord Rämacandra could have produced hundreds and thousands of Sétäs from His pleasure energy, but just to show the duty of a faithful husband, He not only rescued Sétä from the hands of Rävaëa but also killed Rävaëa and all the members of his family.
Another aspect of the teachings of Lord Rämacandra is that although Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His devotees may apparently suffer from material tribulations, they have nothing to do with such tribulations. They are mukta-puruñas, liberated persons, under all circumstances. It is therefore said in the Caitanya-bhägavata: (CB Madhya-khaëòa 9.240):
yata dekha vaiñëavera vyavahära duùkha
niçcaya jäniha tähä paramänanda-sukha
A Vaiñëava is always firmly situated in transcendental bliss because of engagement in devotional service. Although he may appear to suffer material pains, his position is called transcendental bliss in separation (viraha). The emotions a lover and beloved feel when separated from one another are actually very blissful, although apparently painful. Therefore the separation of Lord Rämacandra from Sétädevé, as well as the consequent tribulation they suffered, is but another display of transcendental bliss. That is the opinion of Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura.
TEXT 6
Na vE Sa AaTMaaTMavTaa& SauôtaMa"
 Sa¢-iñl/aeKYaa& >aGavaNa( vaSaudev" )
Na ñqk*-Ta& k-XMal/MaénuvqTa
 Na l/+Ma<a& caiPa ivhaTauMahRiTa )) 6 ))
na vai sa ätmätmavatäà suhåttamaù
saktas tri-lokyäà bhagavän väsudevaù
na stré-kåtaà kaçmalam açnuvéta
na lakñmaëaà cäpi vihätum arhati
na—not; vai—indeed; saù—He; ätmä—the Supreme Soul; ätmavatäm—of the self-realized souls; suhåt-tamaù—the best friend; saktaù—attached; tri-lokyäm—to anything within the three worlds; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; väsudevaù—the all-pervading Lord; na—not; stré-kåtam—obtained because of His wife; kaçmalam—sufferings of separation; açnuvéta—would obtain; na—not; lakñmaëam—His younger brother Lakñmaëa; ca—also; api—certainly; vihätum—to give up; arhati—be able.
Since Lord Çré Rämacandra is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, He is not attached to anything in this material world. He is the most beloved Supersoul of all self-realized souls, and He is their very intimate friend. He is full of all opulences. Therefore He could not possibly have suffered because of separation from His wife, nor could He have given up His wife and Lakñmaëa, His younger brother. To give up either would have been absolutely impossible.
In defining the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we say that He is full in all six opulences—wealth, fame, strength, influence, beauty and renunciation. He is called renounced because He is not attached to anything in this material world; He is specifically attached to the spiritual world and the living entities there. The affairs of the material world take place under the superintendence of Durgädevé (såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä/ chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni bibharti durgä [Bs. 5.44]). Everything is going on under the strict rules and regulations of the material energy, represented by Durgä. Therefore the Lord is completely detached and need not give attention to the material world. Sétädevé belongs to the spiritual world. Similarly, Lord Lakñmaëa, Rämacandra's younger brother, is a manifestation of Saìkarñaëa, and Lord Rämacandra Himself is Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Since the Lord is always spiritually qualified, He is attached to servants who always render transcendental loving service unto Him. He is attached to the truth in life, not to brahminical qualities. Indeed, He is never attached to any material qualities. Although He is the Supersoul of all living entities, He is specifically manifest to those who are self-realized, and He is especially dear to the hearts of His transcendental devotees. Because Lord Rämacandra descended to teach human society how dutiful a king should be, He apparently gave up the company of mother Sétä and Lakñmaëa. Factually, however, He could not have given them up. One should therefore learn about the activities of Lord Rämacandra from a self-realized soul. Then one can understand the transcendental activities of the Lord.
TEXT 7
Na JaNMa NaUNa& MahTaae Na SaaE>aGa&
 Na vax( Na buiÖNaaRk*-iTaSTaaezheTau" )
TaEYaRiÜSa*íaNaiPa Naae vNaaEk-Sa‚
 êk-ar Sa:Yae bTa l/+Ma<aaGa]Ja" )) 7 ))
na janma nünaà mahato na saubhagaà
na väì na buddhir näkåtis toña-hetuù
tair yad visåñöän api no vanaukasaç
cakära sakhye bata lakñmaëägrajaù
na—not; janma—birth in a very polished, aristocratic family; nünam—indeed; mahataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na—nor; saubhagam—great fortune; na—nor; väk—an elegant manner of speaking; na—nor; buddhiù—sharpness of intelligence; na—not; äkåtiù—features of the body; toña-hetuù—the cause of pleasure to the Lord; taiù—by all those above-mentioned qualities; yat—because; visåñöän—rejected; api—although; naù—us; vana-okasaù—the inhabitants of the forest; cakära—accepted; sakhye—in friendship; bata—alas; lakñmaëa-agra-jaù—Lord Çré Rämacandra, the elder brother of Lakñmaëa.
One cannot establish a friendship with the Supreme Lord Rämacandra on the basis of material qualities such as one's birth in an aristocratic family, one's personal beauty, one's eloquence, one's sharp intelligence or one's superior race or nation. None of these qualifications is actually a prerequisite for friendship with Lord Çré Rämacandra. Otherwise how is it possible that although we uncivilized inhabitants of the forest have not taken noble births, although we have no physical beauty and although we cannot speak like gentlemen, Lord Rämacandra has nevertheless accepted us as friends?
In a prayer to Kåñëa expressing her feelings, Çrématé Kuntédevé called Him akiïcana-gocara. The prefix a means "not," and kiïcana "something of this material world." One may be very proud of his prestigious position, material wealth, beauty, education and so on, but although these are certainly good qualifications in material dealings, they are not necessary for achieving friendship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who possesses all these material qualities is expected to become a devotee, and when he actually does, the qualities are properly utilized. Those who are puffed up by a high birth, wealth, education and personal beauty (janmaiçvarya-çruta-çré [SB 1.8.26]) unfortunately do not care for developing Kåñëa consciousness, nor does the Supreme Personality of Godhead care about all these material qualifications. The Supreme Lord is achieved by devotion (bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti [Bg. 18.55]). One's devotion and sincere desire to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead are the only qualifications. Rüpa Gosvämé has also said that the price for achieving God's favor is simply one's sincere eagerness to have it (laulyam ekaà mülyam). In the Caitanya-bhägavata (Madhya-khaëòa 23.492–3) it is said:
kholävecä sevakera dekha bhägya-sémä
brahmä çiva käìde yära dekhiyä mahimä
[CB Madhya-khanda 23.492]
dhane jane päëòitye kåñnere nähi päi
kevala bhaktira vaça caitanya-gosäïi
[CB Madhya-khanda 23.493]
"Behold the great fortune of the devotee Kholävecä. Lord Brahmä and Çiva shed tears upon seeing his greatness. One cannot attain Lord Kåñëa by any amount of wealth, followers, or learning. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is controlled only by pure devotion." Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu had a very sincere devotee whose name was Kholävecä Çrédhara and whose only business was to sell pots made of the skin of banana trees. Whatever income he had, he used fifty percent for the worship of mother Ganges, and with the other fifty percent he provided for his necessities. On the whole, he was so very poor that he lived in a cottage that had a broken roof with many holes in it. He could not afford brass utensils, and therefore he drank water from an iron pot. Nevertheless, he was a great devotee of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. He is a typical example of how a poor man with no material possessions can become a most exalted devotee of the Lord. The conclusion is that one cannot attain shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa or Çré Caitanya Gosäïi through material opulence; that shelter is attainable only by pure devotional service.
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänu-
çélanaà bhaktir uttamä
 [Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
TEXT 8
Saurae_Saurae vaPYaQa vaNarae Nar"
 SavaRTMaNaa Ya" Sauk*-TajMautaMaMa( )
>aJaeTa raMa& MaNauJaak*-iTa& hir„&
 Ya otaraNaNaYaTk-aeSal/aiNdviMaiTa )) 8 ))
suro 'suro väpy atha vänaro naraù
sarvätmanä yaù sukåtajïam uttamam
bhajeta rämaà manujäkåtià harià
ya uttarän anayat kosalän divam iti
suraù—demigod; asuraù—demon; vä api—or; atha—therefore; vä—or; anaraù—other than a human being (bird, beast, animal and so on); naraù—a human being; sarva-ätmanä—wholeheartedly; yaù—who; su-kåtajïam—easily made grateful; uttamam—most highly elevated; bhajeta—should worship; rämam—Lord Rämacandra; manuja-äkåtim—appearing as a human being; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaù—who; uttarän—of northern India; anayat—brought back; kosalän—the inhabitants of Kosala-deça, Ayodhyä; divam—to the spiritual world, Vaikuëöha; iti—thus.
Therefore, whether one is a demigod or a demon, a man or a creature other than man, such as a beast or bird, everyone should worship Lord Rämacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who appears on this earth just like a human being. There is no need of great austerities or penances to worship the Lord, for He accepts even a small service offered by His devotee. Thus He is satisfied, and as soon as He is satisfied, the devotee is successful. Indeed, Lord Çré Rämacandra brought all the devotees of Ayodhyä back home, back to Godhead [Vaikuëöha].
Lord Çré Rämacandra is so kind and merciful to His devotees that He is very easily satisfied by a little service rendered by anyone, human or not. This is the special advantage of worshiping Lord Rämacandra, and there is the same advantage in worshiping Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Lord Kåñëa and Lord Rämacandra, in the manner of kñatriyas, sometimes showed Their mercy by killing asuras, but Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu awarded love of God without difficulty even to the asuras. All the incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead—but especially Lord Rämacandra, Lord Kåñëa and, later, Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu—delivered many of the living entities present before Them, indeed almost all of them. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is therefore represented in the six-armed form of ñaò-bhüja-mürti, which is a combination of Lord Rämacandra, Lord Kåñëa and Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. The best purpose of human life can be fulfilled by worshiping the ñaò-bhüja-mürti, the form of the Lord with six arms-two arms of Rämacandra, two arms of Kåñëa and two arms of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.

Song Prayers by Sri Nārada to Nara-Nārāyaṇa Rși in Bhārata-varsa (SB 5.19.11-15)
TEXT 11
p NaMaae >aGavTae oPaXaMaXaql/aYaaeParTaaNaaTMYaaYa NaMaae_ik-ÄNaivtaaYa
‰iz‰z>aaYa NarNaaraYa<aaYa ParMah&SaParMaGaurve AaTMaaraMaaiDaPaTaYae NaMaae
NaMa wiTa )) 11 ))
oà namo bhagavate upaçama-çéläyoparatänätmyäya namo 'kiïcana-vittäya åñi-åñabhäya nara-näräyaëäya paramahaàsa-parama-gurave ätmärämädhipataye namo nama iti.
om—O Supreme Lord; namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upaçama-çéläya—who has mastered the senses; uparata-anätmyäya—having no attachment for this material world; namaù—my respectful obeisances; akiïcana-vittäya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the only asset of persons who have no material possessions; åñi-åñabhäya—the most exalted of saintly persons; nara-näräyaëäya—Nara-Näräyaëa; paramahaàsa-parama-gurave—the most exalted spiritual master of all paramahaàsas, liberated persons; ätmäräma-adhipataye—the best of self-realized persons; namaù namaù—my respectful obeisances again and again; iti—thus.
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Nara-Näräyaëa, the best of all saintly persons, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the most self-controlled and self-realized, He is free from false prestige, and He is the asset of persons who have no material possessions. He is the spiritual master of all paramahaàsas, who are the most exalted human beings, and He is the master of the self-realized. Let me offer my repeated obeisances at His lotus feet.
TEXT 12
GaaYaiTa cedMa(ƒƒ
k-TaaRSYa SaGaaRidzu Yaae Na bDYaTae
 Na hNYaTae dehGaTaae_iPa dEihkE-" )
d]íuNaR d*GYaSYa Gau<aEivRdUZYaTae
 TaSMaE NaMaae_Sa¢-iviv¢-Saai+a<ae )) 12 ))
gäyati cedam—
kartäsya sargädiñu yo na badhyate
na hanyate deha-gato 'pi daihikaiù
drañöur na dåg yasya guëair vidüñyate
tasmai namo 'sakta-vivikta-säkñiëe
gäyati—he sings; ca—and; idam—this; kartä—the executor; asya—of this cosmic manifestation; sarga-ädiñu—of the creation, maintenance and destruction; yaù—one who; na badhyate—is not attached as the creator, master or proprietor; na—not; hanyate—is victimized; deha-gataù api—although appearing as a human being; daihikaiù—by bodily tribulations such as hunger, thirst and fatigue; drañöuù—of Him who is the seer of everything; na—not; dåk—the power of vision; yasya—of whom; guëaiù—by the material qualities; vidüñyate—is polluted; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—my respectful obeisances; asakta—unto the Supreme person, who is unattached; vivikta—without affection; säkñiëe—the witness of everything.
Närada, the most powerful saintly sage, also worships Nara-Näräyaëa by chanting the following mantra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this visible cosmic manifestation, yet He is completely free from false prestige. Although to the foolish He appears to have accepted a material body like us, He is unaffected by bodily tribulations like hunger, thirst and fatigue. Although He is the witness who sees everything, His senses are unpolluted by the objects He sees. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto that unattached, pure witness of the world, the Supreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is described as sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], the body of eternity, transcendental bliss and full knowledge. Now in this verse He is more fully described. Kåñëa is the creator of the entire cosmic manifestation, yet He is unattached to it. If we were to construct a very tall skyscraper, we would be very attached to it, but Kåñëa is so renounced that although He has created everything, He is not attached to anything (na badhyate). Furthermore, although Kåñëa has His transcendental form, sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], He is not disturbed by the bodily necessities of life, which are called daihika; for example, He is never hungry, thirsty or fatigued (na hanyate deha-gato 'pi daihikaiù). Then again, since everything is Kåñëa's property, He sees everything and is present everywhere, but because His body is transcendental, He is above vision, the objects of vision and the process of vision. When we see someone beautiful, we are attracted. The sight of a beautiful woman immediately attracts a man, and the sight of a man naturally attracts a woman. Kåñëa, however, is transcendental to all these faults. Although He is the seer of everything, He is not afflicted with faulty vision (na dåg yasya guëair vidüñyate). Therefore, although He is the witness and seer, He is aloof from all affection for the activities He sees. He is always unattached and separate; He is only a witness.
TEXT 13
wd& ih YaaeGaeìr YaaeGaNaEPau<a&
 ihr<YaGa>aaeR >aGavaÅGaad YaTa( )
YadNTak-ale/ TviYa iNaGauR<ae MaNaae
 >a¢-ya dDaqTaaeiJ‡TaduZk-le/vr" )) 13 ))
idaà hi yogeçvara yoga-naipuëaà
hiraëyagarbho bhagaväï jagäda yat
yad anta-käle tvayi nirguëe mano
bhaktyä dadhétojjhita-duñkalevaraù
idam—this; hi—certainly; yoga-éçvara—O my Lord, master of all mystic power; yoga-naipuëam—the expert process of executing yogic principles; hiraëya-garbhaù—Lord Brahmä; bhagavän—the most powerful; jagäda—spoke; yat—which; yat—which; anta-käle—at the time of death; tvayi—in You; nirguëe—the transcendence; manaù—the mind; bhaktyä—with a devotional attitude; dadhéta—one should place; ujjhita-duñkalevaraù—having given up his identification with the material body.
O my Lord, master of all mystic yoga, this is the explanation of the yogic process spoken of by Lord Brahmä [Hiraëyagarbha], who is self-realized. At the time of death, all yogés give up the material body with full detachment simply by placing their minds at Your lotus feet. That is the perfection of yoga.
Çréla Madhväcärya says:
yasya samyag bhagavati
jïänaà bhaktis tathaiva ca
niçcintas tasya mokñaù syät
sarva-päpa-kåto 'pi tu
"For one who very seriously practices devotional service during his lifetime in order to understand the constitutional position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, liberation from this material world is guaranteed, even if he has previously been addicted to sinful habits." This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä:
api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù
"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly situated." (Bg. 9.30) The only purpose of life is to be fully absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa and His form, pastimes, activities and qualities. If one is able to think of Kåñëa in this way, twenty-four hours a day, he is already liberated (svarüpeëa vyavasthitiù [SB 2.10.6]). Whereas materialists are absorbed in material thoughts and activities, devotees, on the contrary, are always absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa and Kåñëa's activities. Therefore they are already on the platform of liberation. One has to think of Kåñëa with full absorption at the time of death. Then he will certainly return home, back to Godhead, without a doubt.
TEXT 14
YaQaEihk-aMauiZMak-k-aMal/MPa$="
 SauTaezu darezu DaNaezu icNTaYaNa( )
XaªeTa ivÜaNa( ku-k-le/vraTYaYaad(
 YaSTaSYa YaÒ" é[Ma Wv ke-vl/Ma( )) 14 ))
yathaihikämuñmika-käma-lampaöaù
suteñu däreñu dhaneñu cintayan
çaìketa vidvän kukalevarätyayäd
yas tasya yatnaù çrama eva kevalam
yathä—as; aihika—in the present life; amuñmika—in the expected future life; käma-lampaöaù—a person who is very attached to lusty desires for bodily enjoyment; suteñu—children; däreñu—wife; dhaneñu—wealth; cintayan—thinking about; çaìketa—is afraid; vidvän—a person advanced in spiritual knowledge; ku-kalevara—of this body, which is full of stool and urine; atyayät—because of loss; yaù—anyone; tasya—his; yatnaù—endeavors; çramaù—a waste of time and energy; eva—certainly; kevalam—only.
Materialists are generally very attached to their present bodily comforts and to the bodily comforts they expect in the future. Therefore they are always absorbed in thoughts of their wives, children and wealth and are afraid of giving up their bodies, which are full of stool and urine. If a person engaged in Kåñëa consciousness, however, is also afraid of giving up his body, what is the use of his having labored to study the çästras? It was simply a waste of time.
At the time of death a materialist thinks of his wife and children. He is absorbed in thinking of how they will live and who will take care of them after he leaves. Consequently he is never prepared to give up his body; rather, he wants to continue to live in his body to serve his society, family, friends and so on. Therefore by practicing the mystic yoga system one must become detached from bodily relationships. If despite practicing bhakti-yoga and studying all the Vedic literature one is afraid of giving up his bad body, which is the cause of all his suffering, what is the use of his attempts to advance in spiritual life? The secret of success in practicing yoga is to become free from bodily attachments. Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura says, deha-småti nähi yära, saàsära-bandhana kähäì tära: one whose practice has freed him from the anxieties of bodily needs is no longer in conditional life. Such a person is freed from conditional bondage. A person in Kåñëa consciousness must fully discharge his devotional duties without material attachment. Then his liberation is guaranteed.
TEXT 15
Taà" Pa[>aae Tv& ku-k-le/vraiPaRTaa&
 TvNMaaYaYaah&MaMaTaaMaDaae+aJa )
i>aNÛaMa YaeNaaXau vYa& Saudui>aRda&
 ivDaeih YaaeGa& TviYa Na" Sv>aaviMaiTa )) 15 ))
tan naù prabho tvaà kukalevarärpitäà
tvan-mäyayähaà-mamatäm adhokñaja
bhindyäma yenäçu vayaà sudurbhidäà
vidhehi yogaà tvayi naù svabhävam iti
tat—therefore; naù—our; prabho—O my Lord; tvam—You; ku-kalevara-arpitäm—invested in this bad body full of stool and urine; tvat-mäyayä—by Your illusory energy; aham-mamatäm—the conception of "I and my"; adhokñaja—O Transcendence; bhindyäma—may give up; yena—by which; äçu—very soon; vayam—we; sudurbhidäm—which is very difficult to give up; vidhehi—please give; yogam—the mystic process; tvayi—unto You; naù—our; svabhävam—which is symptomized by a steady mind; iti—thus.
Therefore, O Lord, O Transcendence, kindly help us by giving us the power to execute bhakti-yoga so that we can control our restless minds and fix them upon You. We are all infected by Your illusory energy; therefore we are very attached to the body, which is full of stool and urine, and to anything related with the body. Except for devotional service, there is no way to give up this attachment. Therefore kindly bestow upon us this benediction.
The Lord advises in Bhagavad-gétä: man-manä bhava mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. The perfect yoga system consists of always thinking of Kåñëa, always engaging in devotional service, always worshiping Kåñëa and always offering obeisances unto Him. Unless we practice this yoga system, our illusory attachment for this bad body, which is full of stool and urine, is impossible to give up. The perfection of yoga consists of giving up attachment for this body and bodily relationships and transferring that attachment to Kåñëa. We are very attached to material enjoyment, but when we transfer that same attachment to Kåñëa, we traverse the path of liberation. One has to practice this yoga system and none other.

Song Demigods Glorification of Birth in Bhārata-varsa (SB 5.19.21-27)
TEXT 21
WTadev ih deva GaaYaiNTaƒƒ
Ahae AMaqza& ik-Mak-air Xaae>aNa&
 Pa[Saà Wza& iSvduTa SvYa& hir" )
YaEJaRNMa l/BDa& Na*zu >aarTaaiJare
 Mauku-NdSaevaEPaiYak&- SPa*ha ih Na" )) 21 ))
etad eva hi devä gäyanti—
aho améñäà kim akäri çobhanaà
prasanna eñäà svid uta svayaà hariù
yair janma labdhaà nåñu bhäratäjire
mukunda-sevaupayikaà spåhä hi naù
etat—this; eva—indeed; hi—certainly; deväù—all the demigods; gäyanti—chant; aho—oh; améñäm—of these inhabitants of Bhärata-varña; kim—what; akäri—was done; çobhanam—pious, beautiful activities; prasannaù—pleased; eñäm—upon them; svit—or; uta—it is said; svayam—personally; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaiù—by whom; janma—birth; labdham—obtained; nåñu—in human society; bhärata-ajire—in the courtyard of Bhärata-varña; mukunda—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can offer liberation; sevä-aupayikam—which is the means of serving; spåhä—desire; hi—indeed; naù—our.
Since the human form of life is the sublime position for spiritual realization, all the demigods in heaven speak in this way: How wonderful it is for these human beings to have been born in the land of Bhärata-varña. They must have executed pious acts of austerity in the past, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself must have been pleased with them. Otherwise, how could they engage in devotional service in so many ways? We demigods can only aspire to achieve human births in Bhärata-varña to execute devotional service, but these human beings are already engaged there.
These facts are further explained in Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 9.41):
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
"One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India [Bhärata-varña] should make his life successful and work for the benefit of all other people."
There are many facilities in India, Bhärata-varña, for executing devotional service. In Bhärata-varña, all the äcäryas contributed their experience, and Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu personally appeared to teach the people of Bhärata-varña how to progress in spiritual life and be fixed in devotional service to the Lord. From all points of view, Bhärata-varña is the special land where one can very easily understand the process of devotional service and adopt it to make his life successful. If one makes his life successful in devotional service and then preaches devotional service in other parts of the world, people throughout the world will actually benefit.
TEXT 22
ik&- duZk-rENaR" §-Taui>aSTaPaaev]TaE‚
 daRNaaidi>avaR ÛuJaYaeNa f-LGauNaa )
Na Ya}a NaaraYa<aPaadPaªJa‚
 SMa*iTa" Pa[MauíaiTaXaYaeiNd]YaaeTSavaTa( )) 22 ))
kià duñkarair naù kratubhis tapo-vratair
dänädibhir vä dyujayena phalgunä
na yatra näräyaëa-päda-paìkaja-
småtiù pramuñöätiçayendriyotsavät
kim—what is the value; duñkaraiù—very difficult to perform; naù—our; kratubhiù—with performances of sacrifice; tapaù—with austerities; vrataiù—vows; däna-ädibhiù—with executing charitable activities and so on; vä—or; dyujayena—with achieving the heavenly kingdom; phalgunä—which is insignificant; na—no; yatra—where; näräyaëa-päda-paìkaja—of the lotus feet of Lord Näräyaëa; småtiù—the remembrance; pramuñöa—lost; atiçaya—excessive; indriya-utsavät—due to material sense gratification.
The demigods continue: After performing the very difficult tasks of executing Vedic ritualistic sacrifices, undergoing austerities, observing vows and giving charity, we have achieved this position as inhabitants of the heavenly planets. But what is the value of this achievement? Here we are certainly very engaged in material sense gratification, and therefore we can hardly remember the lotus feet of Lord Näräyaëa. Indeed, because of our excessive sense gratification, we have almost forgotten His lotus feet.
The land of Bhärata-varña is so exalted that by taking birth there one can not only attain the heavenly planets but also go directly back home, back to Godhead. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.25):
yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm
"Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me will live with Me." People in the land of Bhärata-varña generally follow the Vedic principles and consequently perform great sacrifices by which they can be elevated to the heavenly planets. However, what is the use of such great attainments? As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.21), kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti: after the results of one's sacrifices, charity and other pious activities expire, one must return to the lower planetary systems and again feel the pangs of birth and death. However, one who becomes Kåñëa conscious can go back to Kåñëa (yänti-mad-yäjino 'pi mäm [Bg. 9.25]). Therefore the demigods even regret having been elevated to the higher planetary systems. The denizens of the heavenly planets regret that they could not take full advantage of being born in the land of Bhärata-varña. Instead, they became captivated by a higher standard of sense gratification, and therefore they forgot the lotus feet of Lord Näräyaëa at the time of death. The conclusion is that one who has taken birth in the land of Bhärata-varña must follow the instructions given personally by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yad gatvä na nivartante tad dhäma paramaà mama [Bg. 15.6]. One should try to return home, back to Godhead, to the Vaikuëöha planets—or to the topmost Vaikuëöha planet, Goloka Våndävana—to live eternally in full, blissful knowledge in the company of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 23
k-LPaaYauza& SQaaNaJaYaaTPauNa>aRvaTa(
 +a<aaYauza& >aarTa>aUJaYaae vrMa( )
+a<aeNa MaTYaeRNa k*-Ta& MaNaiSvNa"
 SaNNYaSYa Sa&YaaNTYa>aYa& Pad& hre" )) 23 ))
kalpäyuñäà sthänajayät punar-bhavät
kñaëäyuñäà bhärata-bhüjayo varam
kñaëena martyena kåtaà manasvinaù
sannyasya saàyänty abhayaà padaà hareù
kalpa-äyuñäm—of those who have a life duration of many millions of years, like Lord Brahmä; sthäna-jayät—than achievement of the place or planetary systems; punaù-bhavät—which is liable to birth, death and old age; kñaëa-äyuñäm—of persons who have only one hundred years of life; bhärata-bhü-jayaù—a birth in the land of Bhärata-varña; varam—more valuable; kñaëena—for such a short life; martyena—by the body; kåtam—the work executed; manasvinaù—those actually understanding the value of life; sannyasya—surrendering unto the lotus feet of Kåñëa; saàyänti—they achieve; abhayam—where there is no anxiety; padam—the abode; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
A short life in the land of Bharata-varña is preferable to a life achieved in Brahmaloka for millions and billions of years because even if one is elevated to Brahmaloka he must return to repeated birth and death. Although life in Bhärata-varña, in a lower planetary system, is very short, one who lives there can elevate himself to full Kåñëa consciousness and achieve the highest perfection, even in this short life, by fully surrendering unto the lotus feet of the Lord. Thus one attains Vaikuëöhaloka, where there is neither anxiety nor repeated birth in a material body.
This is further confirmation of the statement given by Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu:
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
 [Cc. Ädi 9.41]
One who has taken birth in the land of Bhärata-varña has a full opportunity to study the direct instructions given by Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä and thus finally decide what to do in his human form of life. One should certainly give up all other propositions and surrender to Kåñëa. Kåñëa will then immediately take charge and relieve one of the results of past sinful life (ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù [Bg. 18.66]). Therefore one should take to Kåñëa consciousness, as Kåñëa Himself recommends. Man-manä bhava mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru: [Bg. 18.65] "Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer Me obeisances." This is very easy, even for a child. Why not take this path? One should try to follow the instructions of Kåñëa exactly and thus become fully eligible to be promoted to the kingdom of God (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti so'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]). One should go directly to Kåñëa and engage in His service. This is the best opportunity offered to the inhabitants of Bhärata-varña. One who is fit to return home, back to Godhead, is no longer liable to the results of karma, good or bad.
TEXT 24
Na Ya}a vEku-<#=k-QaaSauDaaPaGaa
 Na SaaDavae >aaGavTaaSTadaé[Yaa" )
Na Ya}a YajeXaMa%a MahaeTSava"
 SaureXal/aek-ae_iPa Na vE Sa SaeVYaTaaMa( )) 24 ))
na yatra vaikuëöha-kathä-sudhäpagä
na sädhavo bhägavatäs tad-äçrayäù
na yatra yajïeça-makhä mahotsaväù
sureça-loko 'pi na vai sa sevyatäm
na—not; yatra—where; vaikuëöha-kathä-sudhä-äpagäù—the nectarean rivers of discussions about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is called Vaikuëöha, or one who drives away all anxiety; na—nor; sädhavaù—devotees; bhägavatäù—always engaged in the service of the Lord; tat-äçrayäù—who are sheltered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na—nor; yatra—where; yajïa-éça-makhäù—the performance of devotional service to the Lord of sacrifices; mahä-utsaväù—which are actual festivals; sureça-lokaù—a place inhabited by the denizens of heaven; api—although; na—not; vai—certainly; saù—that; sevyatäm—be frequented.
An intelligent person does not take interest in a place, even in the topmost planetary system, if the pure Ganges of topics concerning the Supreme Lord's activities does not flow there, if there are not devotees engaged in service on the banks of such a river of piety, or if there are no festivals of saìkértana-yajïa to satisfy the Lord [especially since saìkértana-yajïa is recommended in this age].
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu appeared in the land of Bhärata-varña, specifically in Bengal, in the district of Nadia, where Navadvépa is situated. It is therefore to be concluded, as stated by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura, that within this universe this earth is the best planet and that on this planet the land of Bhärata-varña is the best; in the land of Bhärata-varña, Bengal is still better, in Bengal the district of Nadia is still better, and in Nadia the best place is Navadvépa because Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu appeared there to inaugurate the performance of the sacrifice of chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra. The çästras recommend:
kåñëa-varëaà tviñäkåñëaà
säìgopäìgästra-pärñadam
yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair
yajanti hi sumedhasaù
 [SB 11.5.32]
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is always accompanied by His very confidential associates such as Çré Nityänanda, Çré Gadädhara and Çré Advaita and by many devotees like Çréväsa. They are always engaged in chanting the name of the Lord and are always describing Lord Kåñëa. Therefore this is the best among all the places in the universe. The Kåñëa consciousness movement has established its center in Mäyäpur, the birthsite of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, to give men the great opportunity to go there and perform a constant festival of saìkértana-yajïa, as recommended herein (yajïeça-makhä mahotsaväù), and to distribute prasäda to millions of hungry people hankering for spiritual emancipation. This is the mission of the Kåñëa consciousness movement. Caitanya-bhägavata confirms this as follows: "One should not desire to be elevated even to a place in the heavenly planetary systems if it has no propaganda to expand the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, no trace of Vaiñëavas, pure devotees of the Lord, and no festivals for spreading Kåñëa consciousness. It would be better to live perpetually cramped within the airtight bag of a mother's womb, where one can at least remember the lotus feet of the Lord, than to live in a place where there is no opportunity to remember His lotus feet. I pray not to be allowed to take birth in such a condemned place." Similarly, in Caitanya-caritämåta, Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja Gosvämé says that since Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is the inaugurator of the saìkértana movement, anyone who performs saìkértana to please the Lord is very, very glorious. Such a person has perfect intelligence, whereas others are in the ignorance of material existence. Of all the sacrifices mentioned in the Vedic literatures, the performance of saìkértana-yajïa is the best. Even the performance of one hundred açvamedha sacrifices cannot compare to the sacrifice of saìkértana. According to the author of Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, if one compares saìkértana-yajïa to other yajïas, he is a päñaëòé, an infidel, and is liable to be punished by Yamaräja. There are many Mäyävädés who think that the performance of saìkértana-yajïa is a pious activity similar to the performance of the açvamedha-yajïa and other such pious functions, but this is a näma-aparädha. Chanting of the holy name of Näräyaëa and chanting of other names are never equal, despite what Mäyävädés think.
TEXT 25
Pa[aáa Na*JaaiTa& iTvh Yae c JaNTavae
 jaNai§-Yaad]VYak-l/aPaSaM>a*TaaMa( )
Na vE YaTaeràPauNa>aRvaYa Tae
 >aUYaae vNaaEk-a wv YaaiNTa bNDaNaMa( )) 25 ))
präptä nå-jätià tv iha ye ca jantavo
jïäna-kriyä-dravya-kaläpa-sambhåtäm
na vai yaterann apunar-bhaväya te
bhüyo vanaukä iva yänti bandhanam
präptäù—who have obtained; nå-jätim—a birth in human society; tu—certainly; iha—in this land of Bhärata-varña; ye—those who; ca—also; jantavaù—the living beings; jïäna—with knowledge; kriyä—with activities; dravya—of ingredients; kaläpa—with a collection; sambhåtäm—full; na—not; vai—certainly; yateran—endeavor; apunaù-bhaväya—for the position of immortality; te—such persons; bhüyaù—again; vanaukäù—birds; iva—like; yänti—go; bandhanam—to bondage.
Bhärata-varña offers the proper land and circumstances in which to execute devotional service, which can free one from the results of jïäna and karma. If one obtains a human body in the land of Bhärata-varña, with clear sensory organs with which to execute the saìkértana-yajïa, but in spite of this opportunity he does not take to devotional service, he is certainly like liberated forest animals and birds that are careless and are therefore again bound by a hunter.
In the land of Bhärata-varña one can very easily perform the saìkértana-yajïa, which consists of çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23], or one can perform other methods of devotional service, such as smaraëaà vandanaà arcanaà däsyaà sakhyam and ätma-nivedanam. In Bhärata-varña one has the opportunity to visit many holy places, especially Lord Caitanya's birthsite and Lord Kåñëa's birthsite—Navadvépa and Våndävana—where there are many pure devotees who have no desire other than to execute devotional service (anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]), and one may thus become free from the bondage of material conditions. Other paths, such as the path of jïäna and the path of karma, are not very profitable. Pious activities can elevate one to the higher planetary systems, and by speculative knowledge one can merge into the Brahman existence, but that is not real profit, for one has to come down again even from the liberated condition of being merged in Brahman and certainly one must come down from the heavenly kingdom. One should endeavor to go back home, back to Godhead (yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm [Bg. 9.25]). Otherwise there is no difference between human life and the lives of jungle animals and birds. Animals and birds also have freedom, but because of their lower birth they cannot use it. Taking advantage of all the facilities offered him, a human being who has taken birth in the land of Bhärata-varña should become a fully enlightened devotee and go back home, back to Godhead. This is the subject matter of the Kåñëa consciousness movement. The inhabitants of places other than Bhärata-varña have facilities for material enjoyment, but they do not have the same facility to take to Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has advised that one who has taken birth as a human being in Bhärata-varña must first realize himself as a part and parcel of Kåñëa and after taking to Kåñëa consciousness he must distribute this knowledge all over the world.
TEXT 26
YaE" é[ÖYaa bihRiz >aaGaXaae hiv‚
 iNaRåáiMaí& iviDaMaN}avSTauTa" )
Wk-" Pa*Qax(NaaMai>arahuTaae Mauda
 Ga*õaiTa PaU<aR" SvYaMaaiXaza& Pa[>au" )) 26 ))
yaiù çraddhayä barhiñi bhägaço havir
niruptam iñöaà vidhi-mantra-vastutaù
ekaù påthaì-nämabhir ähuto mudä
gåhëäti pürëaù svayam äçiñäà prabhuù
yaiù—by whom (the inhabitants of Bhärata-varña); çraddhayä—faith and confidence; barhiñi—in the performance of Vedic ritualistic sacrifices; bhägaçaù—by division; haviù—oblations; niruptam—offered; iñöam—to the desired deity; vidhi—by the proper method; mantra—by reciting mantras; vastutaù—with the proper ingredients; ekaù—that one Supreme Personality of Godhead; påthak—separate; nämabhiù—by names; ähutaù—called; mudä—with great happiness; gåhëäti—He accepts; pürëaù—the Supreme Lord, who is full in Himself; svayam—personally; äçiñäm—of all benedictions; prabhuù—the bestower.
In India [Bhärata-varña], there are many worshipers of the demigods, the various officials appointed by the Supreme Lord, such as Indra, Candra and Sürya, all of whom are worshiped differently. The worshipers offer the demigods their oblations, considering the demigods part and parcel of the whole, the Supreme Lord. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts these offerings and gradually raises the worshipers to the real standard of devotional service by fulfilling their desires and aspirations. Because the Lord is complete, He offers the worshipers the benedictions they desire even if they worship only part of His transcendental body.
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.13) Lord Kåñëa says:
mahätmänas tu mäà pärtha
daivéà prakåtim äçritäù
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jïätvä bhütädim avyayam
"O son of Påthä, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and inexhaustible." Mahätmäs, advanced devotees, worship only the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Others, however, who are also sometimes called mahätmäs, worship the Lord as ekatvena påthaktvena [Bg. 9.15]. In other words, they accept the demigods as different parts of Kåñëa and worship them for various benedictions. Although the devotees of the demigods thus achieve the desired results offered by Kåñëa, they have been described in Bhagavad-gétä as håta-jïänah [Bg. 7.20], not very intelligent. Kåñëa does not desire to be worshiped indirectly through the different parts of His body; Kåñëa wants direct devotional worship. Therefore a devotee who directly worships Lord Kåñëa through staunch devotional service, as recommended in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (tévreëa bhakti-yogena yajeta puruñaà param [SB 2.3.10]), is very quickly elevated to the transcendental position. Nevertheless, devotees who worship the demigods, the different parts of the Lord, receive the benedictions they desire because the Lord is the original master of all benedictions. If anyone wants a particular benediction, for the Lord to award it is not at all difficult.
TEXT 27
SaTYa& idXaTYaiQaRTaMaiQaRTaae Na*<aa&
 NaEvaQaRdae YaTPauNariQaRTaa YaTa" )
SvYa& ivDatae >aJaTaaMaiNaC^Taa‚
 iMaC^aiPaDaaNa& iNaJaPaadPaçvMa( )) 27 ))
satyaà diçaty arthitam arthito nåëäà
naivärthado yat punar arthitä yataù
svayaà vidhatte bhajatäm anicchatäm
icchäpidhänaà nija-päda-pallavam
satyam—certainly; diçati—He offers; arthitam—the object prayed for; arthitaù—being prayed to; nåëäm—by the human beings; na—not; eva—indeed; artha-daù—the bestower of benedictions; yat—which; punaù—again; arthitä—a demand for a benediction; yataù—from which; svayam—personally; vidhatte—He gives; bhajatäm—unto those engaged in His service; anicchatäm—although not desiring it; icchä-pidhänam—which covers all desirable things; nija-päda-pallavam—His own lotus feet.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead fulfills the material desires of a devotee who approaches Him with such motives, but He does not bestow benedictions upon the devotee that will cause him to demand more benedictions again. However, the Lord willingly gives the devotee shelter at His own lotus feet, even though such a person does not aspire for it, and that shelter satisfies all his desires. That is the Supreme Personality's special mercy.
The devotees mentioned in the previous verse approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead with material motives, but this verse explains how such devotees are saved from those desires. Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.3.10) advises:
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"Whether one is freed from all material desires, is full of material desires, or desires to become one with the Supreme, he should engage in devotional service." In this way, not only will the devotee's desires be fulfilled, but the day will come when he will have no other desire than to serve the lotus feet of the Lord. One who engages in the service of the Lord with some motive is called a sakäma-bhakta, and one who serves the Lord without any motives is called an akäma-bhakta. Kåñëa is so merciful that He turns a sakäma-bhakta into an akäma-bhakta. A pure devotee, an akäma-bhakta, who has no material motives, is satisfied simply to serve the lotus feet of the Lord. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (6.22). Yaà labdhvä cäparaà läbhaà manyate nädhikaà tataù: if one engages in the service of the lotus feet of the Lord, he does not want anything more. This is the highest stage of devotional service. The Lord is so kind even to a sakäma-bhakta, a motivated devotee, that He satisfies his desires in such a way that one day he becomes an akäma-bhakta. Dhruva Mahäräja, for example, became a bhakta with the motive of getting a better kingdom than that of his father, but finally he became an akäma-bhakta and said to the Lord, svämin kåtärtho'smi varaà na yäce: [Cc. Madhya 22.42] "My dear Lord, I am very satisfied simply to serve Your lotus feet. I do not want any material benefits." Sometimes it is found that a small child eats dirty things but his parents take away the dirty things and offer him a sandeça or some other sweetmeat. Devotees who aspire for material benedictions are compared to such children. The Lord is so kind that He takes away their material desires and gives them the highest benediction. Therefore, even for material motives, one should not worship anyone other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead; one must fully engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord so that all his desires will be fulfilled and at the end he can go back home, back to Godhead. This is explained in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.37-39, 41) as follows.
Anyakämé—a devotee may desire something other than service to the lotus feet of the Lord; yadi kare kåñëera bhajana—but if he engages in Lord Kåñëa's service; nä mägiteha kåñëa täre dena sva-caraëa—Kåñëa gives him shelter at His lotus feet, even though he does not aspire for it. Kåñëa kahe—the Lord says; ämä bhaje—"He is engaged in My service"; mäge viñaya-sukha—"but he wants the benefits of material sense gratification." Amåta chäòi' viña mäge:—"such a devotee is like a person who asks for poison instead of nectar." Ei baòa mürkha: "That is his foolishness." Ami-vijïa: "But I am experienced." Ei mürkhe 'viñaya' kene diba: "Why should I give such a foolish person the dirty things of material enjoyment?" Sva-caraëa-måta: "It would be better for Me to give him shelter at My lotus feet." 'Viñaya' bhuläiba: "I shall cause him to forget all material desires." Käma lägi' kåñëa bhaje—if one engages in the service of the Lord for sense gratification; paya kåñëa-rase—the result is that he ultimately gets a taste for serving the lotus feet of the Lord. Käma chäòi' 'dasa' haite haya abhiläñe: He then gives up all material desires and wants to become an eternal servant of the Lord.


Part   Canto nine

Song Prayer by Mahārāja Ambarīşa to Sudarśana (SB 9.5.3-11)
TEXT 3
AMbrqz ovac
TvMaiGan>aRGavaNa( SaUYaRSTv& SaaeMaae JYaaeiTaza& PaiTa" )
TvMaaPaSTv& i+aiTaVYaaeRMa vaYauMaaR}aeiNd]Yaai<a c )) 3 ))
ambaréña uväca
tvam agnir bhagavän süryas
tvaà somo jyotiñäà patiù
tvam äpas tvaà kñitir vyoma
väyur mätrendriyäëi ca
ambaréñaù—Mahäräja Ambaréña; uväca—said; tvam—you (are); agniù—the fire; bhagavän—the most powerful; süryaù—the sun; tvam—you (are); somaù—the moon; jyotiñäm—of all the luminaries; patiù—the master; tvam—you (are); äpaù—water; tvam—you (are); kñitiù—earth; vyoma—sky; väyuù—the air; mätra—the objects of the senses; indriyäëi—and the senses; ca—also.
Mahäräja Ambaréña said: O Sudarçana cakra, you are fire, you are the most powerful sun, and you are the moon, the master of all luminaries. You are water, earth and sky, you are the air, you are the five sense objects [sound, touch, form, taste and smell], and you are the senses also.
TEXT 4
SaudXaRNa NaMaSTau>Ya& SahóaraCYauTaiPa[Ya )
SavaRñgaaiTaNa( ivPa[aYa SviSTa >aUYaa w@SPaTae )) 4 ))
sudarçana namas tubhyaà
sahasräräcyuta-priya
sarvästra-ghätin vipräya
svasti bhüyä iòaspate
sudarçana—O original vision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaù—respectful obeisances; tubhyam—unto you; sahasra-ara—O you who have thousands of spokes; acyuta-priya—O most favorite of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Acyuta; sarva-astra-ghätin—O destroyer of all weapons; vipräya—unto this brähmaëa; svasti—very auspicious; bhüyäù—just become; iòaspate—O master of the material world.
O most favorite of Acyuta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you have thousands of spokes. O master of the material world, destroyer of all weapons, original vision of the Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto you. Kindly give shelter and be auspicious to this brähmaëa.
TEXT 5
Tv& DaMaRSTvMa*Ta& SaTYa& Tv& Yajae_i%l/Yaj>auk(- )
Tv& l/aek-Paal/" SavaRTMaa Tv& TaeJa" PaaEåz& ParMa( )) 5 ))
tvaà dharmas tvam åtaà satyaà
tvaà yajïo 'khila-yajïa-bhuk
tvaà loka-pälaù sarvätmä
tvaà tejaù pauruñaà param
tvam—you; dharmaù—religion; tvam—you; åtam—encouraging statements; satyam—the ultimate truth; tvam—you; yajïaù—sacrifice; akhila—universal; yajïa-bhuk—the enjoyer of the fruits resulting from sacrifice; tvam—you; loka-pälaù—the maintainer of the various planets; sarva-ätmä—all-pervading; tvam—you; tejaù—prowess; pauruñam—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; param—transcendental.
O Sudarçana wheel, you are religion, you are truth, you are encouraging statements, you are sacrifice, and you are the enjoyer of the fruits of sacrifice. You are the maintainer of the entire universe, and you are the supreme transcendental prowess in the hands of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are the original vision of the Lord, and therefore you are known as Sudarçana. Everything has been created by your activities, and therefore you are all-pervading.
The word sudarçana means "auspicious vision." From Vedic instructions we understand that this material world is created by the glance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (sa aikñata, sa asåjata). The Supreme Personality of Godhead glanced over the mahat-tattva, or the total material energy, and when it was agitated, everything came into existence. Western philosophers sometimes think that the original cause of creation was a chunk that exploded. If one thinks of this chunk as the total material energy, the mahat-tattva, one can understand that the chunk was agitated by the glance of the Lord, and thus the Lord's glance is the original cause of material creation.
TEXT 6
NaMa" SauNaa>aai%l/DaMaRSaeTave
 ùDaMaRXaql/aSaurDaUMake-Tave )
}aEl/aeKYaGaaePaaYa ivéuÖvcRSae
 MaNaaeJavaYaad(>auTak-MaR<ae Ga*<ae )) 6 ))
namaù sunäbhäkhila-dharma-setave
hy adharma-çéläsura-dhüma-ketave
trailokya-gopäya viçuddha-varcase
mano-javäyädbhuta-karmaëe gåëe
namaù—all respectful obeisances unto you; su-näbha—O you who have an auspicious hub; akhila-dharma-setave—whose spokes are considered to be a bridge of religion for the entire universe; hi—indeed; adharma-çéla—who are irreligious; asura—for the demons; dhüma-ketave—unto you who are like fire or an inauspicious comet; trailokya—of the three material worlds; gopäya—the maintainer; viçuddha—transcendental; varcase—whose effulgence; manaù-javäya—as speedy as the mind; adbhuta—wonderful; karmaëe—so active; gåëe—I simply utter.
O Sudarçana, you have a very auspicious hub, and therefore you are the upholder of all religion. You are just like an inauspicious comet for the irreligious demons. Indeed, you are the maintainer of the three worlds, you are full of transcendental effulgence, you are as quick as the mind, and you are able to work wonders. I can simply utter the word "namaù," offering all obeisances unto you.
The disc of the Lord is called Sudarçana because he does not discriminate between high and low criminals or demons. Durväsä Muni was certainly a powerful brähmaëa, but his acts against the pure devotee Mahäräja Ambaréña were no better than the activities of asuras. As stated in the çästras, dharmaà tu säkñäd bhagavat-praëétam: [SB 6.3.19] the word dharma refers to the orders or laws given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: [Bg. 18.66] real dharma is surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore real dharma means bhakti, or devotional service to the Lord. The Sudarçana cakra is here addressed as dharma-setave, the protector of dharma. Mahäräja Ambaréña was a truly religious person, and consequently for his protection the Sudarçana cakra was ready to punish even such a strict brähmaëa as Durväsä Muni because he had acted like a demon. There are demons even in the form of brähmaëas. Therefore the Sudarçana cakra does not discriminate between brähmaëa demons and çüdra demons. Anyone against the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotees is called a demon. In the çästras we find many brähmaëas and kñatriyas who acted as demons and have been described as demons. According to the verdict of the çästras, one has to be understood according to his symptoms. If one is born of a brähmaëa father but his symptoms are demoniac, he is regarded as a demon. The Sudarçana cakra is always concerned with annihilating the demons. Therefore he is described as adharma-çéläsura-dhüma-ketave. Those who are not devotees are called adharma-çéla. The Sudarçana cakra is just like an inauspicious comet for all such demons.
TEXT 7
TvtaeJaSaa DaMaRMaYaeNa Sa&ôTa&
 TaMa" Pa[k-aXaê d*Xaae MahaTMaNaaMa( )
durTYaYaSTae MaihMaa iGara& PaTae
 Tvd]UPaMaeTaTa( SadSaTa( ParavrMa( )) 7 ))
tvat-tejasä dharma-mayena saàhåtaà
tamaù prakäçaç ca dåço mahätmanäm
duratyayas te mahimä giräà pate
tvad-rüpam etat sad-asat parävaram
tvat-tejasä—by your effulgence; dharma-mayena—which is full of religious principles; saàhåtam—dissipated; tamaù—darkness; prakäçaù ca—illumination also; dåçaù—of all directions; mahä-ätmanäm—of great, learned personalities; duratyayaù—insurmountable; te—your; mahimä—glories; giräm pate—O master of speech; tvat-rüpam—your manifestation; etat—this; sat-asat—manifested and unmanifested; para-avaram—superior and inferior.
O master of speech, by your effulgence, full of religious principles, the darkness of the world is dissipated, and the knowledge of learned persons or great souls is manifested. Indeed, no one can surpass your effulgence, for all things, manifested and unmanifested, gross and subtle, superior and inferior, are but various forms of you that are manifested by your effulgence.
Without illumination, nothing can be seen, especially in this material world. The illumination in this world emanates from the effulgence of Sudarçana, the original vision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The illuminating principles of the sun, the moon and fire emanate from Sudarçana. Similarly, illumination by knowledge also comes from Sudarçana because with the illumination of Sudarçana one can distinguish one thing from another, the superior from the inferior. Generally people accept a powerful yogi like Durväsä Muni as wonderfully superior, but if such a person is chased by the Sudarçana cakra, we can see his real identity and understand how inferior he is because of his dealings with devotees.
TEXT 8
Yada ivSa*íSTvMaNaÅNaeNa vE
 bl&/ Pa[ivíae_iJaTa dETYadaNavMa( )
bahUdraevRx(iga]iXaraeDarai<a
 v*êàJaó& Pa[DaNae ivraJaSae )) 8 ))
yadä visåñöas tvam anaïjanena vai
balaà praviñöo 'jita daitya-dänavam
bähüdarorv-aìghri-çirodharäëi
våçcann ajasraà pradhane viräjase
yadä—when; visåñöaù—sent; tvam—your good self; anaïjanena—by the transcendental Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai—indeed; balam—the soldiers; praviñöaù—entering among; ajita—O indefatigable and unconquerable one; daitya-dänavam—of the Daityas and Dänavas, the demons; bähu—arms; udara—bellies; üru—thighs; aìghri—legs; çiraù-dharäëi—necks; våçcan—separating; ajasram—incessantly; pradhane—in the battlefield; viräjase—you stay.
O indefatigable one, when you are sent by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to enter among the soldiers of the Daityas and the Dänavas, you stay on the battlefield and unendingly separate their arms, bellies, thighs, legs and heads.
TEXT 9
Sa Tv& JaGaT}aa<a %l/Pa[ha<aYae
 iNaæiPaTa" SavRSahae Gada>a*Taa )
ivPa[SYa caSMaTku-l/dEvheTave
 ivDaeih >ad]& TadNauGa]hae ih Na" )) 9 ))
sa tvaà jagat-träëa khala-prahäëaye
nirüpitaù sarva-saho gadä-bhåtä
viprasya cäsmat-kula-daiva-hetave
vidhehi bhadraà tad anugraho hi naù
saù—that person; tvam—your good self; jagat-träëa—O protector of the whole universe; khala-prahäëaye—in killing the envious enemies; nirüpitaù—are engaged; sarva-sahaù—all-powerful; gadä-bhåtä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viprasya—of this brähmaëa; ca—also; asmat—our; kula-daiva-hetave—for the good fortune of the dynasty; vidhehi—kindly do; bhadram—all-good; tat—that; anugrahaù—favor; hi—indeed; naù—our.
O protector of the universe, you are engaged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as His all-powerful weapon in killing the envious enemies. For the benefit of our entire dynasty, kindly favor this poor brähmaëa. This will certainly be a favor for all of us.
TEXT 10
YaÛiSTa dtaiMaí& va SvDaMaaeR va SvNauiïTa" )
ku-l&/ Naae ivPa[dEv& ced( iÜJaae >avTau ivJvr" )) 10 ))
yady asti dattam iñöaà vä
sva-dharmo vä svanuñöhitaù
kulaà no vipra-daivaà ced
dvijo bhavatu vijvaraù
yadi—if; asti—there is; dattam—charity; iñöam—worshiping the Deity; vä—either; sva-dharmaù—occupational duty; vä—either; su-anuñöhitaù—perfectly performed; kulam—dynasty; naù—our; vipra-daivam—favored by the brähmaëas; cet—if so; dvijaù—this brähmaëa; bhavatu—may become; vijvaraù—without a burning (from the Sudarçana cakra).
If our family has given charity to the proper persons, if we have performed ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices, if we have properly carried out our occupational duties, and if we have been guided by learned brähmaëas, I wish, in exchange, that this brähmaëa be freed from the burning caused by the Sudarçana cakra.
TEXT 11
Yaid Naae >aGavaNa( Pa[qTa Wk-" SavRGau<aaé[Ya" )
SavR>aUTaaTMa>aaveNa iÜJaae >avTau ivJvr" )) 11 ))
yadi no bhagavän préta
ekaù sarva-guëäçrayaù
sarva-bhütätma-bhävena
dvijo bhavatu vijvaraù
yadi—if; naù—unto us; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prétaù—is satisfied; ekaù—without any duplicate; sarva-guëa-äçrayaù—the reservoir of all transcendental qualities; sarva-bhüta-ätma-bhävena—by a merciful attitude toward all living entities; dvijaù—this brähmaëa; bhavatu—may become; vijvaraù—freed from all burning.
If the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is one without a second, who is the reservoir of all transcendental qualities, and who is the life and soul of all living entities, is pleased with us, we wish that this brähmaëa, Durväsä Muni, be freed from the pain of being burned.

Song Prayers by Amśuman to Lord Kapiladeva (SB 9.8.21-26)
TEXT 21
A&éuMaaNauvac
Na PaXYaiTa Tva& ParMaaTMaNaae_JaNaae
 Na buDYaTae_ÛaiPa SaMaaiDaYaui¢-i>a" )
ku-Taae_Pare TaSYa MaNa"XarqrDaq‚
 ivSaGaRSa*ía vYaMaPa[k-aXaa" )) 21 ))
aàçumän uväca
na paçyati tväà param ätmano 'jano
na budhyate 'dyäpi samädhi-yuktibhiù
kuto 'pare tasya manaù-çaréra-dhé-
visarga-såñöä vayam aprakäçäù
aàçumän uväca—Aàçumän said; na—not; paçyati—can see; tväm—Your Lordship; param—transcendental; ätmanaù—of us living beings; ajanaù—Lord Brahmä; na—not; budhyate—can understand; adya api—even today; samädhi—by meditation; yuktibhiù—or by mental speculation; kutaù—how; apare—others; tasya—his; manaù-çaréra-dhé—who consider the body or mind to be the self; visarga-såñöäù—created beings within the material world; vayam—we; aprakäçäù—without transcendental knowledge.
Aàçumän said: My Lord, even Lord Brahmä is to this very day unable to understand Your position, which is far beyond himself, either by meditation or by mental speculation. So what to speak of others like us, who have been created by Brahmä in various forms as demigods, animals, human beings, birds and beasts? We are completely in ignorance. Therefore, how can we know You, who are the Transcendence?
icchä-dveña-samutthena
dvandva-mohena bhärata
sarva-bhütäni sammohaà
sarge yänti parantapa
"O scion of Bharata [Arjuna], O conqueror of the foe, all living entities are born into delusion, overcome by the dualities of desire and hate." (Bg. 7.27) All living beings in the material world are influenced by the three modes of material nature. Even Lord Brahmä is in the mode of goodness. Similarly, the demigods are generally in the mode of passion, and living entities lower than the demigods, such as human beings and animals, are in the mode of ignorance, or in mixed goodness, passion and ignorance. Therefore Aàçumän wanted to explain that because his uncles, who had burnt to ashes, were under the modes of material nature, they could not understand Lord Kapiladeva. "Because You are beyond even the direct and indirect intelligence of Lord Brahmä," he prayed, "unless we are enlightened by Your Lordship it will not be possible for us to understand You."
athäpi te deva padämbuja-dvaya-
prasäda-leçänugåhéta eva hi
jänäti tattvaà bhagavan-mahimno
na cänya eko 'pi ciraà vicinvan
"My Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus feet, he can understand the greatness of Your personality. But those who speculate to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are unable to know You, even though they continue to study the Vedas for many years." (SB 10.14.29) The Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, can be understood by one who is favored by the Lord; the Lord cannot be understood by others.
TEXT 22
Yae deh>aaJaiñGau<aPa[DaaNaa
 Gau<aaNa( ivPaXYaNTYauTa va TaMaê )
YaNMaaYaYaa MaaeihTaceTaSaSTva&
 ivdu" SvSa&SQa& Na bih"Pa[k-aXaa" )) 22 ))
ye deha-bhäjas tri-guëa-pradhänä
guëän vipaçyanty uta vä tamaç ca
yan-mäyayä mohita-cetasas tväà
viduù sva-saàsthaà na bahiù-prakäçäù
ye—those persons who; deha-bhäjaù—have accepted the material body; tri-guëa-pradhänäù—influenced by the three modes of material nature; guëän—the manifestation of the three modes of material nature; vipaçyanti—can see only; uta—it is so said; vä—either; tamaù—the mode of ignorance; ca—and; yat-mäyayä—by the illusory energy of whom; mohita—has been bewildered; cetasaù—the core of whose heart; tväm—Your Lordship; viduù—know; sva-saàstham—situated in one's own body; na—not; bahiù-prakäçäù—those who can see only the products of external energy.
My Lord, You are fully situated in everyone's heart, but the living entities, covered by the material body, cannot see You, for they are influenced by the external energy, conducted by the three modes of material nature. Their intelligence being covered by sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa, they can see only the actions and reactions of these three modes of material nature. Because of the actions and reactions of the mode of ignorance, whether the living entities are awake or sleeping, they can see only the workings of material nature; they cannot see Your Lordship.
Unless one is situated in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, one is unable to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is situated in everyone's heart. However, because the conditioned souls are influenced by material nature, they can see only the actions and reactions of material nature, but not the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One therefore must purify himself internally and externally:
apavitraù pavitro vä
sarvävasthäà gato 'pi vä
yaù smaret puëòarékäkñaà
sa bähyäbhyantaraù çuciù
(Garuòa Puräëa 2.1.47.52)
To keep ourselves externally clean we should bathe three times daily, and for internal cleanliness we must cleanse the heart by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra. The members of the Kåñëa consciousness movement must always follow this principle (bähyäbhyantaraù çuciù). Then it will one day be possible to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face.
TEXT 23
Ta& Tva& Ah& jaNagaNa& Sv>aav‚
 Pa[ßSTaMaaYaaGau<a>aedMaaehE" )
SaNaNdNaaÛEMauRiNai>aivR>aaVYa&
 k-Qa& ivMaU!" Pair>aavYaaiMa )) 23 ))
taà tväà ahaà jïäna-ghanaà svabhäva-
pradhvasta-mäyä-guëa-bheda-mohaiù
sanandanädyair munibhir vibhävyaà
kathaà vimüòhaù paribhävayämi
tam—that personality; tväm—unto You; aham—I; jïäna-ghanam—Your Lordship, who are concentrated knowledge; svabhäva—by spiritual nature; pradhvasta—free from contamination; mäyä-guëa—caused by the three modes of material nature; bheda-mohaiù—by exhibition of the bewilderment of differentiation; sanandana-ädyaiù—by such personalities as the four Kumäras (Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanätana and Sanat-kumära); munibhiù—by such great sages; vibhävyam—worshipable; katham—how; vimüòhaù—being fooled by the material nature; paribhävayämi—can I think of You.
O my Lord, sages freed from the influence of the three modes of material nature—sages such as the four Kumäras [Sanat, Sanaka, Sanandana and Sanätana]—are able to think of You, who are concentrated knowledge. But how can an ignorant person like me think of You?
The word svabhäva refers to one's own spiritual nature or original constitutional position. When situated in this original position, the living entity is unaffected by the modes of material nature. Sa guëän samatétyaitän brahma-bhüyäya kalpate (Bg. 14.26). As soon as one is freed from the influence of the three modes of material nature, he is situated on the Brahman platform. Vivid examples of personalities thus situated are the four Kumäras and Närada. Such authorities can by nature understand the position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but a conditioned soul not freed from the influence of material nature is unable to realize the Supreme. In Bhagavad-gétä (2.45), therefore, Kåñëa advises Arjuna, trai-guëya-viñayä vedä nistrai-guëyo bhavärjuna: one must rise above the influence of the three modes of material nature. One who stays within the influence of the three material modes is unable to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 24
Pa[XaaNTa MaaYaaGau<ak-MaRil/(r)‚
 MaNaaMaæPa& SadSaiÜMau¢-Ma( )
jaNaaePadeXaaYa Ga*hqTadeh&
 NaMaaMahe Tva& Pauåz& Paura<aMa( )) 24 ))
praçänta mäyä-guëa-karma-liìgam
anäma-rüpaà sad-asad-vimuktam
jïänopadeçäya gåhéta-dehaà
namämahe tväà puruñaà puräëam
praçänta—O completely peaceful one; mäyä-guëa—the modes of material nature; karma-liìgam—symptomized by fruitive activities; anäma-rüpam—one who has no material name or form; sat-asat-vimuktam—transcendental to the manifested and nonmanifested modes of material nature; jïäna-upadeçäya—for distributing transcendental knowledge (as in Bhagavad-gétä); gåhéta-deham—has assumed a form like a material body; namämahe—I offer my respectful obeisances; tväm—unto You; puruñam—the Supreme Person; puräëam—the original.
O completely peaceful Lord, although material nature, fruitive activities and their consequent material names and forms are Your creation, You are unaffected by them. Therefore, Your transcendental name is different from material names, and Your form is different from material forms. You assume a form resembling a material body just to give us instructions like those of Bhagavad-gétä, but actually You are the supreme original person. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Çréla Yämunäcärya has recited this verse in his Stotra-ratna (43):
bhavantam evänucaran nirantaraù
praçänta-niùçeña-manorathäntaraù
kadäham aikäntika-nitya-kiìkaraù
praharñayiñyämi sanätha-jévitam
"By serving You constantly, one is freed from all material desires and is completely pacified. When shall I engage as Your permanent eternal servant and always feel joyful to have such a fitting master?"
Manorathenäsati dhävato bahiù: [SB 5.18.12] one who acts on the mental platform must descend to material activities. Material contamination, however, is completely absent from the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His pure devotee. Therefore the Lord is addressed as praçänta, completely peaceful, free from the disturbances of material existence. The Supreme Lord has no material name or form; only the foolish think that the Lord's name and form are material (avajänanti mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam [Bg. 9.11]). The identity of the Supreme Lord is that He is the original person. Nonetheless, those who have but a poor fund of knowledge think that the Lord is formless. The Lord is formless in the material sense, but He has His transcendental form (sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]).
TEXT 25
TvNMaaYaaricTae l/aeke- vSTaubuÖya Ga*haidzu )
>a]MaiNTa k-aMal/ae>aeZYaaRMaaehiv>a]aNTaceTaSa" )) 25 ))
tvan-mäyä-racite loke
vastu-buddhyä gåhädiñu
bhramanti käma-lobherñyä-
moha-vibhränta-cetasaù
tvat-mäyä—through Your material energy; racite—which is manufactured; loke—in this world; vastu-buddhyä—accepting as factual; gåha-ädiñu—in hearth and home, etc.; bhramanti—wander; käma—by lusty desires; lobha—by greed; érñyä—by envy; moha—and by illusion; vibhränta—is bewildered; cetasaù—the cores of whose hearts.
O my Lord, those whose hearts are bewildered by the influence of lust, greed, envy and illusion are interested only in false hearth and home in this world created by Your mäyä. Attached to home, wife and children, they wander in this material world perpetually.
TEXT 26
AÛ Na" SavR>aUTaaTMaNa( k-aMak-MaeRiNd]YaaXaYa" )
MaaehPaaXaae d*!iX^àae >aGav&STav dXaRNaaTa( )) 26 ))
adya naù sarva-bhütätman
käma-karmendriyäçayaù
moha-päço dåòhaç chinno
bhagavaàs tava darçanät
adya—today; naù—our; sarva-bhüta-ätman—O You, who are the Supersoul; käma-karma-indriya-äçayaù—being under the influence of lusty desires and fruitive activities; moha-päçaù—this hard knot of illusion; dåòhaù—very strong; chinnaù—broken; bhagavan—O my Lord; tava darçanät—simply by seeing You.
O Supersoul of all living entities, O Personality of Godhead, simply by seeing You I have now been freed from all lusty desires, which are the root cause of insurmountable illusion and bondage in the material world.

Song Prayers by Brāhmaṇas to Lord Rāmacandra (SB 9.11.6-7)
TEXT 6
APa[ta& NaSTvYaa ik&- Nau >aGavNa( >auvNaeìr )
Yaàae_NTaôRdYa& ivXYa TaMaae h&iSa Svraeicza )) 6 ))
aprattaà nas tvayä kià nu
bhagavan bhuvaneçvara
yan no 'ntar-hådayaà viçya
tamo haàsi sva-rociñä
aprattam—not given; naù—unto us; tvayä—by Your Lordship; kim—what; nu—indeed; bhagavan—O Supreme Lord; bhuvana-éçvara—O master of the whole universe; yat—because; naù—our; antaù-hådayam—within the core of the heart; viçya—entering; tamaù—the darkness of ignorance; haàsi—You annihilate; sva-rociñä—by Your own effulgence.
O Lord, You are the master of the entire universe. What have You not given to us? You have entered the core of our hearts and dissipated the darkness of our ignorance by Your effulgence. This is the supreme gift. We do not need a material donation.
When Dhruva Mahäräja was offered a benediction by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he replied, "O my Lord, I am fully satisfied. I do not need any material benediction." Similarly, when Prahläda Mahäräja was offered a benediction by Lord Nåsiàhadeva, he also refused to accept it and instead declared that a devotee should not be like a vaëik, a mercantile man who gives something in exchange for some profit. One who becomes a devotee for some material profit is not a pure devotee. Brähmaëas are always enlightened by the Supreme Personality of Godhead within the heart (sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca [Bg. 15.15]). And because the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas are always directed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are not greedy for material wealth. What is absolutely necessary they possess, but they do not want an expanded kingdom. An example of this was given by Vämanadeva. Acting as a brahmacäré, Lord Vämanadeva wanted only three paces of land. Aspiring to possess more and more for personal sense gratification is simply ignorance, and this ignorance is conspicuous by its absence from the heart of a brähmaëa or Vaiñëava.
TEXT 7
NaMaae b]ø<YadevaYa raMaaYaaku-<#=MaeDaSae )
otaMaëaek-DauYaaRYa NYaSTad<@aiPaRTaax(ga]Yae )) 7 ))
namo brahmaëya-deväya
rämäyäkuëöha-medhase
uttamaçloka-dhuryäya
nyasta-daëòärpitäìghraye
namaù—we offer our respectful obeisances; brahmaëya-deväya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who accepts the brähmaëas as His worshipable deity; rämäya—unto Lord Rämacandra; akuëöha-medhase—whose memory and knowledge are never disturbed by anxiety; uttamaçloka-dhuryäya—the best of very famous persons; nyasta-daëòa-arpita-aìghraye—whose lotus feet are worshiped by sages beyond the jurisdiction of punishment.
O Lord, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who have accepted the brähmaëas as Your worshipable deity. Your knowledge and memory are never disturbed by anxiety. You are the chief of all famous persons within this world, and Your lotus feet are worshiped by sages who are beyond the jurisdiction of punishment. O Lord Rämacandra, let us offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
