Folio Archives
Songs of the vaisnava acaryas


Part 1 Ananta Acārya


Song 1 (Śrī-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) śacīra nandana jaga-jībana-sāra
jībane maraṇe gorā ṭhākura āmāra
Text 2 āsiyā goloka-nātha         pāriṣada-gaṇa sātha
          nabadwīpe abatīrṇa haiyā
sthāpiyā yugera karma         nija saṅkīrtana dharma
          bujhā-ila nāciyā gā-iyā
Text 3 dhari rūpa hema gaura      parilā kaupina ḍorā
          aruṇa-kiraṇa-bahir-bāsa
kare kamaṇḍalu daṇḍa          dharilā gaurāṅgacandra
          chāḍi biṣṇupriyā-abhilāṣa
Text 4 akhilera guru hari         bhāratīre guru kari
          mantra nāma karilā grahaṇa
ninduka pāṣaṇḍa chila         bahu nindā pūrbe kaila
          bhajila baliyā nārāyaṇa
Text 5 yā-iyā utkala-deśe         nāma kailā upadeśe
          ṣaḍa-bhuja kariyā prakāśa
ananta ācārye kaya       saṅge saba mahāśaya
          laiyā kailā nīlācale bāsa


     Text 1 (Refrain) Śacī’s son is the life of everyone in this world. In life or death Lord Gaura is my master.
     Text 2 Accompanied by His associates the master of Goloka has descended to Navadvīpa. He established saṅkīrtana-dharma the duty for this age. He sang danced and taught.
     Text 3 He manifested a form glorious like gold. He wore a kaupīna and outer garments glorious like the sunrise. Turning aside from any desire to stay with Viṣṇupriyā He carried a daṇḍa and kamaṇḍalu in His hands.
     Text 4 He was Lord Kṛṣṇa the master of all the worlds. He became the guru of this world. He chanted the mantras of the holy names. Because of Him the blasphemers who committed great offenses came to worship Lord Nārāyaṇa and chant His holy names.
     Text 5 He traveled to Orissa manifested a six-armed form and taught the chanting of the holy names. Ananta Acārya says: Surrounded by his devotees, He resided in Nīlācala.


Song 2 (Maṅgala-rāga)


Text 1 nitā-i caitanya du-i bhā-i dayāra abadhi
brahmāra durlabha prema yāce nirabadhi
Text 2 cāri bede anweṣaye ye prema pā-ite
hena prema du-i bhā-i yāce abirate
Text 3 patita durgata pāpī kali-hata yārā
nitā-i caitanya bali nāce gāya tārā
Text 4 bhubana-maṅgala bhela saṅkīrtana rase
rāya ananta kānde nā pā-iya leśa


     Text 1 The two brothers Nitāi and Caitanya are the most merciful. Again and again They beg the people to please accept the rare ecstatic spiritual love even Brahmā cannot attain.
     Text 2 Again and again these two brothers beg the people to please accept the rare ecstatic spiritual love the four Vedas seek.
     Text 3 Not even the fallen misled sinners sinners wounded by Kali-yuga chant “Nitāi! Caitanya!” and dance.
     Text 4 Now the world has become auspicious. Now the world is flooded with the nectar of saṅkīrtana. Alas! Ananta Rāya weeps. He could not taste even a drop of that nectar.


Song 3 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 gaura naba-ghana prema-dhārā bariṣila
tṛṣita tāpita jība tirapita bhela
Text 2 durmati kaṭhina māṭī bhakti-cāṣe cūra
upajila jība-hṛde premera aṅkura
Text 3 se aṅkure bhakti-bāri nitā-i secila
dine dine prema-taru bāḍhiyā uṭhila
Text 4 dharila premera phala saba jība-tare
ananta baṇcita bhela nija karma-phere


     Text 1 The new raincloud of Lord Gaura showered a monsoon of ecstatic spiritual love a monsoon that delighted the thirsty souls suffering from the burning heat.
     Text 2 The ploughman of devotional service plowed the hard earth of the sinners’ wicked hearts and broke up its hardness. Then the plowman watered that ground. Then the first sprout of ecstatic spiritual love appeared.
     Text 3 Lord Nitāi nourished that sprout with the waters of devotional service. Day by day the tree of ecstatic spiritual love grew and grew.
     Text 4 Finally that tree bore the fruit of ecstatic spiritual love a fruit that delivers every soul. Alas! Ananta dāsa could not taste that fruit. His own past karma cheated him of that fruit.


Song 4 (Dhānaśrī-rāga)


Text 1 kāṇcā se soṇāra tanu ḍagamagi aṅga
cānda-badane hāsi amiyā taraṅga
Text 2 abanī bilambita bana-māla
saurabha beḍhala madhukara jāla
Text 3 ubha-dwaya bhuja-para khara-śara cāpa
hera-ite ripu-gaṇa tharahari kampa
Text 4 dūrabā-dala tula nakha bidha sāja
maṇimaya kaṅkaṇa balaya birāja
Text 5 tad-adhahi duhuṁ jaladhara śyāma
tahi śobhe mohana muralī anupāma
Text 6 nakha maṇi bidhu jini talahi suraṅga
maṇi abharaṇa tāhe mūrache anaṅga
Text 7 tad-adhahi karahi kamaṇḍalu daṇḍa
yāhe kali kaluṣa pāṣaṇḍa khaṇḍa
Text 8 giri sañe ure maṇi moti bilola
śrībastāṅkita kaustubha dola
Text 9 malayaja maya-ura parisara pīna
nābhi gabhīra kaṭi keśarī kṣīṇa
Text 10 basana suraṅga caraṇa paryanta
pada nakha nichani dāsa ananta


     Text 1 His youthful golden form staggers in ecstasy. His moonlike face smiles with waves of nectar.
     Text 2 His forest garland reaches to the ground. His sweet fragrance attracts swarms of bees.
     Text 3 In one set of hands He holds a bow and sharp arrows. Seeing them His enemies tremble in fear.
     Text 4 These arms are dark like dūrvā grass. They have ornaments of claws. His jewel bracelets and anklets glisten.
     Text 5 Below these is another pair of arms. These arms are dark like monsoon clouds. In these hands He plays peerless charming melodies on the flute.
     Text 6 These nails defeat a host of jewel moons. Decorated with jewel ornaments they make Kāmadeva faint in ecstasy.
     Text 7 Below these is another pair of arms. In these hands He holds a daṇḍa and kamaṇḍalu. Into pieces these arms break Kali-yuga’s sins and offenses.
     Text 8 A necklace of jewels and pearls sways to and fro on the mountain of His chest. A Kaustubha jewel sways to and fro on His chest marked with Śrīvatsa.
     Text 9 His sandal-paste-anointed arms rest at the edge of His chest. His navel is deep. His waist is slender like a lion’s waist.
     Text 10 His garments reach to reddish feet. Ananta dāsa worships the nails on His toes.


Part 2 Balarāma dāsa

Song 1 (Gāndhāra-rāga)


Text 1 pūrabe bāndhala cūḍā ebe keṣa-hīna
naṭa-bara-beṣa chāḍi parilā kaupīna
Text 2 gābhī dohana bhāṇḍa chila bāma kare
karaṅga dharila gorā se-i anusāre
Text 3 tretāya dharila dhanu dvāparete baṁṣī
kali-yuge daṇḍa dhari ha-ila sannyāsī
Text 4 balarāma kahe śuna nadiyā-nibāsī
balarāma abadhūta kānā-i sannyāsī


     Text 1 Formerly His hair was bound in a topknot. Now He has no hair. Rejecting His colorful garments of a dancing actor, now He wears a sannyāsī’s kaupīna.
     Text 2 Formerly He carried a pot for milking cows. Now He carries a sannyāsī’s waterpot. Now His complexion is fair.
     Text 3 In Tretā-yuga He carried an archer’s bow. In Dvāpara-yuga He carried a flute. In Kali-yuga He carries a daṇḍa. Now He is a sannyāsī.
     Text 4 Balarāma dāsa says: O residents of Nadīyā, please hear. Balarāma has become an avadhūta, and Kṛṣṇa has become a sannyāsī.


Song 2 (Kedāra-rāga)


Text 1 gopī-gaṇa-kuca-kuṅkume rañjita
     aruṇa basana śobhe aṅge
kāṇcana-kānti-binindita-kalebara
     rā-i paraṣa rasa-raṅge
Text 2 (Refrain) dekha dekha aparūpa gaura-bilāsa
lākha yubatī rati yo guru lampaṭa
     so aba karala sannyāsa
Text 3 yo braja-badhū-gaṇa        dṛḍha-bhuja-bandhana
          abirata rahata āgora
so tanu pulake pūrita aâa ḍhara ḍhara
          nayāne galaye prema-lora
Text 4 yo naṭa-bara ghana-śyāma kalebara
     bṛndā-bipina-bihārī
kahaye balarāma naṭa-bara so aba
     akiṇcana ghare ghare prema-bhikhārī


     Text 1 In the past He bore marks of red from the kuṅkuma on the gopīs’ breasts. Now a saffron garment decorates His limbs. In the past He was delighted by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s sweet touch. Now His fair body rebukes the splendor of gold.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Look! Look at Lord Gaura’s wonderful pastimes! The great debauchee who loved millions of girls now has accepted sannyāsa.
     Text 3 In the past He was tightly bound by the vraja-gopīs’ arms. Now He is always overcome with the ecstasy of a devotee’s spiritual love. Now the hairs of His body stand erect in spiritual love. Now tears of spiritual love stream from His eyes.
     Text 4 He was the graceful dancer whose body was dark like a monsoon cloud, the dancer who enjoyed pastimes in Vṛndāvana Forest. Balarāma dāsa says: That best of dancers has now become a penniless sannyāsī. Now He goes from house to house begging everyone to give the alms that they will fall in love with Lord Kṛṣṇa.


Song 3 (Sindhuḍā-rāga)


Text 1 rūpa-koṭi-kāma jini        bidagadha-śiromaṇi
          goloke bihare kutūhale
braja-rāja-nandana       gopikāra prāṇa-dhana
          ki lāgi loṭāya bhūmi-tale
Text 2 (Refrain) hari hari ki śela rahila mora buke
ki lāgi rasika-rāja        kānde saṅkīrtana-mājha
          nā bujhiyā manu mano-dukha
Text 3 saṅge bilasita yāra        rādhā candrābalī āra
          kata śata baraja-kiśorī
ebe pahuṁ buka buka      na dekhena nārī-mukha
          ki lāgi sannyāsī daṇḍa-dhārī
Text 4 chāḍi nāgarāli-beśa        bhrame pahuṁ deśa deśa
          patita cāhiyā ghare ghare
cintāmaṇi nija-guṇe      uddhārilā jagaj-jane
          balarāma dāsa bahu-dūre


     Text 1 Why does He whose handsomeness defeats millions of Kāmadevas, who is the crest jewel of the wise and playful, who enjoys blissful pastimes in Goloka, who is Nanda’s son, and who is the gopīs’ life-treasure now roll about on the ground?
     Text 2 (Refrain) Alas! Alas! A javelin is plunged in my chest! Why does the king of the rasikās now weep in the midst of the holy chanting in saṅkīrtana? I do not understand. My heart is filled with pain.
     Text 3 Formerly He enjoyed many pastimes with Rādhārāṇī, Candrāvalī, and how many hundreds of teenage vraja-gopīs? Now the Lord will not even look at a woman’s face. Why did He become a sannyāsī holding a daṇḍa?
     Text 4 Rejecting His garments of a playful lover, the Lord now wanders from place to place. Going from house to house, He visits the fallen people. With the cintāmaṇi jewels of His glorious virtues He delivers the people of the world. Only Balarāma dāsa is left behind.


Song 4 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 kali-yuga matta mataṅgaja maradane kumati kariṇī dūre gela
pāmara duragata          nāma motima śata
          dāma kaṇṭha bhari dela
Text 2 (Refrain) aparūpa gaura birāja
śrī-nabadwīpa nagara giri-kandare keśarī-rāja
Text 3 saṅkīrtana ghana      huṅkṛti śunā-ite
          durita-dwīpi-gaṇa bhāga
bhaye ākula         aṇimādi mṛgī-kula
          puna-bata garaba teyāga
Text 4 tyāga yāga yama       tirikhi barata sama
          śaśa jāmbukī jarijāti
balarāma dāsa kahe       ata-eba se jama-māha
          hari hari śabada kheyāti


     Text 1 The wild elephants of Kali-yuga have fled. The deer of wicked thoughts are noe far away. They who in the past were sinful and misled now wear necklaces strung with hundreds of pearls of the holy names.
     Text 2 (Refrain) The wonderful fair lion of Lord Gaura now enters the mountain cave that is the town of Navadvīpa.
     Text 3 Hearing that lion’s roar of sankirtana, the tigers of sins become terrified and the deer of anima and other other yogic powers renounce all their pride.
     Text 4 The rabbits and jackals of renunciation, yajṇa, self-control, vows, and equanimity are all afraid. Balarāma dāsa says: This comes from the glory of Lord Gaura’s chanting “Hari! Hari!”


Song 5 (Bhāṭiyāri-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) yata yata abatāra sāra
ghuśite rahila āmāra gorā abatāra
Text 2 brahmāra durlabha kṛṣṇa prema nāma dhana
ā-caṇḍāle diyā prabhu bharila bhubana
Text 3 mleccha pāśaṇḍa ādi premera banyāya
dubiyā sakala loka nāce gāna gāya
Text 4 paśu-pakśi-byāghra-mṛga-jalacara-gaṇe
hāse kānde nāce gāya karaye kīrtane
Text 5 swarga-martya-pātāla ḍubila saba grāme
baṇcita ha-ila eka dāsa balarāme


     Text 1 (Refrain) He is the best of all avatāras. This I say of my Lord Gaura-avatāra.
     Text 2 The treasure of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s holy name and love for Lord Kṛṣṇa—a treasure even the demigod Brahmā finds difficult to attain—Lord Gaura gives to everyone, even to the caṇḍālas. He fills the world with that treasure.
     Text 3 He plunges even the mlecchas, blapshemers, and others like them into a flood of the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. He makes everyone in the world dance and sing.
     Text 4 He makes even the birds, beasts, tigers, deer, and fish dance, sing, laugh, and weep in kīrtana.
     Text 5 He plunges the heavenly, middle, and lower worlds in the nectar of ecstatic love. Only Balarāma dāsa is not plunged. Only he is cheated.


Song 6 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 nabadwīpa-gagane uyala dina rāti
ghana rase siṇcala sthala-cara jāti
Text 2 dekha dekha gaura jalada abatāra
barikhaye preme amiyā anibāra
Text 3 tad-abadhi jaga-bhari dura-dina bhora
hari-rase ḍagamaga jaga-jana bhora
Text 4 nācata unamata bhakata mayura
abhakata bheka royata jale bura
Text 5 bhakati latā tina bhubana beyāpa
uttama adhama saba prema-phala pāba
Text 6 kīrtana kulīśa roga banacārī
jṇānase o ghana garaje bidāri
Text 7 cita bilopi kaśila karama bhujaṅga
niramila o kali-mada dahana taraṅga 
Text 8 tāpita cātaka tirapita bhela
daśa-dika sabahuṁ nadī rahi gela
Text 9 ḍubala abanī kāho nāhi ṭhāma
saṁsārera acale rahalu balarāma


     Text 1 Staying in the sky of Navadvīpa, a monsoon cloud day and night showers nectar rains on the moving and unmoving beings.
     Text 2 Look! Look! The monsoon cloud of Lord Gaura has descended to this world! Without stop It showers the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 3 Now the whole world is filled with rain. Now the people are plunged in the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s glories.
     Text 4 Now the wild-peacock devotees dance. Even the beggar non-devotees are plunged in the nectar waters.
     Text 5 Nourished by the rains, the vine of bhakti grows very large and fills the three worlds. Everyone, from the highest to the lowest, will taste the fruit of divine love that grows on that vine.
     Text 6 The monsoon cloud of Lord Gaura hurls a thunderbolt of kīrtana, a thunderbolt that falls on the imposter sannyāsīs. The roaring cloud hurls another thunderbolt, a thunderbolt that breaks the impersonalists into pieces.
     Text 7 Another thunderbolt cleaves in two the snake of karma’s heart. Then Kali-yuga’s bewildering illusions are drowned in that monsoon’s flooding waves of nectar. 
     Text 8 The thirsty cātaka birds of the devotees are all delighted by drinking the nectar falling from that monsoon cloud. Now the ten directions are filled with flooding rivers of nectar.
     Text 9 The whole world is plunged in the flooding nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. There is no escape. Only Balarāma dāsa has escaped. Standing on the dry mountain peak of repeated birth and death, he has escaped that flood.


Song 7 (Rāmakeli-rāga)


Text 1 gaura sundara pahuṁ        nadīyā udaya kari
          bhubana bhariyā prema-dāna
pāmara pāśaṇḍa ādi       dīna hīna kśīṇa jāti
          uddhārila diyā hari-nāma
Text 2 (Refrain) ṭhākura gurāṅgera guṇa śunite parāṇa kānde
ageyāna yata jana        dekhiyā athira mana
          hari-bola bali mana bandhe
Text 3 gadādhara dekhi kānde      pahuṁ thira nāhi bāndhe
          kare dhari swarūpa rāmānanda
pahuṁ mora śrī-pada bali      loṭāya dharaṇī dhuli
          kole kari kānde nityānanda
Text 4 andha badhira yata         gorā guṇa unamata
          diga bidiga nāhi jāne
bāhu tuli hari-bole      patita la-iyā kole
          gorā preme jaga-jana bhāse
uttama adhama yata       tārā haila bhāgabata
          baṇcita balarāma dāsa


     Text 1 Coming to Nadīyā filling the worlds with His gift of ecstatic spiritual love and giving everyone the gift of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s holy names Lord Gaurasundara delivered the sinners the blasphemers the poor the fallen the low-born and everyone else.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Hearing of Lord Gaurāṅga’s glories my life-breath weeps. Seeing the people did not know the truth Lord Gaurāṅga His heart unsteady began to call out “Chant the holy name of Hari!” 
     Text 3 Seeing Gadādhara Lord Gaurāṅga began to weep. Walking with unsteady steps with His hands He grasps Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāmānanda Rāya. Saying “Ah! The graceful footprints of My Lord!” Lord Gaurāṅga began to roll about in the dust. Then embracing Lord Nityānanda He wept.
     Text 4 Everyone including even the blind and deaf became wild because of Lord Gaura’s glories. In all the directions no one knew anything but Him. Raising His arms He chanted “Haribol!¢ He hugged the fallen people. Lord Gaura plunged the people of the world in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. From the highest to the lowest He transformed every person into a great devotee of the Lord. Only Balarāma dāsa He did not transform. Only Balarāma dāsa was cheated.


Song 8 (Śrī-rāga)


Text 1 kothāya āchila gorā emana sundara
o-rūpe mugadha kaila nadīyā nagara
Text 2 bāndhiyā cikaṇa keśa diyā nānā phule
raṅgaṇa mālatī yūthī pārulī bakule
Text 3 madhu-lobhe madhukara tāhe kata uḍe
o-rūpa dekhite prāṇa nāhi thāke dhaḍe
Text 4 maṇi-mukutāra hāra jhalamala buke
prati aṅge ābharaṇa bijurī camake
Text 5 kuṅkume lepita aṅga candana miśāle
ā-jānu-lambita bhuja bana-mālā gale
Text 6 manthara calani gati du-dike helāni
amiyā uthale kibā grībāra dolāni
Text 7 calite madhura nāde nūpura bāje pāya
balarāma dāsa bale nichani yān3a tāya


     Text 1 Where is anyone handsome and glorious like Lord Gaura? His handsome form charms all of Nadīyā.
     Text 2 His glistneing hair is neatly bound and decorated with raṅgaṇa mālatī yūthī pārulī bakula and many other kinds of flowers. 
     Text 3 Eager for nectar how many black bees floy amongst those flowers? When they see Lord Gaura they cannot keep their life’s breath peaceful within their bodies.
     Text 4 A necklace of pearls and jewels glistens on His chest. On His every limâ ornaments glisten like lightning.
     Text 5 Kuṅkuma and sandal paste anoint His limbs. His arms reach to His knees. A forest garland rests on His neck.
     Text 6 He walks slowly and gracefully. He sways from side to side. His neck sways from side to side. He is a flood of nectar.
     Text 7 His anklets sweetly jangle as He walks. Balarāma dāsa says: Please worship Him.


Song 9 (Beloyāra-rāga)


Text 1 sahaja-i kāṇcana-kānti kalebara hera-ite jaga-jana-mano-mohaniyā
tāhe kata koṭi madana mūrachā-ola aruṇa-kiraṇa-hara ambara baniyā
Text 2 rā-i prema bhare gamana su-manthara antara gara gara paḍa-i dharaṇīyā
sweda kampa ghana ghana pulakābalī ghana huhuṅkāra karata garajaniyā
Text 3 ḍagamaga deha theha nāhi bāndha-i duhu diṭhi meha saghane barakhaṇiyā
o rasa bhora ora nāhi pā-o-i patita kore dhari lora sicaniyā
Text 4 hari hari bali ro-i kata bilapa-i ānande unamata dibasa rajaniyā
hari hari raba śuni jagata tariyā gela baṇcita balarāma dāsa pāmariyā


     Text 1 His form is splendid like gold. Gazing at Him the world’s people find their hearts enchanted. How many millions of Kāmadevas does He enchant? His splendid garments defeat the rising sun.
     Text 2 His heart is overcome with the ecstatic love Śrī Rādha’ feels. Slowely he walks. He stumbles and falls to the ground. He trembles and perspires. The hairs of His body stand erect. Loudly He roars.
     Text 3 He staggers as He walks. He cannot keep still. Like two clouds His eyes shower a monsoon of tears. He is drowning in an nectar ocean of ecstatic spiritual love. He cannot swim to the shore. He hugs the fallen sinners. He sprinkles them with His tears.
     Text 4 How many times does He call out “Hari! Hari!¢ and weep? Day and night He is wild with ecstatic love. Hearing Him chant “Hari! Hari!” the whole world is delivered. Only fallen Balarāma dāsa is not delivered. Only he is cheated.


Song 5 (Śrī-rāga)


Text 1 baḍa abatāra bhā-i baḍa abatāra
patitera bilā-ola premera bhāṇḍāra
Text 2 aparūpa gorācāndera līlā
rājā haiyā kāndhe kare baiśṇabera dolā
Text 3 hena abatārera upamā dite nāri
saṅkīrtanera mājhe nāce kulera bauhārī
Text 4 sarba-loka chāḍe yāre aparasa bali
deba-gaṇa māge āge tāra pada-dhūli
Text 5 yabaneha nāce gāya laya hari-nāma
hena abatāre se baṇcita balarāma


     Text 1 He is a great avatāra! O my brothers He is a great avatāra! To the fallen people of the world He gave the treasure-house of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 2 Lord Gauracandra’s pastimes are wonderful. He is glorious like a king. Staggering in ecstasy He steadies Himself by holding a Vaiśṇava’s shoulders.
     Text 3 No other avatāra is like Him. 


Part 3 Caitanya dāsa


Song 1 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) dekha dekha aparūpa gaurāṅga bilāsa
puna giri-dhāraṇa        pūraba nīlākrama
          nabadwīpe karilā prakāśa
Text 2 śuddha-bhakti gobardhana        pūjā kara jagaj-jana
          e-i bidhi dilā kali mājhe
śrabaṇādi naba aṅga      kalpa-taru-maya aṅga
          pañca-rasa phale tāhā sāje
Text 3 pulaka aṅkura śobhā        aśru jana-mano-lobhā
          manda bāyu bepathu sundara
nijendriya upacāre       pūjā se-i giri-bare
          prema-maṇi pābe iṣṭa bara
Text 4 dekhiyā lokera gati        kali-yuga-surapati
          kope tanu kampita ha-ila
adharama airabāte        kumati indrāṇī sāthe
          sa-sainyete sājiyā ā-ila
Text 5 kāma-megha bariṣaṇe        krodha-bajra-nikṣepaṇe
          lokera ha-ila baḍa ḍara
lobha-moha-śilā-ghāte         mātsaryādi khara-bāte
          dhairya-dharma uḍe nirantara
Text 6 jāniyā jībera dāya         śrī-gaurāṅga dayā-maya
          upāya cintila mane mane
bhakta-bhāva sāroddhāra       nije kari aṅgī-kāra
          bhakti-giri karilā dhāraṇe
Text 7 tānhāra āśraye loka        pāsarila duḥkha-śoka
          kali-bhaya khaṇḍila sakale
tabe kali-deba-rāja         peye parābhaba lāja
          stuti kare caraṇa-kamale
Text 8 aparādha kṣamā-iyā         kahe kichu dīna haiyā
          yata jība prabhura āśraya
yebā taba guṇa gāya      tāhe mora nāhi dāya
          e-i satya karinu niścaya
Text 9 prabhu tāhe dayā kaila          dhanya kali nāma haila
          adhyāpi-o ghoṣaye saṁsāre
caitanya-dāsete bale          gobardhana-līlā-chale
          yuge yuge jībera uddhāre


     Text 1 (Refrain) Look! Look at Lord Gaura's wonderful pastimes! As in the past He lifted Govardhana Hill. so again He lifted it in Navadvīpa and Nīlācala.
     Text 2 As the people of the world were worshiping Kali-yuga Lord Gaura taught them to worship instead the Govardhana Hill of pure devotional service. That hill has nine parts beginning with the part of hearing the Lord's glories. On that hill are many kalpa-taru trees whose fruits are the five rasas.
     Text 3 The grass on that hill is the devotees’ bodily hairs standing erect in ecstasy. The streams on that hill are the tears that flow from the devotees’ yearning hearts. The gentle breezes blowing by that hill are the devotees’ trembling in ecstasy. Using their own senses as the paraphernalia of worship the people woprshiped that Govardhana Hill of devotional service. At the end they attained their desired boon the jewels of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 4 Seeing what the people of the world had done the King Indra of Kali-yuga trembled with rage. Taking with him the Airāvata elephant of impiety the Queen Indrani of wicked thoughts and the great hosts of his armies that Indra came to this world.
     Text 5 As the clouds of lust showered torrents of rain and the thunderbolts of anger fell the people of the world became afraid. As hailstones of greed an illusion fell and a sharp hurricane wind of envy and other vices blew the people's peacefulness flew away.
     Text 6 Aware of the calamity that had fallen on the people merciful Lord Gaurāṅga thought and thought trying to find a solution. Deciding that to life the life of a devotee is the best solution He lifted the Govardhana Hill of devotional service. 
     Text 7 When the people took shelter under that hill their suffering and lamentation fled far away. Their fear of Kali-yuga was broken into pieces. The embarrassed King Indra of Kali-yuga was defeated and he spoke many prayers before Lord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet.
     Text 8 Now humbled he asked forgiveness. He was an individual soul taking shelter of the Supreme Lord. He said “O Lord I praise Your glories. Please do not punish me. You are the Supreme Truth. This I know for certain."
     Text 9 Then Lord Gaurāṅga gave mercy to him. That is why Kali-yuga is known as a fortunate and glorious time. In this world to this day Kali-yuga is famous in this way. Caitanya dāsa says: Yuga after yuga manifesting this pastime like the lifting of Govardhana Hill the Lord delivers the fallen souls.


Part 4 Devakīnandana dāsa


Song 1 (Gaurī-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) mari nā lo nadīyāra mājhāre o nā rūpa
sonāra gaurāṅga nāce ati aparūpa
Text 2 alakā tilakā śobhe mukhera paripāṭi
rase ḍubu ḍubu kare rāṅgā āṅkhi duṭī
Text 3 adhare īṣat hāsi madhura kathā kaya
grībāra bhaṅgimā dekhi parāṇa kothā raya
Text 4 hiyāra dolane dole raṅgaṇa phulera mālā
kata rasa līlā jāne kata rasa kalā
Text 5 candane carcita aṅga binodiyā kocā
cāñcara cikure śobhe gandha-rāja cāmpā
Text 6 debakīnandana bale śuna lo ājulī
tumi ki nā jāna gorā nāgara bana-mālī


     Text 1 (Refrain) Ah! Ah! Wonderful and glorious like gold Lord Śaurāṅga dances in Nadīyā. 
     Text 2 Tilaka glistens on his forehead. He is plunged and plunged in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. His eyes are now reddish. 
     Text 3 A gentle smile rests on His lips. His words are sweet. Tilting His neck He casts a glance. He sighs. 
     Text 4 His chest sways to and fro. His garland of raṅgana flowers sways with it. How many nectar pastimes does He enjoy? How much of the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love does He taste?
     Text 5 His limbs are anointed with sandal paste. He is graceful and playful. A campaka flower that is the king of sweet fragrances decorates His curly hair.
     Text 6 Devakīnandana says: O foolish friend please listen. Why do you not accept the truth the truth that Lord Gaura is Kṛṣṇa Himself Kṛṣṇa the amorous teenage boy who wears a forest-flower garland.


Part 5 Dina Krsna dāsa


Song 1 (Tuḍi-rāga)


Text 1 jaya jaya mahāprabhu jaya gauracandra
jaya jaya biśvambhara karuṇāra sindhu
Text 2 jaya śacī-suta jaya paṇḍita nimā-i
jaya miśra purandara jaya śacī mā-i
Text 3 jaya jaya nabadvīpa jaya suradhunī
jaya lakṣmī biṣṇupriyā prabhura gharaṇī
Text 4 jaya jaya nabadvīpa-bāsī bhakta-gaṇa
jaya jaya nityānanda advaita-caraṇa
Text 5 nityānanda pada-dvandva sadā kari āśa
nāma-saṅkīrtana gāya dīna kṛṣṇa-dāsa


     Text 1 Glory glory to Lord Mahāprabhu! Glory to Lord Gauracandra! Glory glory to Lord Viśvambhara who is an ocean of mercy!
     Text 2 Glory to Śacī's son! Glory to Nimāi Paṇḍita! Glory to Purandara Miśra! Glory to Mother Śacī!
     Text 3 Glory glory to Navadvīpa! Glory to the Gaṅgā! Glory to Lakṣmīpriyā and Viṣṇupriyā the Lord's consorts!
     Text 4 Glory glory to devotees who reside in Navadvīpa! Glory glory to Lord Nityānanda and Lord Advaita!
     Text 5 I always aspire to attain Lord Nityānanda's feet. In this way Dīna Kṛṣṇa-dāsa sings a saṅkīrtana of holy names.


Part 6 Govinda Ghoṣa


Song 1 (Pāhiḍā-rāga)


Text 1 gorā gelā pūrba-deśa       nija-gaṇa pā-i kleśa
          bilāpaye kata parakāra
kānde debī lakṣmīpriyā        śunite bidare hiyā
          dibase mānaye andhakāra
Text 2 (Refrain) hari hari gaurāṅga biccheda nāhi sahe
punaḥ se-i gorā-mukha         dekhiyā ghucibe dukha
          ekhāna parāṇa yadi rahe
Text 3 śacīra karuṇā śuni         kāndaye akhila prāṇī
          mālinī prabodha kare tāya
nadīyā nāgarī-gaṇa       kānde tāra anukṣaṇa
          basana bhūṣaṇa nāhi bhāya
Text 4 suradhunī-tīre yā-ite      dekhiba gaurāṅga pathe
          kata dina habe śubha dina
cānda-mukhera bāṇī śuni       juḍābe tāpita prāṇī
          gobinda ghoṣera deha kṣīṇa


     Text 1 Now that Lord Gaura has gone ot East Bengal His close associates suffer. How many ways do they lament? Anyone who hears Lakṣmīpriyā-devī weep feels his heart break in two. He feels daylight had suddenly become blinding darkness.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Alas! Alas! She cannot bear separation fro Lord Gaurāṅga. If once again she saw Lord Gaura's face then all her sufferings would perish. Then her life's breath would remain in her body.
     Text 3 Hearing Śacī's laments every living being weeps. Mālinī tries to console her. The ladies of Nadīyā weep moment after moment. Their garments and ornaments no longer seem glorious to them.
     Text 4 How many days must pass before the auspicious day comes the day when they see Lord Gaurāṅga walk on the path by the Gaṅgā's banks? Hearing words come from His moonlike face the living entities will find their burning sufferings turn into cooling bliss. Alas! Now that Lord Gaura is absent Govinda Ghoṣa's body has become emaciated wasted away.


Song 2 (Sindhuḍā-rāga)


Text 1 kanayā kaṣila mukha-śobhā
hera-ite jaga-mana-lobhā
Text 2 bini hāse gorā mukha hāsa
paridhāna pīta paṭa-bāsa
Text 3 aṅgera saurabha lobhā pā-iyā
nabīna bhramarī ā-ila dhā-iyā
Text 4 ghuri ghuri bule pada-tale
guna guna śabada rasāle
Text 5 gobinda ghoṣera mane jāge
gorā nā dekhile biṣa lāge


     Text 1 The world's hearts yearn to see the glory of His face glistening like the purest gold.
     Text 2 Lord Gaura's face gracefully smiles. His garments are yellow.
     Text 3 Attracted by the fragrance of His limbs the young bees fly to Him.
     Text 4 Listening and listening to the sweet music He makes His feet turn and turn as He dances.
     Text 5 He awakens Govinda Ghoṣa's sleeping heart. They who do not place their eyes on Lord Gaura have drunk poison.


Song 3 (-rāga)


Text 1 snāna kari śrī-gaurāṅga         basilena dibyāsane
          ḍā-ine bāme nitā-i gadā-i
adwaita sammukhe basi        miṣṭānna pāyasa kare
          śribāsa yogāya dhā-i dhā-i
Text 2 (Refrain) āhā mari mari kibā abhiṣekānanda
nitā-i gadā-i saha       bhojane basila gorā
          ānande nehāre bhakta-bṛnda
Text 3 bhojana samāpi gorā        karilena ācamana
          adwaita tāmbūla dila mukhe
narahari pāśe thāki      tina-rūpa nirakhiche
          cāmara ḍhulāya aṅge sukhe
Text 4 sa-candana tulasī-patra         gorāra caraṇe diyā
          ācārya kṛṣṇāya namaḥ bale
kahe e gobinda ghoṣa         hari-dhwani ghana ghana
          karite lāgila kutūhale


     Text 1 The bathing completed Lord Gaurāṅga sits on the Deity-throne. At His right and left are Lord Nityānanda and Gadādhara. Sitting before Him Lord Advaita places an offering of sweet-rice. Running and running Śrīvāsa brings offerings.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Ah! Ah! Ah! How great is the bliss of the abhiṣeka ceremony! With Nitāi and Gadādhara at His sides Lord Gaura accepts the offerings. The devotees joyfully watch.
     Text 3 After eating all the offerings Lord Gaura rinses His mouth. Lord Advaita places betelnuts in His mouth. Standing at the side Narahari gazes at the forms of the three Lords. With a cāmara he happily fans Their bodies.
     Text 4 Offering a tulasī-leaf anointed with sandal paste at Lord Gaura's feet Lord Advaita Acārya says “Kṛṣṇāya namaḥ (I bow down before Lord Kṛṣṇa). Govinda Ghoṣa says: There is a great tumult of the chanting of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names.


Part 7 Ghanaśyāma dāsa


Song 1 (Gāndhāra-rāga)


Text 1 bhaba sāgara bara duratara duragraha
          duranta gati su-bithāra
nimagana jagata          patita saba ākula
          ko-i nā pā-ola pāra
Text 2 (Refrain) jaya jaya nitā-i gaura abatāra
hari-nāma prabala taraṇī abalambaye
          karuṇāya karala uddhāra
Text 3 aja bhaba adi byāsa śuka nārada
          anta nā pāya-i yān3ra
aichana prema patita jane bitara-i
          ko achu karuṇā apāra
Text 4 hena abatāra āra kiye hoyaba
          rasika bhakata-gaṇa mela
dīna ghanayśāma          son3ari bhela jara jara
          hṛdi māhā rahi gela śela


     Text 1 The ocean of repeated birth and death is horrible and wide. The people of the world were drowning in it. The fallen souls were distraught. No one could swim to the shore.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Glory glory to Lord Gaura and Lord Nitāi who descended to this world! Kindly picking up the drowning souls They placed them in the strong boat of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names and delivered them. 
     Text 3 Even Brahmā Śiva Vyāsa Śukadeva Nārada and all the demigods and sages could not find that ocean's shore. To the fallen people Lord Gaura and Lord Nitāi gave the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. Who has limitless mercy like Them?
     Text 4 Will there ever be another avatāra like Them? They were surrounded by a host of rasika devotees. Remembering Them poor Ghanaśyāma is overcome. He feels as if a javelin is pushed into his heart.


Song 2 (Basanta-rāga)


Text 1 āju pūrṇimā sāja samaye rāhu śaśī garāsi
gauracandra udaye bhabahi tāpatama bināśi
Text 2 praphullita saba bhakta-hṛdaya dhiraja nā dharu ko-i
sītā-pati niyaḍe calata ati unamata ho-i
Text 3 ghana ghana huṅkārata adwaita parama dhīra
bilasata priya-gaṇa saha grahaṇe suradhunī-tīra
Text 4 maṅgala kala-raba saba nadīyā-pura bhari bhela
kautuke ko-i jānata nāhi kaiche rajanī gela
Text 5 miśra-bhabana śobhā śubha sampada sukha bāḍhi
āyata bahu loka kona yata bhabana chāḍi
Text 6 bāyata mṛdu-bādya sarasa bādaka muda māti
gāyaka-gaṇa gāna-nipuṇa gāyata kata bhānti
Text 7 nartaka kṛta nṛtya tāttā thai tāthai ucāri
nirmala yaśa bhaṇata bhāṭa bhaṅgī bhara bithāri
Text 8 yācaka mana toṣi miśra deta ucita dāna
nirupama nabanīta raṅga nirakhata ghanaśyāma


     Text 1 Now it is the full-moon. Rāhu swallows the moon. The moon of Lord Gaura rises. Now all sufferings are destroyed.
     Text 2 The devotees’ hearts blossom with bliss. No one is peaceful. Lord Advaita approaches. He is wild with bliss.
     Text 3 Saintly Lord Advaita roars. During the eclipse on the Gaṅgā's banks He enjoys pastimes with His companions.
     Text 4 All of Nadīyā's towns are filled with auspicious sounds. No one can identify anyone else in the darkness of night.
     Text 5 Jagannātha Miśra's house is filled with beauty splendor opulence and bliss. Leaving their own homes everyone goes there.
     Text 6 The instrumental music is sweet. The musicians are all wild with bliss. How many glorious songs do the expert singers sing?
     Text 7 The dancers dance. “Thai tāthai!” the rhythms declare. The poets recite graceful words describing His pure glories.
     Text 8 Giving proper charity Jagannātha Miśra satisfies the beggars’ hearts. Ghanaśyāma gazes at the peerless infant an infant fair like new butter.


Song 3 (Basanta-rāga)


Text 1 pūrṇimā-pratipada-sandhi samaya pā-i rāhu garāsala gagana-śaśī
nimba-mahī-taru-tala-sūtikā-gehe udaya bhela go-ura-śaśī
Text 2 śiśu-rūpa ālā-bhubana ujala karu jwalila janu pradīpa śata
swaraga parihari sura-suraramaṇī sūtikā-gehe bhela āgata
Text 3 sahasra-locana brahmā caturānana ṣaḍānana gajabadana pañcamukha
unapañcāśata pabana baruṇa dhaneśwara ā-ola sabhe pā-i bahu sukha
Text 4 nehāri pahuṁ mukha bahu-bhāgya mānala sabhe praṇata bha-i pahuṁ caraṇe
kebala śacī-mā-i nehārala iha saba raṅga su-bihwalita mane
Text 5 śata-candra janu udala sūtikālaye debadala aṅga-ābhā-rūpe
ghanaśyāma bhaṇa sānandita mana jaga-mugadhala naba-śiśu-rūpe


     Text 1 At the time of pūrṇimā-pratipada-sandhi Rāhu swallowed the moon in the sky. At that moment another moon the moon of Lord Gaura arose in a maternity-room on the earth a maternity-room that was under a nīm tree.
     Text 2 Effulgent infant Lord Gaura lit up the room. He shone like a hundred lamps. Leaving Svargaloka the demigods and goddesses came to that maternity-room.
     Text 3 Thousand-eyed Indra four-faced Brahmā six-faced Kārttikeya elephant-faced Gaṇeśa five-faced Śiva the 4¹ Maruts Varuṇa and Kuvera the master of treasures all came. They were filled with bliss. 
     Text 4 Gazing at Lord Gaura's face they felt very fortunate at heart. They bowed before Lord Gaura's feet. Gazing at her son mother Śacī was overcome with bliss in her heart.
     Text 5 In nthat maternity-=room infant Lord’ Gaura's body shone like a hundred moons. Ghanaśyāma says: Seeing that newborn infant's glorious form the whole world was enchanted. Every heart was filled with bliss.


Song 4 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 jagannātha miśrera bhabane
bāje bādya maṅgala bidhāne
Text 2 nārī-gaṇe de-i yajakāra
bhāṭa-gaṇe paḍe kāyabāra
Text 3 (Refrain) śubha-kṣaṇe śacīra nandana
yajṇa-sūtra karaye dhāraṇa
Text 4 yajṇa-sūtra upamā ki āne
sūkṣma-rūpe ananta āpane
Text 5 keśa-hīna mastaka mādhurī
kare bā nā kare cita curi
Text 6 rakta-bāsa paridheya bhālo
ruṣe daśa-diśa kare ālo
Text 7 catur-dike brāhmaṇa samāja
tāra mājhe gorā dwija-rāja
Text 8 hāte dibya daṇḍa-jhuli kāndhe
tā dekhi dhairaja kebā bāndhe
Text 9 bāmana ābeśa beśa śohe
bhaṅgīte bhubana-mana mohe
Text 10 hāsi mṛdu su-madhura bhāṣe
bhikṣā māge bhakatera pāśe
Text 11 sabe cāhe prāṇa bhikṣā dite
ye de-i tāhā nā bhāya cite
Text 12 deba-nārī mānuṣe niśā-i
bhikṣā dena cānda-mukha cā-i
Text 13 kebā bā nā nichaye jībana
jaya-dhwani kare sarba-jana
Text 14 bhaṇe ghanaśyāma miśrālaye
sukhera samudra uthalaye


     Text 1 In Jagannātha Miśra's house auspicious instrumental-music plays.
     Text 2 The ladies have come for the ritual. The poets recite many poems.
     Text 3 (Refrain) At an auspicious moment Śacī's son accepts the sacred thread.
     Text 4 What other sacred thread is like this one? This sacred thread is Lord Ananta Himself manifest in a very slender form.
     Text 5 His head now free of hair the Lord's face is sweet and charming. Does He or does He not rob everyone's heart?
     Text 6 He wears saffron garments. He fills the ten directions with light.
     Text 7 On four sides is the assembly of brāhmaṇas. In the center is Lord Gaura the king of brāhmaṇas.
     Text 8 In His hand and on His shoulder are a brahmacāri-daṇḍa and a jhuli alms-bag. Seeing Him who can remain peaceful and indifferent?
     Text 9 He is glorious like Lord Vāmana Himself. His every gesture charms the hearts of all the worlds.
     Text 10 Gently smiling He speaks sweet words. Approaching the devotees He begs alms.
     Text 11 Everyone gazes at Him. In their hearts they give their life's breath to Him as alms. No fear in their hearts they offer alms to Him.
     Text 12 Infiltrating the crowd of human ladies the demigoddesses gaze at Lord Gaura's moonlike face. They also offer alms to Him.
     Text 13 Who does not worship Lord Gaura dedicating his whole life to Him? Everyone calls out “Jaya!"
     Text 14 Ghanaśyāma says: An ocean of bliss now floods Jagannātha Miśra's house.


Song 5 (Kāmoda-rāga)



Text 1 ko kahe aparūpa       prema-sudhā-nidhi
          ko-i kahata rasa seha
ko-i kahata iha          so-i kalapa-taru
          majhu-mane hota sandeha
Text 2 (Refrain) pekhalu gauracandra anupāma
yācata yāka mūla         nāhi tri-bhubane
          aiche ratana hari-nāma
Text 3 yo eka sindhu         bindu nāhi yācata
          para-baśa jalada-sañcāra
mānasa abadhi       bahuta kalapa-taru
          ko achu karuṇā pāra
Text 4 yachu caritāmṛta      śruti-pathe sañcaru
          hṛdaya-sarobara-pūra
umaḍa-i nayana      adhama-maru bhūmahi
          hoyata pulaka-aṅkura
Text 5 nāmahi yān3ka          tāpa saba meḍhaye
          tāhe ki cānda-upāma
bhaṇa ghanaśyāma         dāsa nāhi hoyata
          koṭi koṭi eku ṭhāma


     Text 1 One person says: “This is an ocean of the wonderful nectar of ecstatic spiritual love.” Another persons says: “This is nectar personified.” Another says: “This is a kalpa-taru tree.” In my heart a doubt now arises.
     Text 2 (Refrain) The person I saw is peerless Lord Gauracandra. He does not ask for anything in the three worlds. He wishes only the jewel of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy name.
     Text 3 He does not ask for even a single drop of water from the ocean of material happiness. He will accept only the water that falls from the raincloud of spiritual love. He is a kalpa-taru tree that fulfills the desires of every heart. Who is limitlessly merciful like Him?
     Text 4 The nectar of His pastimes flows along the pathway of the ears enters the lake of the heart exits from the eyes in the form of tears irrigates the dry land of the limbs and makes to sprout the plants of the bodily hairs standing erect in ecstasy.
     Text 5 His holy name cools the burning sufferings of this world. Shall we compare His holy name to the cooling moon? Ghanaśyāma dasa says: No. His holy name is like millions and millions of moons standing in one place.


Song 6 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 āhā mari mari         dekha āṅkhi bhari
          bhubana-mohana rūpa
adwaita ānanda-kanda          nityānanda
          caitanya rasera bhūpa
Text 2 jini bidhu-ghaṭā      badanera chaṭā
          madana garaba hāre
lahu lahu hāsi      sudhā rāśi rāśi
          baraṣe rasera bhāre
Text 3 kare jhalamala        tilaka ujwala
          lalita locana bhurū
kibā bāhu śobhā          muni-mano-lobha
          bakṣa parisara cāru
Text 4 gale śobhe bhāla          nānā phula-mālā
          su-beśa basana sāje
aruṇa caraṇa        bilasaye ghana-
          śyāmera hṛdaya mājhe


     Text 1 O! O! O! Fill your eyes with this sight! Look at these glorious forms that charm all the worlds! Look at Lord Advaita at Lord Nityānanda the root of all bliss and at Lord Caitanya the king of the nectar of spiritual love!
     Text 2 The glories of Their faces eclipse the glistening moon. They take away Kāmadeva's pride. Their gentle gentle smiles bring a flood of nectar a monsoon rain of nectar. 
     Text 3 They are effulgent. Their tilaka markings are glorious. Their eyes and eyebrows are graceful. Their glorious graceful arms rest at the side of Their chests chests that attract the sages’ hearts.
     Text 4 On Their necks rests garlands of many different flowers. Their garments are glorious. The reddish soles of their feet gloriously stand in Ghanaśyāma's heart.


Part 8 Gopāla dāsa


Song 1 (Dhanaśī-rāga)


Text 1 kara-yoḍe nabadwīpe bandiba nimā-i
adhama-janāra bandhu tin3he binu nā-i
Text 2 adwaita gosāñī bandiba sābadhāne
prakāśila ye-i hari nāma dayābāne
Text 3 bando bīrabhadra-pitā nityānanada nāma
prema hena dāne ye-i pūrṇa kaila kāma
Text 4 bando rūpa sanātana rāya rāmānanda
sāraṅga gosāñī bando parama sānanda
Text 5 sārbabhauma bando sarba-śāstre biśārada
prabhura sahita yānra kaila bādābāda
Text 6 ṣaḍabhuja dekhāñā prabhu dila daraśana
gopāla bale prabodha haila sārbabhauma-mana


     Text 1 Folding my palms I will offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Nimāi in Navadvipa. None but He is the friend of the fallen souls.
     Text 2 I will offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Advaita who mercifully revealed Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names.
     Text 3 I offer my respectful obeisances to Vīrabhadra's father who bears the name Nityānanda. When He gives the gift of ecstatic spiritual love all one's desires are at once fulfilled.
     Text 4 I offer my respectful obeisances to Rūpa Gosvāmī Sanātana Gosvāmī and Rāmānanda Rāya. I very happily offer my respectful obeisances to Sāraṅga Gosvāmī.
     Text 5 I offer my respectful obeisances to Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya who learned in all the scriptures debated with the Lord.
     Text 6 To Sārvabhauma the Lord revealed His six-armed form. Gopāla dāsa says: In this way Sārvabhauma's heart became enlightened.


Part 9 Govinda dāsa

Song 1 (Suha-i-rāga)

Text 1 śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya gorā śacīra dulāla
e-i ye pūrabe chila gokulera gopāla
Text 2 keha keha jānakī-ballabha chila rāma
keha bale nanda-lāla naba-ghana-śyāma
Text 3 pūrabe kaliyā chila gopī preme bhora
bhābiyā rādhāra baraṇa ebe haila gorā
Text 4 chala chala aruṇa-nayana anurāgī
nā pā-iyā bhābera ora ha-ila bairāgī
Text 5 sannyāsī bairāgī haiya bhrame deśe deśe
tabu nā pā-ila rādhā premera uddeśe
Text 6 gobinda-dāsiyā kaya kiśorī-kiśora
svarūpa rāmera sane se-i rase bhora


   Text 1 In His previous birth Śacī's son, fair Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, was a cowherd boy in Gokula. 
   Text 2 Some say He was Jānakī's beloved, Lord Rāmacandra. Others say He was Nanda's son, dark like a monsoon cloud. 
   Text 3 In ancient times He was dark, but now, overcome by personally experiencing the love the gopīs feel for Him, He became fair like Śrī Rādhārāṇī.
   Text 4 Tears flowed from His reddened eyes. He could not find the limit of that ecstatic love. He renounced everything.
   Text 5 He renounced everything, accepted sannyāsa, and wandered from place to place. He tried to understand Rādhā's love, but He could not.
   Text 6 Govinda dāsa says: It was in the company of Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāmānanda Rāya that Lord Caitanya, overwhelmed, tasted the nectar of ecstatic love for Śrī Śrī Kiśorī-Kiśora, the teenage divine couple.


Song 2 (Pāhiḍā-rāga)


Text 1 śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya     balarāma nityānanda
     pāriṣada saṅge abatāra
golokera prema-dhana     sabāre yāci-ā dila
     nā la-inu mu-i durācāra
Text 2 (Refrain) āre pāmara mana    marame rahala baḍa leśa
     saṅkīrtana prema-bādale
saba hiyā ḍubala     mohe bidhi bañcita kela
Text 3 śrī guru baiṣṇaba pade     kalpa-taru-chāyā pā-ā
     saba jība tāpa pāśarila
mu-i abhāgiyā     biṣa biṣaye mātiyā ra-inu
     hena yuge nistāra nā haila
Text 4 āgune puḍiyā maroṁ     jale parabeśa karoṁ
     biṣa khā-ā maroṁ mo pāpiyā
e-i mata kari yadi     maraṇa na kare bidhi
     prāṇa rahe ki sukha lāgiyā
Text 5 ehena gaurāṅga-guṇa   na karinu śrabaṇa
     haya haya kari ha hutāśa
hare-kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra    mukha bhari nā la-ilāma
     jīban-mṛta gobinda-dāsa


   Text 1 Accompanied by Their associates, to this world Lord Kṛṣṇa descended as Lord Caitanya and Lord Balarāma descended as Lord Nityānanda. They begged everyone please to accept the great treasure of love They had brought from the spiritual world of Goloka. I acted very badly. I refused to accept it.
   Text 2 (Refrain) O my wicked heart! A great javelin is now pushed into my heart. The saṅkīrtana chanting of the holy names brought a great monsoon of spiritual love. Every heart was plunged in that monsoon. Only my heart was not plunged. Destiny cheated me.
   Text 3 Resting in the shade of the kalpa-taru tree of the feet of Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas every soul has forgotten his burning sufferings. Not I. I am very unfortunate. I drank poison. Now I have become like a wild man. Even after a yuga I will not be delivered.
   Text 4 I will throw myself into a fire. I will drown in the waters. Sinful I will drink poison and die. If in spite of all my efforts destiny does not allow me to die then how can I be happy as I live and breathe?
   Text 5 I do not hear the descriptions of Lord Gaurāṅga's glories. Alas! Alas! I burn in the flames of a fire. The Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra does not fill my mouth. Govinda dāsa has become a walking corpse.


Song 3 (Sindhuḍā-rāga)


Text 1 kali timirākula    akhila loka dekhi
     badana-cānda parakāśa
locane prema sudhā-rasa rabi khaye   jaga-jana-tāpa-bināśa
Text 2 (Refrain) gaura karuṇā-sindhu abatāra
nija nāma gānthiyā nāma cintāmaṇi    jagate parā-ola hāra
Text 3 bhakata kalapa-taru    antare antaru
     ropaye ṭhāmahi ṭhāma
tachu pada-tale     abalambana pathika
     pūraye nija nija kāma
Text 4 bhāba gajendra caḍā-ola akiñcana aichana pahuṁka bilāsa
saṁsāra kālakūṭa biṣe dagadhala ekali gobinda dāsa


   Text 1 Seeing that all everyone was lost in the darkness of Kali-yuga Lord Caitanya made the moon of His face rise in this world. When the eyes of this world tasted that moon's nectar moonlight of spiritual love everyone felt that his burning sufferings had perished.
   Text 2 (Refrain) Lord Gaura who is an ocean of mercy descended to this world. Taking the cintāmaṇi jewels of His own holy names He strung a great necklace a necklace He placed on the people of this world.
   Text 3 Under the kalpa-taru tree of His devotees' feet Lord Caitanya made a resting place. Taking shelter there the souls traveling in this world find all their desires are fulfilled. 
   Text 4 The regal elephant of ecstatic spiritual love has picked up the devotees devotees for whom Kṛṣṇa is the only treasure and placed them in Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. Only Govinda dāsa is left behind. Staying in the world of birth and death He burns in flames of poison.


Song 4 (Sindhuḍā-rāga or Vasanta-rāga)


Text 1 pada-tale bhakata-kalapa-taru    siñcita pada-makaranda
     ya kara chāya surāsura nara-bara paramānanda nirabandha
Text 2 (Refrain) pekhalu gauracandra naṭa-rāja
jaṅgama hema dharādhara uyala   kiye nabadvīpa mājha
Text 3 nayana-nīra janita mandākinī     bhubana bharala taraṅge
nityānanda candra    gaura dinamaṇi
     bhrama-i pradakṣiṇa rasa-raṅge
Text 4 yā kara caraṇa samādhiye śaṅkara caturānana karu āśa
so pahuṁ patita kore kari kāndaye ki kahaba gobinda-dāsa


   Text 1 The devotees are walking kalpa-taru trees trees with nectar-filled flowers at their feet. In the shade of those trees the demigods humans and demons find a blissful shelter.
   Text 2 (Refrain) I saw Lord Gauracandra the king of dancers. How did golden Mount Meru suddenly appear in the midst of Navadvīpa?
   Text 3 Flowing from His eyes was a celestial Gaṅgā of tears a Gaṅgā that filled with world with its waves. The moon of Lord Nityānanda and the sun of Lord Gaura danced in the nectar dancing circle.
   Text 4 Lord Śiva meditates on Their feet. Four-headed Lord Brahmā yearns to meet Them. These two Lords Lord Caitanya and lord Nityānanda, embrace the fallen souls and weep. What more shall Govinda dāsa say?


Song 5 (Bhāṭiyāri-rāga)


Text 1 kali-yuge śrī-caitanya     abanī karilā dhanya
     patita-pābana yāra bāṇā
pūrabe rādhāra bhābe     gaurāṅga la-ihā ebe
     nija rūpa dhari kāñcā soṇā
Text 2 (Refrain) gaurāṅga patita-pābana abatāri
kali bhujaṅgama dekhi     hari-nāme jība rākhi
     āpani ha-ila dhanvantari
Text 3 gadādhara ādi yata     mahā mahā bhāgabata
     tārā saba gorā-guṇa gāya
akhila bhubana pati   goloke yān3hāra sthiti
     hari bali abanī loṭhāya
Text 4 son3ari pūraba guṇa     murachaya punaḥ punaḥ
     paraśe dharaṇī ulasita
caraṇa kamala kibā    nakhara ujora śotā
     gobinda-dāsa se bañcita


   Text 1 In Kali-yuga Lord Caitanya made the earth fortunate and glorious. He was the purifier of the fallen souls. At that time He manifested a form effulgent like gold a form effulgent like Śrī Rādhā’s.

   Text 2 (Refrain) Descending to this world Lord Caitanya purified the fallen souls. Seeing (the fallen souls bitten by) the snake of Kali-yuga Lord Caitanya became like Dhanvantari. Giving them the medicine of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names He rescued the fallen souls.
   Text 3 Gadādhara and the other great great devotees chanted Lord Gaura's glories. The Supreme Personality of Godhead the master of the all the worlds the master who stays in the spiritual world of Goloka descended to this world. He chanted "Hari!" In ecstasy He rolled on the ground.
   Text 4 Remembering the glories of His previous incarnation He fell unconscious again and again. At these times the earth became filled by bliss by His touch. The touch of His lotus feet and lotus toenails made the whole world glorious. Only Govinda dāsa was cheated of Their touch.


Song 6 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 kali kabalita     kaluṣa jaḍita
     dekhiyā jībera dukha
karala udaya    ha-iya sadaya
     chāḍiyā gokula-sukha
Text 2 (Refrain) dekha gaura guṇera nāhi sīmā
dīna-hīna pā-ā    bilāya yāci-ā
     biriñci-bāñchita prema
Text 3 jāti na bicāre    ā-caṇḍāle tāre
     karuṇā-sāgara gorā
bhāba bhare sadā aṅga ṭalamala     gamane bhubana bhorā
Text 4 kṣaṇe kṣaṇe kata   karuṇā karaye
     garaje gabhīra nāde
adhama dekhiyā   ākula ha-iyā
     dhariyā dhariyā kānde
Text 5 caraṇa kamala     ati su-komala
     rātā utpala rīta
badana kamale    gada gada svare
     gā-oye rasamaya gīta
Text 6 hāhākāra kari     bhuja-yuga tuli
     bale hari hari bola
rādhā rādhā bali     kānde ucca kari
     rahi gadādhara kola
Text 7 muralī muralī     kṣaṇe kṣaṇe bali
     svarūpa mukha nehāre
gobinda dāsiyā   se bhāba dekhiyā
     tāhā ki kahite pāre


   Text 1 Seeing the sufferings of the fallen souls souls devoured by Kali-yuga souls stunned by their own sins Lord Kṛṣṇa felt compassion for them. Leaving behind the bliss of Gokola He came to this world.
   Text 2 (Refrain) Look at Lord Gaura! His glories have no end. Approaching rhe poor fallen souls He begs them to accept the gift of ecstatic spiritual love love even the demigod Brahmā yearns to attain.
   Text 3 Lord Gaura does not consider caste. He gaves that love to all even down to the caṇḍālas. Lord Gaura is an ocean of mercy. Overcome with ecstatic love His body trembles as He walks. His steps fill the earth with bliss. 
   Text 4 Moment after moment He is overcome with compassion. In a deep voice He roars. Seeing the fallen souls He is overcome. Hugging and hugging them He weeps.
   Text 5 He soft feet are like red lotus flowers. His face is like a lotus flower. His words spoken in a broken voice are the sweetest songs.
   Text 6 Raising His arms He roars "Hari! Haribol!" Calling out "Rādhā! Rādhā!" He hugs Gadādhara and weeps. 
   Text 7 Moment after moment calling out "Flute! Flute!" He gazes at Svarūpa Dāmodara's face. Govinda dāsa simply watches all this ecstasy. What power has he to describe it?


Song 7 (Kedāra-rāga)


Text 1 preme ḍhala ḍhala     gorā kalebara
     naṭana rase bhela bhora
e dīna yāminī    ābeśe abaśa
     priya gadādhara kora
Text 2 (Refrain) gorā pahuṁ karuṇāmaya abatāra
yo guṇa kīrtane     patita durgata jane
     sabe pā-ola nistāra
Text 3 hari hari bali    bhuja yuga tuli
     pūlake pūraye tanu
aruṇa diṭhi jale     abanī bhāsaye
     suradhunī dhārā bahu janu
Text 4 gupata prema-dhana     jaga-bhari bilā-ola
     pūrala sabahuka āśa
so prema-sindhu     bindu nāhi pā-ola
     pāsari gobinda dāsa


   Text 1 Tears of love stream down Lord Gaura's body. He is overcome with the nectar of dancing. Overcome with ecstasy He hugs dear Gadādhara.
   Text 2 (Refrain) Merciful Lord Gaura has descended to this world. Simply by chanting His glories all the fallen unfoertunate souls have become delivered.
   Text 3 Raising His arms He calls out "Hari! Hari!" The hairs of His body stand erect. From His eyes stream tears that flood the earth tears like the celestial Gaṅgā.
   Text 4 The confidential treasure of divine love He freely gave to the people of this world. He fulfilled everyone's desire. He distributed the great ocean of spiritual love. Still He did not give even a single drop to Govinda dāsa. Govinda dāsa He forgot.


Song 8 (Śrī-rāga)


Text 1 patita-pābana     parbhura caraṇa
     śaraṇa la-ila ye
iha paraloke    sukhera se līlā
     dekhite pā-ola se
Text 2 śuna śuna śuna    sujana bhā-i
     bhāṅgala salaka dhanda
manera āndhāra    saba dūre gela
     bhābite se sukha-canda
Text 3 se-rupa lābaṇi    se diṭhi cāhani
     se manda madhura hāsi
se bhuru-bhaṅgima    adhara raṅgima
     ugare pīyūṣa rāśi
Text 4 se pada sundara    nakhara cānde
     bilāse uḍura-gaṇe
bibidha bilāse   binoda bilāsī
     gobinda-dāsa se jāne


   Text 1 They who take shelter of Lord Gaura's feet feet that purify the fallen souls are able even while they reside in this world to see the Lord's blissful pastimes in the spiritual world.
   Text 2 Listen. Listen. Listen O my brothers. the mystery is now broken. When the moon of Lord Gaura's face rises there blinding darkness flees from the heart.
   Text 3 His form is handsome. His smiles and glances are sweet. His eyebrows are curved. His lips are red. He is a flood of sweet nectar.
   Text 4 His feet are graceful. His toenails are like moons moons glistening amongst a host of stars. Blissful and glorious He enjoys many pastimes This Govinda dāsa knows.


Song 9 (Gāndhāra-rāga)


Text 1 jambunada-tanu    badana ambuja
     saghane hari hari bola
nayana ambuje    baha-i suradhunī
     kambu kandhare dola
Text 2 (Refrain) dekha dekha gaura bara dwija-rāja
saṅge sahacara   sughaḍa śekhara
     uyala nabadwīpa mājha
Text 3 taruṇa prema-bhare     dina rajanī nācata
     aruṇa caraṇa athira
karuṇa diṭhi jale    e mahī bhāsala
     nīlaya baraṇa gabhīra
Text 4 kabahuṁ nācata    kabahuṁ gā-ota
     kabahuṁ gada gada bhāṣa
akhila jaga-jane     preme pūrala
     bañcita gobinda dāsa


   Text 1 His body is gold. His face is a lotus flower. Loudly He chants "Hari! Hari!" From His lotus eyes a celestial Gaṅgā of tears flows down His conchshell neck.
   Text 2 (Refrain) Look! Look at Lord Gaura the king of the brāhmaṇas! Surrounded by His companions He stands at the crest of Navadvīpa.
   Text 3 Overcome with ever-new ecstatic spiritual love He dances day and night with restless reddish feet. The tears from His merciful eyes flood the world with their deep dark waters.
   Text 4 Sometimes He dances. Sometimes He sings. Sometimes He speaks broken words. Every person in the world He has plunged int the flood of ecstatic spiritual love. Only Govinda dāsa was not plunged. Only he was cheated.


Song 10 (Beloyāra-rāga and Kandarpa-tāla)


Text 1 lākha-bāṇa kanaka     kaṣila kalebara
     mohana sumeru jiniyā su-ṭhāna
gada gada nīra      thira nāhi pā-o-i
     bhubana-mohana kiye nayana-sandhāna
Text 2 (Refrain) dekha re mā-i sundara śacī-nandanā
ā-jānu-lambita bhuja bahu su-balanā
Text 3 mayamatta hātī bhāti gati calanā
kiyere mālatīra mālā gorā aṅge dolanā
Text 4 śarada-indu jini sundara bayanā
prema ānande paripūrita nayanā
Text 5 pada du-i cāri calata ḍagamagiyā
thira nāhi bāndhe paḍata pahu ḍhaliyā
Text 6 gobinda dāsa kahe gorā baḍa raṅgiyā
balihāri yā-u mu-i saṅgera anusaṅgiyā


   Text 1 His form is more effulgent than gold purified millions of times. He is more charming than golden Mount Sumeru. He speaks broken words ina choked voice. Tears stream from His eyes. He cannot stay still. He enchants the worlds. For what does His eyes search?
   Text 2 (Refrain) Look at mother Śacī's handsome son! His garceful arms reach to His knees.
   Text 3 He walks like a graceful wild elephant. A mālatī garland sways to and fro on His fair body.
   Text 4 His handsome face defeats the autumn moon. Disguised as tears spiritual bliss and love flood His eyes.
   Text 5 Staggering He takes two or four steps. Unsteady the Lord falls. 
   Text 6 Govinda dāsa says: I joyfully surrender everything to Lord Gaura. I am a follower of His followers.


Song 11 (Sāraṅga-rāga)


Text 1 campaka śoṇa     kusuma kanakācala
     jitala gaura-tanu lābaṇī re
unnata-gīma     sīma nāhi anubhaba
     jaga-mano-mohana bhān3anire
Text 2 (Refrain) jaya śacī-nandana tri-bhubana-bandana
kali-yuga-kāla-bhujaga-bhaya-khaṇḍana
Text 3 bipula pulaka kula     ākula kalebara
     gara gara antara prema-bhare
lahu lahu hāsini     gada gada bhāṣini
     kata mandākinī nayane jhare
Text 4 nija rase nācata   nayana ḍhulāyata
     gāyata kata kata bhakata meli
ye rase bhāsi    abaśa mahī-maṇḍala
     gobinda dāsa tahi paraśa nā bheli


   Text 1 Ah! Lord Gaura's graceful glorious form defeats the yellow campaka flower and the golden mountain. His long neck has grace without end. His graceful gestures charm the world's hearts.
   Text 2 (Refrain) Glory to Śacī's son! The three worlds bow befor Him. He breaks into pieces all fear of the black Kali-yuga snake.
   Text 3 The hairs of His body stand erect. His heart is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. He gently gently smiles. He speaks broken words in a choked voice. How many celestial Gaṅgās of tears flow from His eyes?
   Text 4 Tasting the nectar of love for a person who is actually His own self He dances. Overcome with ecstasy His eyelids begin to close. How many devotees assemble there and sing? Overcome every resident of the earth's circle now floats in the nectar of ecstatic love. Only Govinda dāsa cannot touch that nectar.


Song 12 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 gaura baraṇa tanu śohana    mohana sundara 
     madhura su-ṭhāma
anupama aruṇa    kiraṇa jini ambara 
     sundara cāru bayāna
Text 2 (Refrain) pekhalu gaurāṅgacandra bibhora
kali-yuga-kaluṣa-    timira-ghora-nāśaka 
     nabadwīpa cānda ujora
Text 3 bhābahi bhora     ghora duhuṁ locana
     mocana bhaba-nada-bandha
naba naba prema-bhara     bara tanu sudnara
     uyala bhakata gaṇa saṅga
Text 4 lahu lahu hāsa    bhāṣa mṛdu bolata
     śohata gati ati manda
dīna jane nija   bīja de-i tārala
     bañcita dāsa gobinda


   Text 1 His complexion is fair. His form is splendid enchanting handsome sweet and graceful. His garments defeat the peerless rising sun. His face is handsome and graceful.
   Text 2 (Refrain) I saw Lord Gaurāṅgacandra. Now I am overcome. Lord Gaura is a splendid moon rising in Navadvīpa a moon that destroys the horrible darkness of Kali-yuga's sins.
   Text 3 His eyes are restless with ecstatic spiritual love. He frees everyuone from the bonds of repeeated birth and death. His graceful form is overcome with newer and newer ecstatic spiritual love. He stays amongst the devotees.
   Text 4 He gently gently smiles. He speaks sweet words. He slow movements are graceful. Giving them the seed of ecstatic spiritual love He delivers the poor fallen people. Only Govinda dāsa He did not deliver. Only Govinda dāsa was cheated.


Song 13 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 pulake balita ati     lalita hema-tanu
     anukhaṇa laṭana bibhora
kata anubhabi    abadhi nāhi pā-iye
     prema-sindhu baha nayanaka lora
Text 2 (Refrain) jaya jaya bhubana-maṅgala abatāra
kali-yuga bāraṇa     mada-binibāraṇa
     hari-dhwani jagata-bithāra
Text 3 nija rase bhāsi    hāsi kṣaṇe rom3ya-i
     ākula gada gada bola
prema bhare gara gara     nā cine āpana para
     patita janere de-i kola
Text 4 iha sudhā-sāyare   gamana surāsura
     dina rajanī nāhi jāni
gobinda dāsa bindu    lāgi roya-i
     śrī-ballabha paramāṇi


   Text 1 The hairs of His graceful golden body stand erect. Moment after moment He is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. How many feelings of ecstatic spiritual love does he feel? Oceans of spiritual love flow as tears from His eyes.
   Text 2 (Refrain) Glory glory to the Supreme Lord who descending to this place brings auspiciousness to the whole world. He stops the raging wild elephant of Kali-yuga. He fills the worlds with the sound of Lord Hari's holy names.
   Text 3 He is plunged in the nectar of ecstatic love for a person that is actually His own self. One moment He laughs. The next moment He weeps. Overcome He speaks broken words in a choked voice. Overcome with ecstasy He does not know who He isd and who others are. (Overcome with compassion) He embraces the fallen souls.
   Text 4 He plunges the demigods and demons in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. He does not know if it is day or night. Tasting a drop of that nectar Govinda dāsa weeps. Now he knows for certain that Lord Gaura is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself Śrī Kṛṣṇa the beloved of the goddess of fortune.


Song 14 (Tori-rāga)


Text 1 dekhata bekata gauracandra beḍhala bhakata-nakhata-bṛnda
akhila bhubana ujora-kārī kunda-kanaka kāntiyā
Text 2 agati patita kumuda-bandhu heri uchala rasika sindhu
hṛdaya-kuhara-timira-hārī udita dinahuṁ rātiyā
Text 3 sahaje sundara madhura deha ānande ānande nā bandhe theha
ḍhuli ḍhuli calata khalata matta-kari-bara-bhātiyā
Text 4 laṭana ghaṭana bhaigela bhora mukunda mādhaba gobinda bola
rom3yata hasata dharaṇī khasita śohata pulaka pāntiyā
Text 5 mahimā mahimā ko kahu ora nija-para dhari karaye kora
prema amiyā harakhi barakhi tarakhita mahī mātiyā
Text 6 yo rase uttama adhama bhāṣa bañcita ekali gobinda dāsa
ko jāne ki khaṇe kona gaḍhala kāṭha kaṭhina chātiyā


   Text 1 Look at Lord Gaura. He glistens like a moon surrounded by the stars of the devotees a moon glorious like jasmine flowers and gold a moon that fills all the worlds with light.
   Text 2 The moon of Lord Gaura is the friend of the lotus flowers that are the fallen sinners who dare not hope for a good future. The moon of Lord Gaura brings great tidal waves to the ocean of the rasika devotees who taste the nectar of transcendental mellows. The moon of Lord Gaura removes the darkness that fills the cave of the heart. The moon of Lord Gaura shines day and night.
   Text 3 Lord Gaura's form is naturally handsome and charming. Filled with bliss after bliss He cannot remain peaceful. Overcome with ecstasy He staggers as He walks gloriously staggers like an intoxicated elephant.
   Text 4 Overcome with ecstasy He calls out "Mukunda! Mādhava! Govinda!" He weeps. He laughs. He falls to the ground. The hairs of His body stand erect. He is glorious. 
   Text 5 His glories are the best of glories. Who will say where His glories end? Both friends and outsiders He hugs holding them in His arms. Showering a monsoon of the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love He makes this thirsty world wild with bliss.
   Text 6 Exalted saints and fallen sinners alike float in that flood of nectar. Only Govinda dāsa does not float there. Only he is cheated of that nectar. When will Govinda dāsa be soaked by that nectar? Who knows? Alas the wooden umbrella of Govinda dāsa's hard heart keeps him always dry.


Song 15 (Kānāḍā-rāga)


Text 1 nirupama hema-jyoti jini baraṇa
saṅgīte raṅgita raṇjita caraṇa
Text 2 nācata gauracandra guṇa-maṇiyā
caudike hari hari dhwani dhani dhaniyā
Text 3 śarada-indu-nindi sundara bayanā
ahar-niśi prema nijhore jhare nayanā
Text 4 bipula pulaka-paripūrita deha
nija rase bhāsi nā pāya-i theha
Text 5 jaga-bhari pūrala ehena-o ānanda
mahī māhā bañcita dāsa gobinda


   Text 1 His peerless complexion defeats the splendor of gold. The soles of His feet are reddish. He is delighted by the devotees' songs.
   Text 2 Adorned with the jewels of all virtues Lord Gauracandra dances. The four directions are filled with sounds of "Hari! Hari!"
   Text 3 His handsome face rebukes the autumn moon. Day and night tears of ecstatic spiritual love stream from His eyes.
   Text 4 The hairs of His body stand erect. He floats in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. He cannot remain peaceful.
   Text 5 He fills the worlds with bliss. On the entire earth Govinda dāsa alone was cheated of that bliss.


Song 16 (Beloyāra-rāga)


Text 1 suradhunī-tīre tīra māhā bilasa-i
sama-baya bālaka saṅga
Text 2 kara-tāla tāla balita hari-hari-dhwani
nācata naṭa-bara bhaṅga
Text 3 (Refrain) jaya śacī-nandana    tri-bhubana-bandana
     pūrṇa pūrṇa abatāra
jaga-anuraṇjana     bhaba-bhaya-bhaṇjana
     saṅkīrtana paracāra
Text 4 campaka gaura     prema-bhare kampa-i
     jhampa-i sahacara kora
aṅgahi aṅga     pulakākula ākula
     kaṇja nayane jhare lora
Text 5 dhani dhani bhābinī    catura-śiromaṇi
     bidagdha jībana jība
gobinda dāsa    ehena rasa bañcita
     abahu śrabaṇe nāhi pība


   Text 1 On the Gaṅgā's banks a boy plays with His friends.
   Text 2 Clapping His hands and singing "Hari! Hari!" He who is the best of dancers dances.
   Text 3 (Refrain) Glory to Śacī's son! The three worlds bow down before Him. He is the perfect and complete Supreme lord descended to this world. He fills the worlds with bliss. He breaks into pieces all fears of the cycle of birth and death. He is rapt in pastimes of saṅkīrtana of chanting the holy names.
   Text 4 He is fair like a campaka flower. He trembles in the ecstasy of spiritual love. With great hugs He covers His friends. The hairs of His body stand erect. Tears of ecstatic spiritual love flow from His lotus eyes.
   Text 5 "Bravo! Bravo!" call the grown-up ladies. Boy Gaura is supremely intelligent the crest-jewel of the wise. He is the life of all who live. Alas Govinda dāsa was cheated of tasting the nectar of love for Him. Even at this moment Govinda dāsa has no power to sip with his ears the sweet nectar of these words describing Lord Gaura's pastimes.


Song 17 (Torī-rāga)


Text 1 cita cora gaura aṅga    raṅge phirata bhakata saṅga
     madana-mohana chānduyā
hema-baraṇa haraṇa deha    pulaka aruṇa taruṇa seha
     tapata jagata bandhuyā
Text 2 bhābe abaśa dibasā-rāti     nīpa-kusuma pulaka-pānti
     badana śarada induyā
saghane rodana saghane hāsa    ānahi bayana birasa bhāṣa
     nibiḍa prema sindhuyā
Text 3 ami-ā jitala madhura bola   aruṇa caraṇe maṇjīra rola
     calata manda manduyā
akhila bhubana preme bhāsa     āśa karata gobinda dāsa
     prema-sindhu binduyā


   Text 1 Lord Gaura's limbs roâ the heart. Surrounded by His devotees He turns in the dancing-circle. He is more charming than Kāmadeva. His body defeats the splendor of gold. The hairs of His body stand erect. He is fair and youthful. He is the only friend of this world a world burning in the flames of many sufferings.
   Text 2 Day and night He is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. Like kadamba filaments the hairs of His body stand erect. His face is glorious like the autumn moon. One moment He weeps. The next moment He laughs. The next moment his mouth speaks bitter words. He floats in an ocean of intense spiritual love.
   Text 3 His sweet words defeat nectar. As He slowly slowly walks the anklets at His reddish feet speak again and again. He makes the whole world float in ecstatic spiritual love. Govinda dāsa aspires to taste one drop of that ocean of spiritual love.


Song 18 (Śrī-rāga)


Text 1 sundara gaura naṭa-rāja
kāñcana kalapa-taru nabadwīpa mājha
Text 2 hāsaki jharaye amiyā makaranda
hāraki taraka-dyotira chanda
Text 3 pada-tala alaki kamala ghana-rāga
tāhe kalahaṁsaki nūpura jāge
Text 4 gobinda dāsa kahaye matimanta
bhulala yāhe dwija-rāja basanta


   Text 1 Handsome Lord Gaura is the king of dancers. He is a golden kalpa-taru tree growing in Navadvīpa.
   Text 2 His smiles are streams of sweet nectar. His necklace glistens like a host of stars.
   Text 3 The soles of His feet are like red lotus flowers. His anklets jangle like cooing swans.
   Text 4 Govinda dāsa says: The wise devotees are intoxicated by the glories of Lord Gaura the king of the brāhmaṇas.


Song 19 (Śrī-rāga)


Text 1 nīrada nayāne naba-ghana siñcane pūrala mukula abalamba
sweda makaranda bindu bindu cuyata bikaśita bhāba kadamba
Text 2 (Refrain) pekhanu naṭa-bara gaura-kiśora
abhinaba hema kalapa-taru sañcaru suradhunī-tīre ujora
Text 3 cañcala caraṇa kamala-tale jhaṅkaru bhakata bhramara-gaṇa bhora 
parimale lubadha surāsura dhāya-i ahar-niśi rahata agora
Text 4 abirata prema-ratana-phala-bitaraṇe akhila manoratha pūra
tākara caraṇe dīna-hīna bañcita gobinda dāsa bahu dūra


   Text 1 The flood of tears from His monsoon-cloud eyes are like a necklace of flower-buds. His perspiration is like flower-nectar falling drop by drop. His symptoms of ecstasy are like a blossoming kadamba flower.
   Text 2 (Refrain) I saw Lord Gaura-kiśora the king of dancers. He is like a new-gold kalpa-taru tree effulgent by the Gaṅgā's banks.
   Text 3 His quickly-moving feet are a lotus flower that makes the buzzing bees of the devotees wild with bliss. Attracted by that lotus flower's fragrance the eager demigods and demons run to that place. Day and night they stay near that lotus flower.
   Text 4 Without stop Lord Gaura gives away the jewel of ecstatic spiritual love. He fulfills the desires of everyone. The poor fallen people all take shelter of His feet. Only Govinda dāsa must stay far away. Only he is cheated of Lord Gaura's association.


Song 20 (Śrī-rāga Daśakuśi)


Text 1 ki herilāma aparūpa gorā guṇa-nidhi
kata-i candra niṅgaḍiyā yena niramila bidhi
Text 2 ugāra-i sudhā janu gorā-mukhera hāsi
nirakhite gorā-rūpa hṛdaye raila paśi
Text 3 āṅkhi pālaṭite kata yuga hena māni
hiyāra mājhe thora gorā-rūpa-khāni
Text 4 mane abhilāṣa kṣamā nāhi kara mora
gobinda dāsa kahe mu-i bhela bhora


   Text 1 What wonder did I see? I was Lord Gaura the treasury of all transcendental virtues. Extracting the nectar from how many moons did the creator create Lord Gaura's form?
   Text 2 Lord Gaura's smile is like a stream of sweet nectar. Entering my own heart I see Lord Gaura's form there.
   Text 3 If I cannot see Him there how many yugas does every moment seem to me? In my heart I will keep Lord Gaura's form always.
   Text 4 A great desire fills my heart. I cannot be patient and peaceful. Govinda dāsa says: I am overcome by my desire.


Song 21 (Bairabī-rāga)


Text 1 āju śacī-nandana-naba-abhiṣeka
ānanda-kanda nayana bhari dekha
Text 2 nityānanda adwaita mili raṅge
gā-ota unamata bhakatahi saṅge
Text 3 hera-ite nirupama kāñcana-deha
bariṣaye sabahuṁ nayane ghana meha
Text 4 punaḥ-punaḥ nirakhite gorā mukha-indu
uchalala prema-sudhā-rasa-sindhu
Text 5 jaga-bhari pūrala prema-taraṅge
bañcita gobinda-dāsa parasaṅge


   Text 1 Filling your eyes with the sight please look at the abhiṣeka of Śacī's son an abhiṣeka that is the root of all bliss.
   Text 2 Nityānanda and Advaita come and sing Lord Gaura's glories. The devotees are wild with bliss.
   Text 3 The devotees gaze at Lord Gaura's peerless golden form. Their eyes become clouds showering a monsoon of tears of love.
   Text 4 Again and again they gaze at the moon of Lord Gaura's face a moon that makes great tiadal waves rise in the nectar ocean of ecstatic spiritual love.
   Text 5 Those waves of ecstatic love now flood all the worlds. Only Govinda dāsa is not touched by them. Only he is cheated.


Song 22 (Bhairabī-rāga)


Text 1 śrībāsa paṇḍita bigraha gehe
ratna-siṁhāsane śrī-gaura śohe
Text 2 bapu sa-e jyoti nikasaye kata
janu udaya bhela bhānu śata śata
Text 3 ta heriyā sītāpati nitā-i
karu abhiṣeka ānande abagā-i
Text 4 kalasi bhari suradhunī-bāri
āni basā-ola kari sāri sāri
Text 5 jhāri bhari adwaita mana ānande
snāna karā-ola śrī-gauracande
Text 6 gobinda dāsa ati mati manda
nā herala so abhiṣeka ānanda


   Text 1 In the temple-room of Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita's house sitting on a jewel throne Lord Gaura shines with great splendor.
   Text 2 How effulgent is His form! It is like hundreds and hundreds of rising suns.
   Text 3 Gazing at Him Lord Nityānanda and Lord Advaita joyfully perform Lord Gaura's abhiṣeka.
   Text 4 Many jars of Gaṅgā water are brought. They are placed row after row.
   Text 5 Filling a pitcher joyful-hearted Lord Advaita bathes Lord Gauracandra.
   Text 6 Govinda dāsa is very sad at heart. He did not see Lord Gaura's blissful abhiṣeka.


Song 23 (Bhairabī-rāga)


Text 1 adwaita ācārya gaurāṅga-śire
ḍhārata jāhnabī-bāri dhīre dhīre
Text 2 snāna samāpana yaba tachu bhela
nitā-i hema-aṅga muchā-ola
Text 3 paṭṭa-basana le-i śrībāsa paṇḍita
gaura-kalebare karala beṣṭita
Text 4 cuyā candana taba āni gadā-i
gorā aṅge lepe sukhe abagā-i
Text 5 gaurī-dāsa śire dharala chatra
narahari byajane byajaye gātra
Text 6 adabhuta ānanda śrībāsa-gehe
gobinda-dāsa bañcita bhela tāhe


   Text 1 Slowly slowly Lord Advaita Acarya pours Gaṅgā water on Lord Gaurāṅga's head.
   Text 2 The bathing completed with a towel Lord Nitāi carefully dries Lord Gaura's golden limbs.
   Text 3 With exquisite garments Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita covers Lord Gaura's body.
   Text 4 Bringing sandal-paste and fragrances Gadādhara anoints Lord Gaura's limbs. Gadādhara is plunged into a flood of bliss.
   Text 5 Gaurī-dāsa holds a parasol over Lord Gaura's head. Moving a fan Narahari fans Lord Gaura's body.
   Text 6 Wonderful bliss fills Śrīvāsa home. Alas. Govinda dāsa did not see it. He was cheated of that sight.



Song ??

Text 1 jaya jaya śri-kṛṣṇa-caitanya nāma
kali-mada-mathana nityānanda dhāma
Text 2 aparūpa hema kalapa-taru jora
prema-ratana phala dharala ujora
Text 3 ayācita vitara-i kāhe nā upekhi
aichana sadaya-hṛdaya nāhi dekhi
Text 4 ye nācite nācaye badhira jada andha
kāndite akhila bhubana-jana kānda
Text 5 teṁhi anumāniye duhuṁ parameśa
prati darapaṇe janu rabira ābeśa
Text 6 iha rase yāhāra nāhika biśoyāsa
maline mukure nāhi bimba bikāśa
Text 7 gobinda dāsiyā kahe tāhe ki bicāra
koṭī kalapa tāra nāhika bistāra


Part 10 Hari dāsa


Song 1 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 iha kali-yuga dhanya       nityānanda śrī-caitanya
          patita lāgiyā abatāra
dekhi jība baḍa dukhī         haiyā sa-karuṇā āṅkhi
          hari-nāma gānthi dila hāra
Text 2 nija-guṇa prema-dhana      dila gorā jane jana
          patitera āge dāna kare
nija bhakta saṅge kari        phire prabhu gaura-hari
          yāciyā yāciyā ghare ghare
Text 3 jaḍa paṅgu andha yata      paśu pākhī āra kata
          kāṇdāyāla nije prema diyā
prema saba matta haiyā        anna jala teyāgiyā
          phire tāra nāciyā gā-iyā
Text 4 hena prabhu nā bhajinu        janamiyā nā marinu
          hārā-inu nityānanda nidhi
kahe hari-dāsa chāra          kona gati nāhi āra
          hena yuge bañcita kaila bidhi


     Text 1 Kali-yuga is a fortunate and glorious time for then Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda descend to this world to save the fallen souls. With compassionate eyes seeing the suffering fallen souls the two Lords string a jewel-necklace of the holy names.
     Text 2 Because His very virtuous Lord Gaura gives away the great treasure of spiritual love. Going from person to person He gives every fallen soul the gift of this treasure. Accompanied by His devotees Lord Gaura-Hari goes from house to house begging and begging everyone please to accept His gift.
     Text 3 To everyone even to the fools the lame and the blind He gives His gift of ecstatic spiritual love. Now everyone becomes wild with ecstatic spiritual love. Turning away from food and drink they sing and dance.
     Text 4 I did not worship a Lord that was so kind. I was born. Not yet have I died. I was cheated of the treasure Lord Nityānanda brought. Kṛṣṇa dāsa who is worthless like a pile of ashes says: I have no hope but Him. Even though it is the auspicious Kali-yuga destiny still cheated me of this treasure.


Part 11 Hari-vallabha dāsa


Song 1 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) śyāmera tanu aba gaura-baraṇa
gokula choḍi aba      nadīyā ā-ola
          baṁśī choḍi kīratana
Text 2 kālindī-taṭa choḍi         surasarit-taṭe
          abahuṁ karata bilāsa
aruṇa-baraṇa ḍora-kaupīna aba
          choḍi pīta-dhaḍā bāsa
Text 3 bāme nahata aba rā-i sudhā-mukhī 
          braja-badhū nahata niyaḍe
gadādhara paṇḍita        phirata bāme aba
          sadā sa-e bhakata bihare
Text 4 choḍi mohana cūḍā          śire śikhā rākhala
          mukhe kahata rārā rārā
kahe hari-ballabha       teracha cāhani
          du-nayane galata dhārā


     Text 1 (Refrain) He whose body was dark now has a fair complexion. Leaving Gokula He came to Nadīyā. Putting down His flute He now sings the holy names.
     Text 2 Leaving the Yamunā He came to the Gaṅgā's banks. There He enjoys pastimes. Putting down His yellow garments now He wears the saffron cloth of a sannyāsī.
     Text 3 Sweet-faced Rādha‘ is no longer at His left. The vraja-gopis are no longer around Him. Now Gadādhara Paṇḍita is at His left. Now He always enjoys pastimes with His devotees.
     Text 4 He abandoned His glorious hair. Now He wears a śikhā. With His mouth He now loudly calls the holy names. Hari-vallabha says: Turning away from crooked playful glances He now makes flooding rivers of tears flow from His eyes.


Song 2 (Śrī-rāga)


Text 1 prathame bandiyā gāha gaurāṅga gosā-ī
advaita nityānanda bine āra gati nā-i
Text 2 karuṇā-nayana-koṇe eka-bāra dekha
āpana janera jana kari more likha
Text 3 pāya dhāri dayā kari tāre hena nā-i
parihāra patita dekhiyā saba ṭhā-i
Text 4 yeba jana paṇa kari la-ila śaraṇa
svapane nayane mane nāhi daraśana
Text 5 dayāmaya kathā kaya hena keba āche
mu-i pāpī nibediyā kaya pahuṁ pāche
Text 6 dante ghāsa karo āśaya mora ha'ye
ballabha dāsiya kaya baiṣṇabera pāya


     Text 1 First I shall bow down. Then I shall sing. I sing that Lord Gaurāṅga Gosa-i Lord Advaita and Lord Nityānanda are my only shelter. I have no shelter but Them. 
     Text 2 O Lords please place Your glance of mercy upon me. Please write that I am the servant of Your servants.
     Text 3 I grasp Your feet. Please be merciful to me. There is no one like You. Casting a glance on the fallen souls of every place You deliver them all.
     Text 4 You give shelter to anyone who approaches You. With my eyes in my heart or in my dreams I have not seen anyone like You.
     Text 5 Who speaks kind words the way You do?  O Lords I a poor sinner place a request before You.
     Text 6 Placing a blade of grass between my teeth I place my request before You: Please place this Vallabha dāsa always at the Vaiṣṇavas’ feet.


Part 12 Jagadānanda


Song 1 (Sri-rāga)


Text 1 pāpe purala pṛthibī parisara pekhi parama dayāla
prema-paya paripūrṇa payo-nidhi prakaṭa praṇata-pāla
Text 2 (Refrain) pahuṁ patita-pābana nāma
paśupa preyasī pirīti para-rasa praṇaya pīyūṣa dhāma
Text 3 praṇata-pālaka padabī pāla-i pūraba parikara meli
pracura pātaki-pāpa parihara pāda pariṇata keli
Text 4 pūja-i paśupati padma āsana pāda-paṅkaja-dwandwa
para pañca pathe paḍi pekhi nā pekhala jagadānanda andha


     Text 1 Seeing that the earth was filled with sins, the supremely merciful Lord, the protector of the surrendered souls, flooded the earth with an ocean of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 2 (Refrain) He who bears the name Patita-pāvana (purifier of the fallen) is the Supreme Lord. He is the abode of the nectar of spiritual love. He is Lord Krsna, for whom the gopis feel the sweet nectar of love.
     Text 3 He who is the protector of the surrendered souls came to this world, met with His previous associates, enjoyed pastimes, and removed the sins of this world.
     Text 4 Śiva and Brahmā worship His lotus feet. Blind Jagadānanda, who stumbles as he walks on the path, even if he looks, cannot see Him.


Song 2 (Dhanaśī-rāga)


Text 1 ageyāna-dhwānta duranta nimagana
     akhila loka nehāri
kona bihi nabadwīpa de-ola
     ujora dīpaka jāri
Text 2 (Refrain) saba diga daraśana bhela
kiraṇe jhalamala         bahira antare
          timira saba dūre gela
Text 3 ku-patha parihari sādhu-pantha pathika paricaya ranṅa
nāma-hemaka dāma pahirala prema-maṇikhāni saṅga
Text 4 dulaha sampade dīna duragata
     jagata bhari paripūra
janama āndhala      ekali rahu hāsa
          jagata bāhira dūra


     Text 1 Seeing that all the worlds were plunged into the unbearable darkness of ignorance, He placed a glistening lamp in Navadvīpa.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Now all the directions are clearly seen. The glistening light shines within and without. All the darkness has fled far away.
     Text 3 Now everyone has left the bad path. Now everyone happily walks on the path of the saints. Everyone wears a golden necklace of the Lord's holy names, a necklace where the jewels are the ecstasies of spiritual love.
     Text 4 Now the poor misguided people are rich with that great spiritual treasure. The whole world is filled with that treasure. Only one lonely person, a person blind from birth, is shut out from that world of treasure.


Song 3 (Dhanaśī-rāga)


Text 1 nara hari-nāma antare achu bhāvaha habe bhaba-sāgare pāra
dhara re śrabaṇe nara hari-nāma sādare cintāmaṇi uha sāra
Text 2 yadi kṛta-pāpī ādare kabhu mantraka-rāja śrabaṇe kare pāna
śrī-Kṛṣṇa-caitanya-balye hayatachu durgama pāpa-tāpa saha trāṇa
Text 3 karaha gaura guru baiṣṇaba āśraya laha nara hari-nāma hāra
saṁsāre nāma la-i sukṛti ha-iyate re ā-pāmara durācāra
Text 4 ithe kṛta biṣaya tṛṣṇā pahuṁ nāma-hārā yo dhāraṇe śrama tāra
kutṛṣṇa-jagadānanda kṛta-kalmaṣa kumati rahala kārāgāra


     Text 1 O people, when in your hearts you love Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names, then you will cross to the farther shore of the ocean of birth and death. O people, with your ears please grasp Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. With love and respect hold the cintāmaṇi jewel of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names.
     Text 2 If you have committed sins, then with your ears drink the sweet nectar of the king of mantras. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya will save you from all sins and sufferings.
     Text 3 Accept Lord Gaura as your master. Take shelter of the Vaisnavas. Wear the necklace of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. Even the most misbehaved and unimportant person in this world will become a saint by chanting Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names.
     Text 4 One should thirst after Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. One should wear a necklace of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. With great diligence one should meditate on Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. These words were spoken by Jagadānanda, a person who thirsts after the wrong things, a sinner with a wicked heart, a criminal who resides in a prison.


Song 4 (Kāmoda-rāga, Kandarpa-tāla)


Text 1 dāminī-dāma-damana ruci daraśane, dūre ge-o darapaki dāpa
śoṇa kusuma tāhe, kona gaṇiye re prātara-aruṇa-santāpa
Text 2 (Refrain) gorā-rūpera yāna balihāri
heri sudhākara, mūrachi caraṇa-tale paḍi daśa-nakha-rūpa-dhārī
Text 3 subaraṇa baraṇa heri nija kubaraṇa jāni āpana mana tāpe
nija tanu jwāri bhasama sama kara-ite, paiṭhale ānala santāpe
Text 4 yo sama bidhika adhika nāhi anubhaba, tulanā dibāra nāhi ṭhora
jagadānanda kahu pahuṁka tulanā pahuṁ nirupama gaura-kiśora


     Text 1 His glory eclipses lightning. It makes the glistening mirror's pride flee far away. Who counts golden flowers glorious in comparison to Him? He makes the reddish dawn burn with envy.
     Text 2 (Refrain) I approach Lord Gaura's gloriosu form and I surrender everything to Him. I gaze at the nectar moon of His face. I fall at His feet. I grasp His feet glorious with ten toenails.
     Text 3 I gaze at His golden form. Aware of how unworthy I am, I burn with shame. I feel as if my body had burned to ashes, as if I had entered a great fire.
     Text 4 No one is greater than Him. No one is equal to Him. Jagadānanda says: Only the Lord Himself is the Lord's equal. Lord Gaura-kiśora has no equal.


Song 5 (Śrī-rāga)


Text 1 gaura-kalebara mauli manohara cikura aiche nehāri
janu hema mahīdhara śikhare cāmara de-i ura-para ḍāri
Text 2 pīna ura upanīta kṛta upabīta, sītimā raṅga
janu kanayā bhūdhara, beḍhi bilasa-i, sura-taraṅginī gaṅga
Text 3 ādha ambara ādha sambara ādha aṅga su-cora
janu jalada sañe, ati bāla-rabi-cchabi, nikase adhika ujora
Text 4 jagata ānanda pahuṅka pada-nakha, lakha-i aichana chanda
janu mīnaketana, karu nirmañchana, caraṇe de-i daśa canda


     Text 1 I gaze at Lord Gaura hair and head and form like a golden mountain summit and a cāmara whisk.
     Text 2 His glorious broad chest adorned with a sacred thread is like a golden mountain where a glistening wave-filled Gaṅgā flows.
     Text 3 His glorious limbs half covered by garments, He is like a dawning sun shining from behind the clouds.
     Text 4 Lord Gaura's toenails that delight the worlds are like the pūjari Kāmadeva offering ārati and placing ten moons before Lord Gaura's feet.


Part 13 Jagannātha dāsa


Song 1 (Bhāṭiyāri-rāga)


Text 1 phālguna-purṇimā tithi śubhaga sakali
janama labhibe gorā paḍe hulāhuli
Text 2 ambare amara sabe bhela unamukha
labhibe janama gorā yābe saba dukha
Text 3 śaṅkha dundubhi bāje parama hariṣe
jaya-dhwani sura-gula kusuma bariṣe
Text 4 jaga bhari hari-dhwani uṭhe ghana ghana
ā-bāla banitā ādi nara-nārī-gaṇa
Text 5 śubha-kṣaṇe jāni gorā janama labhilā
pūrṇimāra candra yena prakāśa karilā
Text 6 se-i kāle candre rāhu karila grahaṇa
hari hari dhwani uṭhe bhariyā bhubana
Text 7 dīna-hīna uddhāra ha-ibe bhela āśa
dekhiyā ānande bhāse jagannātha-dāsa


     Text 1 When Lord Gaura takes birth at an auspicious moment during the full-moon of Phalguna month, there will be a joyous tumult.
     Text 2 When Lord Gaura takes birth the demigods will appear in the sky. They will crane their necks to see Him. All sufferings will flee far away.
     Text 3 Conchshells and dundubhi drums are sounded with great joy. The demigods call out, “Jaya!¢ and shower flowers.
     Text 4 Men, women, children, everyone raise a great tumult of “Hari!", a tumult that fills the worlds.
     Text 5 Then, when the full-moon was manifest, at an auspicious moment Lord Gaura took birth in this world.
     Text 6 Then, when Rāhu swallowed the moon, a great cry of “Hari! Hari!¢ filled the worlds.
     Text 7 Seeing the great hope that the poor fallen people will soon be delivered, Jagannātha dāsa now floats in bliss.


Part 14 Jaya dasa


Song 1 (Dhanaśī-rāga)


Text 1 jaya śacī-suta gaura-hari
jaya pābana jaya nadīyā-bihārī
Text 2 jaya cāpāla-gopāla-mukti-kārī
jaya jagāi-mādhāi-duṣkṛti-hārī
Text 3 jaya akhila-bhubana-trāṇa-kārī
jaya daṇḍa-kamaṇḍalu karoyā dhārī
Text 4 jaya yugala-kiśora-rūpa-dhārī
jaya-dāsa manohara hṛdaya-bihārī


     Text 1 Glory to Śacī's son, Lord Gaura-Hari! Glory to the purifier of the worlds! Glory tothe Lord who enjoys pastime sin Nadīyā!
     Text 2 Glory to the Lord who delivered Cāpāla-Gopāla! Glory to the Lord who removed teh sins of Jagāi and Mādhāi!
     Text 3 Glory to the savior of all the worlds! Glory to the Lord who holds a daṇḍa and kamaṇḍalau!
     Text 4 Glory to Lord Gaura-Hari, who manifests the form of the youthful divine couple! Glory to the Lord who enjoys pastimes in the heart of enthralled Jaya dāsa!


Part 15 Jñāna dāsa


Song 1 (Beloyāra-rāga)


Text 1 śacī-garbha-sindhu-mājhe        gaurāṅga-ratana rāje
          prakaṭa ha-ila abanīte
heri se ratana ābhā      jagata ha-ila lobhā
          pāpatama luka-ila turite
Text 2 (Refrain) āya dekhi giyā gorācānde
e cānda-badanera āge          gaganera cānda ki lāge
          cānda heri cānda lāje kānde
Text 3 pīyile cāndera sudhā       dūre nāki yāya kṣudhā
          tā-i tāre bale sudhākara
e cāndera nāma sudhā          pāne yāya bhaba-kṣudhā
          haya jība ajara amara
Text 4 gorā-mukha-sudhākare       hari-nāma-sudhā jhare
          jṇāna-dāse se amṛta cāki
eḍābe saṁsāra-śaṅkā      gorā-nāma māri ḍaṅkā
          śamana-kiṅkare dibe phāṅki


     Text 1 In the ocean of Śacī's womb, the regal jewel of Lord Gaurāṅga was manifest in this world. Gazing at the spelndor of this jewel, the people of the world yearned to attain it, and the great sins quickly hid. 
     Text 2 (Refrain) Ah! He came and gazed at the moon of Lord Gaura! In the presence of the moon of Lord Gaurāṅga's face, of what use is the moon in the sky? Gazing at the moon fo Lord Gaurāṅga's face, the sky's embarrassed moon wept.
     Text 3 Anyone who drinks the nectar of that moon finds his hunger flees far away. The sky's moon says: The very name of this moon is nectar. Anyone who drinks that nectar finds the hungers of this world of birth and death flee far away. That person becomes free from old age and death.
     Text 4 On the nectar moon of Lord Gaura's face flows a nectar river of Lord Keṣka's holy names. JOāna dāsa has himself taken some sips from that river. When the drummer of Lord Gaura's holy name beats his big drum, the fears of this world fo birth and death flee. Those drumbeats scatter Yamarāja's servants.


Song 2 (Dhānaśrī-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) hema-baraṇa bara       sundara bigraha 
     sura-taru bara parakāśa
pulaka patra-naba        prema pakwa-phala
          kusuma manda mṛdu-hāsa
Text 2 nācata gaura          manohara sundara
          adbhuta raṇjita suradhunī dhāra
tri-jagata loka oka      bhari pā-ola
          bhakati-ratana-maṇi-hāra
Text 3 bhāba bibhabamaya       rasa-rūpa anubhaba
          su-balita rasamaya aṅga
dwirada matta-gati       ati su-manohara
          mūrachita lākha anaṅga
Text 4 dhani kṣiti-maṇḍala        dhani nadīyā pura
          dhani dhani ha-i kali-kāla
dhani abatāra       dhanire dhani kīrtana
          jOāna dāsa naha pāra


     Text 1 (Refrain) His graceful golden form is a divine tree, a tree where His boldy hairs standing erect are the leaves, His ecstatic spiritual love is the ripe fruit, and His gentle smile is the flowers.
     Text 2 Charming, wonderful, glorious Lord Gaura dances by the Gaṅgā's stream. To the residents of the three worlds He gives a necklace of the jewels of devotional service.
     Text 3 His body is filled with the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. His nectar form displays the symptoms of ecstatic love. His graceful motions are like an intoxicated elephant's walk. He enchants the heart. He overwhelms millions of Kāmadevas.
     Text 4 Glorious is the circle of the earth! Glorious is Nadīyā-pura! Glorious, glorious is the age of Kali! Glorious is Lord Gaura's descent to this world! Most glorious of all glories is His saṅkīrtana movement of chanting the holy names! JOāna dāsa knows nothing more glorious than saṅkīrtana.


Part 16 Kānu dāsa

Song 1 (Suha-i-rāga)

Text 1 ke go a-i gaura-baraṇa          bāṅkā bhuru bāṅkā nayana
cina cina cina yena kari
e-i nā se nandera gopāla      yaśodāra jībana dulāla
ā-ila kari gopīra mana-curi
Text 2 śire chila mohana cūḍā          ebe māthā kaila neḍā
kaupina parila dhaḍā chāḍi
gopī-mana mohanera tāre       mohana-baṁśī chila kare
ebe se ha-ila daṇḍa-dhārī
Text 3 nīpa-taru-mūle giyā        adhare muralī laiya
rādhā-nāma karita sādhana
ebe suradhunī-tīre       bāhu duṭī ucca ka're
sadā-i karaye saṅkīrtana
Text 4 nabīna nāgara sāje         gopī-saha kuṇja-mājhe
karita ye bibidha bilāsa
ebe pāriṣada saṅge       nāma yāce dīna-beśe
se-i e-i kahe kānu-dāsa

     Text 1 Look! Look! Look! Who is this person with a fair complexion, with curved eyebrows and eyes with crooked glances? He cannot be Nanda's gopa son. He cannot be Yaśodā's beloved son. He cannot be the boy that robbed the gopīs of their hearts.
     Text 2 In the past His hair was glorious. Now His head is shaved. Now He wears a kaupīna and a sannyāsī's garments. In the past He charmed the gopīs' hearts. In the past He played charming melodies on his flute. Now He carries a sannyāsī's daṇḍa.
     Text 3 In the past He sat under a kadamba tree, placed the flute to His lips, and played melodies that were actually songs chanting Śrī Rādhā's name. Now He stands by the Gaṅgā's banks, raises His arms, and always sings in saṅkīrtana.
     Text 4 In the past He was the teenage hero of amorous pastimes. In the past He enjoyed many pastimes with the gopīs in the middle of the forest. Now He wears the garments of a sannyāsī. Accompanied by His companions, He begs everyone to accept the chanting of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. Kānu dāsa speaks these words.

Song 2 (Barāḍī-rāga)

Text 1 jībera emana dayā kothā-o nā dekhi
nāyara caitanya prabhu
dīna-hīna-jane emana karuṇā āra
nāhi dekhi kabhu
Text 2 yuga-dharma lāgiyā         bairāgye bhramiyā
phirena deśe deśe
pā-iyā ākiñcana          yāciÑā prema-dhana
bilāya karuṇā-ābeśa
Text 3 nija nāma saṅkīrtana       parama nigūḍha dhana
karuṇāya gaḍhala kāya
dhīra adhīra jaḍa        paṅgu andha ātura
sabāre samana dayā
Text 4 tina tāpa tāpite      dekhiyā tri-jagata
nayana bharala prema-jale
śītala karite       heriyā kṛpā-diṭhi
barikhaye kānu-dāse bale

     Text 1 Nowhere have I seen mercy like this, mercy to the fallen souls. Never have I seen mercy like the mercy Lord Caitanya gave to the poor fallen people.
     Text 2 Following the yuga-dharma, He wandered as a sannyasi from place to place. Meeting the poor souls He begged them to accept the treasure of ecstatic spiritual love. In this way He gave His mercy.
     Text 3 He mercifully gave the great hidden treasure of nama-sankirtana, of the chanting of His own holy names. He was equally merciful to all, to the saints, sinners, fools, lame, blind, and sick. 
     Text 4 When He saw how the three worlds suffered the three-fold miseries, His eyes filled with tears fo love. Showering His glance of mercy, He brought cooling relief to the suffering worlds. Kānu dāsa speaks these words.


Part 17 Kṛṣṇa dāsa


Song 1 (Śrī-rāga)


Text 1 nitā-i caitanya dohe baḍa abatāra
emana dayāla dātā nā ha-ibe āra
Text 2 mleccha caṇḍāla ninduka pāṣaṇḍādi yata
karuṇāmaya uddhāra karila kata śata
Text 3 hena abatāre mora kichu-i na haila
hāya re dāruṇa prāṇa ki sukhe rahila
Text 4 yata yata abatāra ha-ila bhubane
hena abatāra bhā-i na haya kathane
Text 5 hena prabhura pāda-padma na kari bhajana
hāte tuli mukhe biṣa karinu bhakṣana
Text 6 gaura-kīrtana-rase jagata ḍubila
hāya re abhāgāra bindu paraśa nahila
Text 7 kānde kṛṣṇa-dāsa keśa chiṇḍi nija kare
dhik dhik abhāgiyā kena nāhi māre


     Text 1 Nitāi and Caitanya are exalted avatāras. No one is merciful like Them.
     Text 2 How many hundreds of mlecchas, caṇḍālas, blasphemers, and offenders did They deliver? 
     Text 3 Why does the descent of Nitāi and Caitanya to this world mean nothing to me? Alas! My heart is very cruel. How can I live a happy life?
     Text 4 Many many avatāras have come to this world. O my brothers, none of Them are like these avatāras. 
     Text 5 I did not worship those two Lords. Raising my hand to my mouth, I have drunk poison.
     Text 6 The whole world is plunged into the nectar of kīrtana brought by Lord Gaura. Alas! Not even a drop of that nectar has touched this unfortunate soul.
     Text 7 With his own hands Kṛṣṇa dāsa pulls the hairs from his head. Alas! Alas! I am very unfortunate! Why do I not die?


Song 2 (Dhanaśī-rāga)


Text 1 āre re ninduka bhā-i       tore kire bodha nā-i
          bṛthā-i dharila dona āṅkhi
saba abatāra-sāra        śrī-gaurāṅga abatāra
          tumi tāhe raiyācha upekhi
Text 2 surā-pāna aty-ācāra        bhruṇa-hatyā byabicāra
          tantra-dharme bhārata byāpila
yakṣa rakṣa biṣahari          nānā upahāra kari
          jība sabe pūjite lāgila
Text 3 dekhiyā jībera dainya      prabhu mora śrī-caitanya
          nabadvīpe prakaṭa ha-ilā
tāraka brahma hari-nāma       yāci sabe kari dāna
          dharmera se glāni ghucā-ilā
Text 4 jagā-i mādhā-i ādi         duṣkṛtera nirabadhi
          hari-nāme karilā uddhāra
brāhmaṇa yabane mili          karā-ilā kolākuli
          parateke dekha eka-bāra
Text 5 nāstike karila bhakta      khaṇje kailā gati-śakta
          andhera karilā cakṣu-dāna
kahe dīna kṛṣṇa-dāsa         nahile ithe biśvāsa
          tora āra nāhi paritrāṇa


     Text 1 O blapshemer brother, why do you not understand? Your eyes have become useless. Although Lord Gaurāṅga is the best of all avatāras, still you turn your eyes from Him.
     Text 2 The people drink liquor and kill unborn children and commit many sins. The tantric religion has covered the world. Bringing many gifts, the people worship yakṣas, rākṣasas and Goddess Mānasā.
     Text 3 Seeing the peoples' fallen condition, my mnaster, Śrī Caitanya became manifest in Navadvīpa.He begged everyone to please accept the holy name of Lord Hari, a name delivers the chanter. In this way the Lord stopped the decline of true religion.
     Text 4 With the gift of Lord Hari's holy name He delivered Jagāi, Mādhāi, and a host of sinners. By His influence the brāhmaṇas and yavanas now meet and embrace. Even just once you should see this sight.
     Text 5 The blasphemers have now become devotees. The lame now walk. The blind now see. Poor Kṛṣṇa dāsa says: If you have no faith in these words, you will not be delivered.


Song 3 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 śāntipurera baṛā-mālī      baikuṇṭha bāgāna khāli
          kariyā ānila eka cārā
nitā-i mālīre pāñā         cārā tāra hāte diyā
          yatane ropita kaila nāḍā
Text 2 nadīyā uttama sthāna       tāhāte kari udyāna
     ropila caitanya-taru mālī
bāḍe taru dine dine      śākhā-patra agaṇane
          gajā-ila yatne jala ḍhāli
Text 3 pā-iyā bhakati-jala        nāma-prema du-i phala
          prasabila se taru sundara
se-i du-i phalera āśe         jība-pakhī nitya āse
          kolāhale kare nirantara
Text 4 ānande nitā-i mālī         la-iya māthāya ḍāli
          du-i phale sabāre bilāya
nā-i jāti bhedābheda          sabāra miṭila kheda
          phalāsvade sakalete pāya
Text 5 dhara la-o la-o bali       ānande nitā-i mālī
          ā-caṇḍāle phala bilā-ila
ye-i cāya se-i pāya      ye na cāhe se-o pāya
          yabane-o phala āswādila
Text 6 ki mora karama phere       na herinu se taru re
          na cininu se mālī dayāla
kṛṣṇa dāsa durāśaya          dante tṛṇa kari kaya
          dhik dhik e poḍā kapāla


     Text 1 The great gardener of Śāntipura brought a young sapling from Vaikuṇṭha and gave it to Nitāi. Nitāi took the sapling from His hand. Nār3ā carefully planted it.
     Text 2 In the most glorious place of Nadīyā He made a garden. There the gardener planted the Caitanya tree. Day after day the tree grew. Its branches and leaves were beyond number. The gardener watered it, and it grew.
     Text 3 Watered with the waters of bhakti (devotional service), that beautiful tree bore two kinds of fruits: nāma (the holy name) and prema (ecstatic spiritual love). The birds that are the invidual spirit souls yearn to taste those two fruits. There is always an uproar. 
     Text 4 The gardener Nitāi joyfully picked these two kinds of fruits, placed them in a basket, and carried that basket on His head. Those fruits He distributed to everyone without considering caste or birth. Anyone who tasted these fruits found all his sufferings and troubles came to an end.
     Text 5 Saying, "Please take. Take. Take.", the gardener Nitāi gave those fruits to everyone, even down to the caṇḍālas. Whoever wished those fruits at ocne received them. The persons who did not wish those fruits received them anyway. Even the yavanas relished those fruits.
     Text 6 Because of my past misdeeds I did not see that tree. I did not see that merciful gardener. Placing a blade of straw between my teeth, I, wicked-hearted Kṛṣṇa dāsa, say: Alas! Alas! A flaming calamity has fallen on my head!


Song 4 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 prema-sindhu gorā-rāya          nitā-i taraṅga tāya
          karuṇā bātāsa cāri pāśe
prema uthaliyā paḍe      jagata hākāla chāḍe
          tāpa tṛṣṇā sabākāra nāśe
Text 2 (Refrain) dekha dekha nitā-i caitanya dayāmaya
bhakta haṁsa candramāke       pibi pibi bali ḍāke
          pā-iyā bañcita kena haya
Text 3 ḍubi rūpa sanātana         tole nānā ratna dhana
          yatane ganthiyā tāra mālā
bhakti latā sūtra kari        leha jība kaṇṭhe bhari
          dūre yābe āpanāra jwālā
Text 4 līlā rasa saṅkīrtana       bikasita padma-bana
          jagata bharila yāra bāse
phuṭila kusuma-bana      mātila bhramara-gaṇa
          pā-iyā bañcita kṛṣṇa dāse


     Text 1 Lord Gaura is a flowing river of spiritual love, a river where Lord Nitāi is the waves and mercy is the breeze blowing in the four directions. Now the ecstasies of love rise and fall in that river. Now the world lets out a tumultous roar. Now every person's burning sufferings and thirsts are at once destroyed.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Look! Look! There are the merciful Lords Caitanya and Nitāi! In the moonlight the swans of the devotees drink and drink from that river of love. Loudly they sing. Not one of them is cheated of drinking that nectar.
     Text 3 Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī dive deep into that river. Up they come holding treasures of many jewels, jewels they carefully string onto vines of devotional service, string into necklaces they place on the fallen souls' necks, souls the flames of whose sufferings will soon be extinguished, will far away be cast.  
     Text 4 In those waters of nectar grows a lotus forest filled with nectar pastimes of saṅkīrtana, a forest whose fragrance fills the worlds, a forest where the wild bumblebees and blossoming flowers are the devotees. Alas! Kṛṣṇa dāsa is still cheated of the nectar of that forest.


Song 5 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 līlāmṛta rasa sāra         tāra śata śata dhāra
          daśa dike bahe yāhā haite
se caitany-līlā haya          sarobara akṣaya
          mano-haṁsa chāḍa-o tāhāte
Text 2 (Refrain) bhakta-gaṇa śuna mora caitanya-badana
tomāra sabāra śrī-caraṇa      kari aṅga bibhūṣaṇa
          karo kichu eka nibedana
Text 3 kṛṣṇa-bhakti siddhānta-gaṇa    praphullita padma-bana
          tāhā madhu kara āswādana
prema-rase kumud-bane       praphullita rātri-dine
          tāhe caraha mano-bhṛṅga-gaṇa
Text 4 nānā-bhābe bhakta-gaṇa          haṁsa cakrabāka-gaṇa
          yāte sabe karena bihāra
kṛṣṇa-keli mṛṇāla        yāhā pā-i sarba-kāla
          bhakta karaye āhāra
Text 5 se-i sarobare yāñā      haṁsa cakrabāka haiñā
          sadā tāte karaha bilāsa
khaṇḍibe sakala duḥkha        pā-ibe parama sukha
          anāyase kahe kṛṣṇa-dāsa


     Text 1 From the ten directions hundreds and hudreds of flooding rivers of the sweetest nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes flow into the eternal lake of Lod Caitanya's pastimes. O swans of the devotees' thoughts, please fly to that lake.
     Text 2 (Refrain) O devotees, please hear my words about Lord Caitanya. All of you please make Lord Kṛṣṇa's graceful feet the ornaments of your bodies. This I request of you.
     Text 3 O bumblebees of the devotees' thoughts, please taste the sweet nectar in the blossoming lotus forest of the truths of devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa. Day and night please fly in the blossoming lotus forest of ecstatic love for Lord Kṛṣṇa.
     Text 4 O swans and cakravāka birds of the devotees, please enjoy many kinds of pastimes in those lotus forests. Always stay amongst the lotus-stalks of Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. Enjoy there.
     Text 5 O swans and cakravāka birds of the devotees, go to that lake of Lord Caitanya's pastimes. Always enjoy pastimes there. Your sufferings will be broken into pieces. You will find supreme happiness. Kṛṣṇa dāsa confidently speaks these words.


Song 6 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 gaurāmṛta anukṣaṇa     sādhu mahānta megha-gaṇa
          biśwodyāne kare bariṣaṇa
tāte phale prema-phala        bhakta khāya nirantara
          tāra preme jīye jagaj-jana
Text 2 caitanya-līlāmṛta-pura        kṛṣṇa-līlā-karpūra
          du-i mili haya ye mādhurya
sādhu-guru-prasāde       tāte yāra mano-bāndhe
          se-i jāne mādhurya-prācurya
Text 3 se-i līlāmṛta bine         khāya yadi anna-pāne
          tabu bhaktera durbala jībana
yāra eka binu pāne       praphullita tanu mane
          hāse gāya karaye nartana
Text 4 e amṛta kara pāna          yāhā binā nāhi āna
          citte kara su-dṛḍha biśwāsa
nā paḍa kutarka-garte         amedhya karkaśāvarte
          yāhāte paḍile sarba-nāśa
Text 5 śrī caitanya nityānanda        adwaita āra bhakta-bṛnda
          āra yata srota bhakta-gaṇa
tomā sabāra śrī-caraṇa        śire kari bhūṣaṇa
          yāhā haite abhīṣṭa pūraṇa
Text 6 śrī-rūpa śrī-sanātana      raghunātha śrī-caraṇa
          śire dhari kari tāṅra āśa
kṛṣṇa-līlāmṛtānwita      caitanya caritāmṛta
          gāya kichu dīna kṛṣṇa-dāsa


     Text 1 Moment after moment the great saints shower on the garden of this world a monsoon of the nectar of Lord Gaura's pastimes. From these monsoon rains grow the fruits of ecstatic spiritual love. Again and again the devotees eat these fruits. By eating these fruits the people of the world become alive with the ecstasy of spieitual love.
     Text 2 The nectar of Lord Caitanya's pastimes with the camphor of Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes combine to make a very great sweetness. Persons who in their hearts carry the mercy of the spiritual master and the saints can understand the great sweetness of that nectar drink.
     Text 3 If a devotee merely eats food and drinks drinks and does not taste the nectar of the Lord's pastimes, then his life will become very weak. But if he tastes a single drop of that nectar then his body and mind will blossom with happiness. Then he will dance and sing and laugh.
     Text 4 If a person drink that nectar alone and nothing else, then the faith in his heart will become very strong. He will not fall down into the pit of illogical ideas. He will not fall into the horrible whirlpool of sins. He will not fall into a calamity where all is lost.
     Text 5 O hearers of this song, please make the graceful feet of Śrī Caitanya, Śrī Nityānanda, Śrī Advaita, and all Their devotees the ornament you carry on your heads. Do this and all your desires will be fulfilled.
     Text 6 Please place the graceful feet of Śrī Rupa Gosvami, Śrī Sanatana Gosvami, and Śrī Raghunatha dasa Gosvami upon your heads. Then your desires will be fulfilled. In this way poor Kṛṣṇa dāsa sings a brief song about some of the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes and the nectar of Lord Caitanya's pastimes.


Song 7 (Dhānaśī-rāga)

Text 1 nadīyāra ghāṭe bhā-i ki adbhuta tari
nitā-i galu-iyā tāte caitanya kāṇḍārī
Text 2 du-i raghunātha śrī-jība gopāla śrī-rūpa sanātana
pārera naukāya \era dāṇḍi chaya-jana
Text 3 ke yābi bhā-i bhaba-pāre bali nita-i ḍāke
kheyāra kaḍi binā pāra kare yāke tāke
Text 4 ātare kātara binā ke pāra kare bha-i
kintu pāra kare sabhe caitanya nitā-i
Text 5 kṛṣṇa-dāsa bale bhā-i bala hari hari
nitā-i caitanyera ghāṭe nāhi lāge kaḍi


     Text 1 O my brothers, at the Nadīyā ferry-landing is a wonderful ferry-boat. At that ferry-boat's stern stand Lord Nitāi and Lord Caitanya, the boat's captain.
     Text 2 In that ferry-boat Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana, Śrī Jīva, Śrī  Gopāla, and the two Śrī Raghunāthas are the six oarsmen.
     Text 3 Loudly Lord Nitāi calls, "O My brothers, who amongst you will cross the ocean of birth and death? Without paying even a single penny, you may cross in Our ferry to the other shore.
     Text 4 "Without taking the trouble to pay even a little attar incense, who will cross, O My brothers, to the farther shore? Caitanya and Nitāi will take everyone across."
     Text 5 Kṛṣṇa dāsa says: O my brothers, please chant, “Hari! Hari!" At the ferry-landing of Caitanya and Nitāi you need not pay even a single penny.


Song 8 (Bhairaba-rāga, Eka-tāla)


Text 1 (Refrain) soṅara naba         gaura sundara
          nāgara banoyārī
nadīyā-indu         karuṇā-sindhu
          bhakata batsala-kārī
Text 2 badana canda, adhara kanda       nayane galata prema-taraṅga
          candra-koṭi bhānu mukha, śobhā-bichuyārī
kusuma-śobhita, cāñcara cikura       lalāṭa tilaka nāsikā upara
          daśana motima amiya hāsa, dāminī ghanayārī
Text 3 makara-kuṇḍala jhalake gaṇḍa      maṇi kaustubha dīpta kaṇṭha
          aruṇa basana, karuṇa bacana, śobhā ati bhāri
mālā-candana carcita aṅga          lāje lajjita koṭi anaṅga
          candana balaya ratana nūpura, yajña-sūtra-dhārī
Text 4 dhārata gā-ota, bhakata-bṛnda        kamalā-sebita pāda-dwandwa
          ṭhamake calata manda manda, yā-u balihāri
kahata dīna kṛṣṇa dāsa       gaura-caraṇe karata āśa
          patita-pābana nitā-i cānda, prema-dāna-kārī


     Text 1 (Refrain) Please meditate on youthful Lord Gaurasundara as the hero Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa who wears a forest garland. Kṛṣṇa, who is an ocean of mercy and who dearly loves the devotees, has now become Lord Gaurasundara, the moon of Nadīyā.
     Text 2 His face is a moon. His lips are flowers. Flooding waves of ecstatic spiritual love flow from His eyes as tears. His face is effulgent like millions of moons. His curly hair is decorated with flowers. Tilaka decorates His nose and forehead. His teeth are pearls. His smile is nectar. He is splendid like rainclouds and lightning.
     Text 3 Shark-shaped earrings glisten at His cheeks. His neck shines with the Kaustubha jewel. He wears reddish garments. His words are kind. He is filled with grace and glory. His limbs are anointed with sandal-paste. He shames millions of Kāmadevas. He wears candana bracelets, jewel anklets, and a glorious sacred-thread.
     Text 4 The devotees sing His gloires. The goddess of fortune serves His feet. Please slowly, slowly approach Him. Surrender everything to Him. Poor Kṛṣṇa dāsa says: My yearn to attain the shelter of Lord Gaura's feet. I pray that Lord Nitāicandra, who purifies the fallen, will give to me the gift of ecstatic spiritual love.


Song 9 (Barāḍī-rāga)


Text 1 dekha du-i bhā-i      gaura nitā-i
          basila bedīra upare
gagana tyajiyā      nāmila āsiyā
          yena niśā dibākare
Text 2 heri haraṣita         ṭhākura paṇḍita
          nija-gaṇa la-iyā sāte
jala su-bāsita      ghaṭa bari kata
          ḍhālaye duṅhāra māthe
Text 3 śaṅkha ghaṇṭā kāśi         beṇu bīṇā baṁśī
          khola karatāla bāya
jaya jaya rola      hari hari bola
          caudige bhakata gāya
Text 4 sināna karāñā      basana parāñā
          basā-ilā siṁhāsane
dhūpa dīpa jwāli         laiyā arghya-thāli
          pūjā kaila du-i jane
Text 5 upahāra-gaṇa          karāñā bhojana
          tāmbūla candana śeṣe
phula-hāra diyā          ārati kariyā
          praṇamila kṛṣṇa-dāse


     Text 1 Look at Gaura and Nitāi, the two brothers who sit on the Deity-throne! As the sun comes to the night, so They descended from the spiritual sky and came to this earth.
     Text 2 Śrīvāsa Pandita and His associates joyfully gaze at the two Lords. From how many jars is scented water poured on the two Lord's heads?
     Text 3 Conchshells, bells, gongs, flutes, vīṇās, flutes, kholas, are karatālas are sounded. There is a tumult of "Jaya! Jaya!" and "Hari! Hari!" From the four directions the devotees sing.
     Text 4 The bathing completed, and now dressed in new garemnts, the two Lords sit on the throne. With incense, lamps, and arghya, worship is offered to the two Lords.
     Text 5 Offerings of food are presented. betelnuts and sandal paste are offered at the end. Offering a flower garland, and then performing ārati, Kṛṣṇa-dāsa bows down before the two Lords.


Song 10 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 abhiṣeke gauracandera ānanda apāra
kahaye bhakata-gaṇe pūraba bihāra
Text 2 pūlake pūrala tanu ā-pāda-mastaka
soṇāra keśara jine kadamba-koraka
Text 3 bhābe bharala mana gada gada bhāṣa
aneka yatane bidhi pūrāyala āśa
Text 4 śacīra nandana gorā jāti prāṇa-dhana
śuni canda-mukhera kathā juḍā-ila mana
Text 5 gorācandera līlāya yāra ha-ila biśwāsa
duḥkhī kṛṣṇa-dāsa tāra dāsa anudāsa


     Text 1 A shoreless ocean of bliss flooded Lord Gauracandra's abhiṣeka. Thus the devotees describe the Lord's pastime.
     Text 2 From head to foot the hairs of His body stod erect. He defeated the golden lion's mane or the kadamba flower's buds.
     Text 3 His heart is filled with ecstasy. With a choked voice He speaks broken words. He fulfills everyone's desires.
     Text 4 Lord Gaura, who is Śacī's son, is the life's treasure of all who live. Hearing the description of His moonlike face brings cooling bliss to every heart.
     Text 5 Of all who have faith in Lord Gauracandra's pastimes sad Kṛṣṇa dāsa is the servant. He is the servant of their servants.



Song 8 (Kalyāṇa-rāga)




     Text 1 The full-moon of Lord Garua-Hari mercifully appeared on the horizon of Nadiya. Grievous sins were all destrioyed. The three worlds were filled with joy. The universe was filled with the sound of "Hari!"
     Text 2 At that moment Lord Advaita R.aya stood up in His house and began to dance, His heart filled with joy. He and Haridāsa sang a tumultuous kīrtana. Why did They dance? No one knew.

Part 18 Lakṣmīkānta dāsa

Song 1 (Kāmoda-rāga)

Text 1 abhinna madana
Text 2 (Refrain)
Text 3
Text 4
Text 5
Text 6
Text 7
Text 8

     Text 1 Seeing Lord Gaura's form more glorious than Kāmadeva, Kāmadeva after Kāmadeva are ashamed. Seeing Lord Gaura's form more glorious than gold, gold personified turns pale and burns in the flames of grief.
     Text 2 (Refrain) What is equal to Lord Gaura's glorious form? In a secluded place Lord Gaurāṅga rolls on the ground. When will I see Him always?
     Text 3 Compared to Lord Gaura's glorious form, the fair atasi flower is like an ugly bug. To see Lord Gaura's fair form is perhaps a little like seeing lightning flash hiding behind a monsoon cloud.
     Text 4 Lakṣmīkānta dāsa says: Nothing in the three worlds is like Lord Gaura. I will blacken my family's reputation if need be, but I will keep Lord Gaura in my heart. I will worship Him.


Part 19 Locana dāsa


Song 1 (Śrī-rāga)


Text 1 ke yābe ke yābe bhā-i bhaba-sindhu pāra
dhanya kali-yugera caitanya abatāra
Text 2 āmāra gaurāṅgera ghāṭe ādāna khelāya
jaḍa andha badhira abadhi pāra haya
Text 3 hari-nāmera naukā-khāni śrī-guru khāṇḍārī
saṅkīrtana keroyāla du bāhu pasāri
Text 4 saba jība haila pāra premera bātāse
paḍiyā rahila locana āpanāra doṣe


     Text 1 Who will cross? O my brothers, who will cross this ocean of birth and death? 
     Text 2 My Lord Gaurāṅga is accepting everyone at His boat-landing. Everyone, including even the fools, the blind, and the deaf have come there to make the crossing.
     Text 3 The ferry-boat is Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. The boat-captain is the spiritual master. The oars in the outstretched hands are saṅkīrtana.
     Text 4 The favorable breeze is ecstatic love for Lord Kṛṣṇa. Now every fallen soul has crossed to the farther shore of the ocean. Only Locana dāsa, by his own fault, is left behind.


Song 2 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 jībera bhāgye abanī bihare dona bhā-i
bhubana-mohana gorācānda nitā-i
Text 2 kali-yuge jība yata chila acetana
hari-nāmāmṛta diyā karilā cetana
Text 3 hena abatāra bhā-i kabhu śuni ṇa-i
pātakī uddhāra kailā ghare ghare yā-i
Text 4 hena abatāra bhā-i nā-i kona yuge
kona abatāre se pāpīra pāpa māge
Text 5 rudhira paḍila aṅge khā-iyā prahāra
yāci prema diyā tāre karilā uddhāra
Text 6 nāma-prema-sudhāte bharila tri-bhubana
ekalā bañcita bela e dāsa locana


     Text 1 To bring good fortune to the fallen souls, two persons, namely Lord Gauracandra and Lord Nitāi, two persons who charm all the worlds, now enjoy pastimes on this earth.
     Text 2 In Kali-yuga the people have fallen lifeless and unconscious. By giving them the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy name, these two Lords have brought them back to life.
     Text 3 O my brothers, what kind of avatāras sare these two Lords? Never have i heard of anyone like Them. They deliver the fallen sinners. They go from house to house searching for them.
     Text 4 O my brothers, never have there been such avatāras. Never in any yuga. What avatāra begs the sinners for a gift of their sinful reactions?
     Text 5 Even when They were struck and blood flowed from Their bodies, these avatāras, begging them please to accept the gift of ecstatic spiritual love, delivered the attackers.
     Text 6 These avatāras filled the three worlds with the nectar of love for the holy names. Only Locana dāsa could not taste that nectar. Only he was cheated of that nectar.


Song 3 (Bibhāsa-rāga or Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 hera dekhiyā          nayāna bhariyā
          ki āra puchasi āne
nadīyā-nagare       śacīra mandire
          cāndera udaya dine
Text 2 kiye lākhabāṇa        kaṣila-kāñcana
          rūpera nichani gorā
śacīra udara        jalada nikasila
          sthira bijurī pārā
Text 3 kata bidhu-bara       badana ujora
          niśi diśi sama śobhe
nayāna-bhramara          śruti-saroruhe
          dhāya makaranda-lobhe
Text 4 ā-jānu-lambita       bhuja su-balita
          nābhi hema sarobara
kaṭi kari-ari       uru hema-giri
          e locana manohara


     Text 1 Look! Now that you have filled your eyes, what further questions do you have? In Nadīyā-nagara, in Śacī's house, in the daytime a moon shines.
     Text 2 Gold purified how many thousands of times shines as Gaura's fair body? From the monsoon-cloud of Śacī's womb has come a stationary lightning-flash.
     Text 3 How many glorious moons shine as Gaura's face? Even at night they fill all the directions with light. Yearning to gather nectar, the black bees of His eyes fly to the lotus flowers of His ears.
     Text 4 His graceful arms reach to His knees. His navel is a gold lake. His waist is a lion's waist. His thighs are golden mountains. He charms Locana dāsa's heart.


Song 4 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 eka-dina mane pahuṁ kaila ācambita
pūrba deśa yāba āmi saba jana hita
Text 2 yātrā kari yāra pahuṁ saṅge nija jana
chaṭaphaṭa kare śacī māyera jībana
Text 3 māyere kahena prabhu nā bhābiha tumi
tomāra nikaṭe sadā rahiba ye āmi
Text 4 lakṣmīre karila prabhu hāsiya uttara
mātāra sebāya tumi ha-ibā tat-para
Text 5 śubha-yātrā kare pahuṁ saṅge nija jana
kautuke bhramaṇa kare ānandita mana
Text 6 brāhmaṇa saj-jana baise padmābatī taṭe
dibya puruṣa nārī snāna kare ghāṭe
Text 7 biśwambhara snāna kaila se-padmābatī
saba-jana pāpa-hare snāna kaile tathi
Text 8 pūrba-deśe basati karaya yata-jana
sabhāre yāciyā pahuṁ dile hari-nāma
Text 9 śuci bā aśuci kibā ācāra bicāra
nā mānila sabāre karila bhaba pāra
Text 10 nāma-saṅkīrtana prabhu nauka sājā-iyā
pāra kaila sarba-loke āpani yāciyā
Text 11 ye-jana palāya tāre dhare kole kari
bhaba-nadī kare pāra gaurāṅga śrī-hari
Text 12 locana kahiche pahuṁ sarba-loka-pati
karuṇā prakāśi lokera kaila śuddha-mati


     Text 1 One day Lord Gaura suddenly thought in His heart: “For the benefit of the people there, I will go east."
     Text 2 Taking His closest companions with Him, Lord Gaura would travel east. He who is mother Śacī's very life was restless to travel.
     Text 3 To His mother Lord Gaura said: "Please don't worry. I will always be near you."
     Text 4 To Lakṣmīpriyā smiling Lord Gaura said: "Serve My mother. Be devoted to her."
     Text 5 Accompanied by His close companions, Lord Gaura began His auspicious journey. With a happy heart He traveled.
     Text 6 Brāhmaṇas and saintly persons stayed on the bank of the Padmāvatī. Effulgent spiritual men an women bathed at the ghāṭas there.
     Text 7 When Lord Viśvambhara bathed in the Padmāvatī, everyone became freed of sins by bathing there.
     Text 8 The people who lived in the east Lord Gaura begged to accept the holy name. He gave them the chanting of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy name.
     Text 9 He did not consider who was pure or impure, or who had acted well or ill. Everyone He carried to farther bank of the river of birth and death.
     Text 10 Lord Gaura built a boat of nāma-saṅkirtana (chanting of the holy names). He personally begged everyone to enter that boat. With that boat He brought them all to the farther bank of the river of birth and death.
     Text 11 Anyone who fled from Him, He caught in His arms. Lord Gaurāṅga, who is Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself, carried those persons to the farther bank of the river of birth and death.
     Text 12 Locana dāsa says: Lord Gaura is the master of all the worlds. Giving His mercy to the people, He made them all pure at heart.


Song 5 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 patibratā lakṣmī-debī pati-gatā prāṇa
ānande śacīra sebā karaya bidhāna
Text 2 debatāra sajja kare gṛha sammārjana
dhūpa dīpa naibedyādi mālya-candana
Text 3 saba saṁskari deya debatāra ghare
bahura śilpatāya śacī āpana pasāra
Text 4 e-i-rūpe āche śacī lakṣmīra sahite
daiba niyojita karma nā haya khaṇḍite
Text 5 gaurāṅga-birahe lakṣmī kātara antara
anurāge birahe byākula kalebara
Text 6 biraha ha-ila mūrtimanta sarpākāra
dekhiyā lakṣmīra mane ha-ila camatkāra
Text 7 daṁśileka se-i sarpa lakṣmīra caraṇe
lakṣmīra swaraga prāpti e locana bhaṇe


     Text 1 Lakṣmīpriyā-devī, who is devoted to her husband, and who has dedicated her life's breath to her husband, happily serves mother Śacī.
     Text 2 She dresses and decorates the Deity. She cleans the house. She burns incense, lights lamps, cooks for the Diety, prepares sandal paste and flower garlands, and perfoems many other like services.
     Text 3 Śacī artistically decorates the Deity room in many ways. Rapt in this service, she forgets herself.
     Text 4 As long as they are rapt in the Deity's service, Śacī and Lakṣmīpriyā are are not broken into pieces by grief.
     Text 5 Still, in separation from Lord Gaurāṅga, Lakṣmīpriyā finds her heart is tormented with grief. In His absence, her love for Him overwhelms her body.
     Text 6 Her grief in His absence eventually assumed the form of a snake. Seeing that snake, Lakṣmīpriyā felt great wonder in her heart.
     Text 7 That snake bit Lakṣmīpriyā's foot. Then Lakṣmīpriyā returned to the spiritual world. This Locana dāsa says.


Song 6 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 gharere ā-ila prabhu ratna laiÑā
mātṛ sthāne dila dhana haraṣita haiÑā
Text 2 namaskāra kari prabhu nehāre badana
birasa badana śacī nā kahe bacana
Text 3 prabhu kahe kena mātā birasa badana
tomāre mailna dekhi poḍe mora mana
Text 4 e bola śuniyā śacī gadagada bhāṣa
jharaye āṅkhira nīra bhija hoya bāsa
Text 5 kahite nā pāre kichu sa-karuṇa kaṇṭha
kahila āmāra badhū calila baikuṇṭha
Text 6 prabhu kahe śoka teji śuna mora mātā
nirbandha nā ghuce se-i likhana bidhātā
Text 7 putrera bacana śacī śuni sābadhāne
śoka nā karila kichu na karila mane
Text 8 kahaye locana dāsa śunaha caritra
lakśmī swarge ārohana biśwambhara saṅgīta


     Text 1 Lord Gaura returns home with many jewels. To mother Śacī He happily gives the wealth He had brought.
     Text 2 Lord Gaura bows down before her and gazes at her face. He face drawn and withered, Śacī speaks not a word.
     Text 3 Lord Gaura says, "Mother, why is your face so drawn and withered? When I see your face so sad, My heart bursts into flames.
     Text 4 Hearing these words, Śacī speaks some broken words in a  choked voice. Tears stream from her eyes and wet the cloth over her heart.
     Text 5 She has no power to speak. Grief fills her throat. Finally she says, "My daughter-in-law has gone to Vaikuṇṭha."
     Text 6 Lord Gaura says, "Renounce your grief. O mother, please hear My words. No one can destroy his destiny, the destiny Lord Brahmā writes on his forehead."
     Text 7 Carefully listening to her son's words, Śacī did not lament. She did not lament in her heart.
     Text 8 Locana dāsa says: Please hear this pastime, the pastime of Lakṣmīpriyā's ascent to Vaikuṇṭha. In this way I have sung of Lord Viśvambhara's pastimes.


Part 20 Madhava dasa


Song 1 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) dekha bhā=i āgama nigame
caitanya nitāi bine dayāra nā-i         pāpī-loka tāhā nāhi jāne
Text 2 satya tretā dvāpara        satya-yugera īśvara
          dhyāna yajṇa pūjā prakāśila
se-i bṛndābana cānda          dhari naṭa-bara chānda
          se yuge gopīre prema dila
Text 3 se-jana gokula-nātha       kaṁsa keśī kaila pāta
          yāre kahe yaśodā-kumāra
nabadvīpe abatāri        se-i haila gaura hari
          pātakīre karite uddhāra
Text 4 tāhāra agraja-nāma         rohiṇī-nandana rāma
          āra yata pāriṣada mile
nija-nāma prema-guṇe          patita caṇḍāla jane
          bhāsā-ila prema āṅkhi jale
Text 5 ye mūḍha paṇḍita-māni      paḍuyā tārkika jāni
          pūrabe asura haiya chila
dvija mādhaba dāse bale       se-i aparādha phale
          e yuge bañcita bujhi haila


     Text 1 (Refrain) O my brothers, please look in the Agama and Nigama scriptures. No one is merciful like Lord Caitanya and Lord Nitāi. This the sinners do not know.
     Text 2 He who is the moon of Vṛndāvana and who in the Satya, Tretā, and Dvāpara-yugas taught meditation, yajṇa, and Deity worship, has now become the best of dancers. In this yuga He teaches the love the gopīs felt.
     Text 3 He who is the master of Gokula, who killed Kaṁsa and Keśī, and who was Yaśodā's little boy, has descended to the town of Navadvīpa. Now He is Lord Gaura-Hari. Now He delivers the sinners.
     Text 4 In this world He met Balarāma, His elder brother, and He also met His eternal associates. He taught the chanting of His holy names. He taught the glories of ecstatic spiritual love. Even the fallen Caṇḍālas He made swim in the tears of spiritual love flowing from their eyes.
     Text 5 The fools who rejected Lord Caitanya and who thought themselves great scholars and philosophers were all demons in their previous births. Dvija Mādhava Dāsa says: For this offense these fools were for a whole yuga be cheated of Lord Gaura's gift.


Part 21 Mādhavī dāsa



Song 1 (Bālā-rāga)


Text 1 śyāmera gaura-baraṇa eka deha
pāmara-jana ithe kara-i sandeha
Text 2 saurabha āgora mūrati rasa sāra
pākala bhena yaiche phala sahakāra
Text 3 gopa-janama punaḥ dvija abatāra
nigama nā pāya-i nigūḍha bihāra
Text 4 prakaṭa karala hari-nāma bākhāna
nārī purukha mukhe śuniye āna
Text 5 kari gaura-caraṇa-kamala-madhu-pāna
sarasa saṅgīta mādhabī dāsa bhāṇa


     Text 1 Dark Kṛṣṇa and beautiful Rādhā have combined in a single fair form. This truth the common people doubt.
     Text 2 That fragrant form contains the sweetest nectar. That form is like a tree filled with ripe fruits.
     Text 3 He who previously took birth as a gopa has now descended as a brāhmaṇa to this world. Even the Vedas do not understand Him. His pastimes are very confidential. 
     Text 4 He openly revealed the chanting of Lord Hari's holy names. Now no other sound is heard from any man's or woman's mouth.
     Text 5 Tasting the sweet nectar at the lotus flower of Lord Gaura's feet, Mādhavī dāsa sings this sweet song.


Part 22 Manamatha dāsa


Song 1 (Bibhāsa-rāga, Daśakuśi)


Text 1 niśi parabhāta samaye kiye pekhaluṁ, rasamyaa gaura-kiśora
kuṅkuma candana, aṅgahi dhūsara, bhūṣaṇa parama ujora
Text 2 rasa bhare rajanī jāgi karu kīrtana, nartana niśi karu bhora
pulakābalī lalita tanu-mādhurī, cāturi carita ujora
Text 3 nindahi lole lola-diṭhi locana, tahi ati aruṇa bhela
pulake pirīta puna uṭha-i, īṣat hāsi puna gela
Text 4 gaura-carita rīta ki kahaba samprīta, bujha-ite bujha-i nā pāri
manamatha bhaṇa, kali dalana dayārṇaba, durlabha nadīyā-bihārī


     Text 1 At dawn I saw charming Lord Gaura-kiśora. His limbs were anointed with sandal and kuṅkuma. His ornaments glistened.
     Text 2 All night He had performed kīrtana. All night He danced, overcome with ecstatic love. The hairs stood erect on His graceful body. His pastimes were glorious.
     Text 3 His reddish eyes were restless. In an eyeblink ecstatic spiritual love arose within Him. He gently smiled.
     Text 4 Who can describe the truth of Lords Gaura's pastimes? I have no power to understand them. Manamatha says: Lord Gaura, who is very difficult to attain, now enjoys pastimes in Nadīyā. An ocean of mercy, under His feet He now tramples Kali-yuga's sins.


Part 23 Mādhava Ghoṣa


Song 1 (Māyūra-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) nāce pahuṁ abadhuta gorā
mukha tachu abikala      pūrṇa bidhu maṇḍala
          nirabadhi mantra rase bhora
Text 2 aruṇa kamala pākhī         jini rāṅgā duṭī āṅkhi
          bhramara-yugala duṭī tārā
soṇāra bhūdhare yaiche        suranadī bahe taiche
          buka bāhi paḍe prema-dhārā
Text 3 keśarīra kaṭi jini         tāhāte kaupīna-khāni
          aruṇa basana bahir-bāsa
galāya donāra mālā       bhūṣaṇa kariyā ālā
          nāsā tila-prasūna bikāśa
Text 4 kanaka mṛṇāla yuga         su-balita duṭī bhuja
          kara yuga kuṇjara bilāsa
rātā utpala phula        padma nahe sama-tula
          paraśane mahīra ullāsa
Text 5 ā-pada mastaka gāya        pulake pūrita tāya
          yaiche nīla phula ati śobhā
prabhāte kadali janu          sa-ghane kampita tanu
          mādhaba ghoṣera mano-lobhā


     Text 1 (Refrain) The avadhūta Lord Gaura dances. Without stop the perfect full moon of His face tastes the nectar of the mahā-mantra.
     Text 2 His reddish yees defeat the red lotus petals. The pupils of His eyes are like black bees. Tears of ecstatic spiritual love flow down His chest like a celestial Gaṅgā flowing down a golden mountain.
     Text 3 His waist defeats the lion's waist. He wears a kaupina and saffron outer garments. On His neck rests a damanaka-flower garland. His ornaments glisten. His nose is like a sesame blossom.
     Text 4 His two graceful arms are two golden lotus-stems. His hands play like two elephant-trunks. The red lotus-flowers are not their equal. Lord Gaura's touch fills the earth with bliss.
     Text 5 From head to foot, the hairs stand erect on His body, hairs glorious like blossoming blue flowers. His trembling body is like a banana tree at dawn. In his heart Mādhava Ghoṣa yearns to attain Lord Gaura's company.


Part 24 Murāri


Song 1 (Pahiḍā-rāga)


Text 1 śacīra āṅginā mājhe        bhubana=mohana sāje
          gorācānda deya hāmāguḍi
māyera aṅguli dhari      kṣaṇe cale guḍi guḍi
          āchāḍa khā-iyā yāya paḍi
Text 2 bāgha-nakha gale dole        buka bhāsi yāya lole
          cānda-mukhe hāsira bijuli
dhūlā-mākha sarba gāya        sahite ki pāre māya
          bukera upare laya tuli
Text 3 kāndiyā ākula tāte         nāme gorā kola haite
          puna bhūme deya gaḍāgaḍi
hāsiyā murāri bole       e nahe kolera chele
          sannyāsī ha-ibe gaura-hari


     Text 1 In Śacī's courtyard crawls infant Gauracandra, who charms all the worlds. For a moment He grasps His mother's finger and walks. Then again He crawls and crawls. Sometimes He walks a few steps, and then again He tumbles to the ground.
     Text 2 As He crawls a splendid tiger-claw necklace swings to and fro on His chest. A lightning-flash smile glistens on the moon of His face. Now His every limb is anointed with dust. How can His mother bear it? She picks Him up.
     Text 3 He is agitated. He cries. Child Gaura scrambles from His mother's lap. She places Him on the ground. Again He crawls. Murāri smiles and says: This is not just another little boy on his mother's lap. This is Lord Hari withn a fair complexion, Lord Hari who later will become a sannyāsī.


Song 2 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 śacīra dulāla mano-raṅge
khele sama-baya śiśu-saṅge
Text 2 mājhe gorā śiśu cāri pāśe
nāce āra mṛdu hāse hāse
Text 3 hāte hāte kare dharādhari
tāle tāle nāce ghuri ghuri
Text 4 kṣaṇe ghana deya karatāli
kṣaṇe keha kahe bhāli bhāli
Text 5 gorā yabe bale hari hari
śiśu-gana bale saṅge hari
Text 6 ghana ghana hari-bola śuni
kāmpe kali paramāda guni
Text 7 murāri ānande bhara-pūra
pāpera rājatwa haila dūra


     Text 1 His heart filled with delight, Śacī's small son plays with the other boys. 
     Text 2 With the other boys around him on four sides, child Gaura dances. He gently, gently laughs.
     Text 3 Hand in hand, the boys dance to the singing.
     Text 4 One moment there is clapping of hands. The next moment there are calls of "Bravo! Bravo!"
     Text 5 Child Gaura sings, "Hari! Hari!" The other boys also sing, "Hari!"
     Text 6 Hearing the boys sing, "Haribol!", Kali-yuga trembles. He knows a calamity is coming.
     Text 7 Murāri is flooded with bliss. Now the king of sins flees far away.


Part 25 Narahari dāsa


Song 1 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 śaci-suta gaura-hari       nabadwīpe abatāri
          karilena bibidha bilāsa
saṅge laiyā apriya-gaṇa        prakāśila saṅkīrtana
          bāḍhā-ila sabāra ullāsa
Text 2 kibā se sannyāsa beśe      bhrami prabhu deśe deśe
          nīlācale āsiyā rahila
rādhikāra preme māti          nā jāni divā-rāti
          se preme jagata mātā-ila
Text 3 nityānanda balarāma        adwaita guṇera dhāma
          gadādhara śrībāsādi yata
dekhi se adbhuta rīti         keha nā dharaye dhṛti
          premāya bihwala abirata
Text 4 debera durlabha ratna      milā-ilā kari yatna
          kṛpāya bālā-i laiyā mari
kailā kali-yuga dhanya        prabhu kṛṣṇa-caitanya
          yaśa gāya dāsa narahari


     Text 1 Descending to this world in Navadvīpa, Lord Gaura-hari became Śacī's son and enjoyed many pastimes. Performing saṅkīrtana with His dear associates, He filled everyone with bliss.
     Text 2 Accepting a sannyāsī's garments, the Lord wandered from place to place. Then He stayed always at Nīlācala. Wild with the ecstatic love Rādhā felt, He did not know if it were day or night. He made the whole world wild with that kind of spiritual love.
     Text 3 Seeing Lord Gaura-Hari's wonderful pastimes, neither Lord Nityānanda-Balarāma, nor Lord Advaita, the abode of transcendental virtues, nor Gadādhara, nor Śrīvāsa, nor anyone else could remain peaceful. Without stop they were all overcome with ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 4 Lord Gaura-Hari carefully brought with Him rare and precious jewels, jewels even the demigods cannot obtain. The Lord kindly distributed those jewels to everyone. In this way He made the Kali-yuga a glorious and fortunate time. Thus Narahari dāsa sings the glories of Lord Kṛṣṇa Caitanya.


Song 2 (Barāḍī-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) anupama gora abatāra
nabadhā bhakati rase          bistāriyā saba deśe
          nā karila jātira bicāra
Text 2 emana ṭhākura bhaja        dura kara saba kāja
          chāḍa saba micha abhilāṣa
caitanyacāndera guṇe          ālo kare tri-bhubane
          anāyāse haila parakāśa
Text 3 caitanya kalpa-taru        akhila-jībera guru
          golaka baibhaba saba saṅge
jībere malina dekhi      ha-iyā karuṇā āṅkhi
          hari-nāma bilā-ila raṅge
Text 4 yajṇa japa dhyāna pūjā          anya yuge yata pūjā
          sādhileka ati baḍa dukhe
e-i ye karila ghore      nare yata pāpa kare
          nāma laiñā tari yāya sukhe
Text 5 karuṇā bigraha sāra        tulanā ki diba āra
          patitera pūrā-ila āśa
kichu nā bujhiyā citte        kāndiyā kāndiyā pathe
          guṇa gāya narahari dāsa


     Text 1 (Refrain) The avatāra Lord Gaura is without equal. In every country He distributed the nectar of the nine-fold activities of devotional service. He did not consider anyone's caste or birth.
     Text 2 Please worship Lord Gaura. Run far from all worldly duties. Renounce all false desires. The glistening light from the moon of Lord Caitanya has filled the three worlds. Now everything is easily seen.
     Text 3 Lord Caitanya is a kalpa-taru tree. He is the master of all living entities. He brought glory to this world. With compassionate eyes He saw how the souls in this world had become defiled. So He happily gave them the gift of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names.
     Text 4 Yajṇa, japa, meditation and Deity-worship are the methods of worship for other yugas. In this yuga they are very difficult to perform. In this horrible Kali-yuga the people are sinners. Still, by chanting the holy names they are easily delivered.
     Text 5 Lord Caitanya is mercy personified. Who is His equal? The fallen souls' desires He fulfills. In my heart I do not know anything. Weeping and weeping, Narahari dāsa sings Lord Gaura's glories.


Song 3 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) gaurāṅga ke jāne mahimā tomāra
kali-yuga uddhārite patita-pābana abātara
Text 2 śyāma-mahodadhi       kemane bidhātā 
     mathiyā se kara-tāla
kata sudhā-rasa          tāhe niramniyā
          upajila gaurāṅga rasāla
Text 3 tri-bhubane prema          bādara ha-ila
          gaura-prema-bariṣaṇe
dīna hīna jana      o rasa magana
          narahari guṇa gāne


     Text 1 (Refrain) O Lord Gaurāṅga, who knows Your glories? O purifier of the fallen, You descended to this world to deliver the people of Kali-yuga.
     Text 2 How, simply by playing the karatālas, did You churn the great ocean of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa? O Lord Gauranga, how many flooding currents of nectar did You make flow from that ocean?
     Text 3 You made a monsoon of ecstatic spiritual love flood the three worlds. The poor fallen souls are now plunged in that flood of love. Narahari thus sings the glories of Lord Gaurāṅga.


Song 4 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) pāśarā nā yāya āmāra gauracāndera līlā
yāṅra guṇe paśu-pākhī bujhaye      galiyā paḍaya śilā
Text 2 yāṅhāra nāmera lāgi        maheśa ha-ila yogī
          biriñci bhābaye anukṣaṇe
brahmāra durlabha nāma        sulabha kariyā pahuṁ
          yāciñā de-ola tri-bhubane
Text 3 śrī-gaurāṅga aṅge śobhe          pulaka kadamba tahe
          aparūpa śrī-aṅgera śobhā
ānande bibhora ati       narahari dāsa tathi
          dekhiyā se kanakera ābhā


     Text 1 (Refrain) I will not forget Lord Gauracandra's pastimes. When they hear His glories the birds and beasts becoem plunged in bliss and the very stones melt with bliss.
     Text 2 Chanting His name, Śiva has become a yogī and Brahmā is rapt in meditation. Although the chanting of the holy names is difficult even for Brahmā to attain, Lord Gauracandra freely gives that chanting to the people of the three worlds. He begs them please to accept it.
     Text 3 Lord Gaurāṅga's limbs are charming and glorious. Standing erect, the hairs of His body are like blossoming kadamba flowers. The glory of His limbs is wonderful. Gazing at the golden splendor of His limbs, Narahari dāsa is overcome with bliss.


Song 5 (Pada-rāga)


Text 1 phālguna-pūrṇimā      maṅgalera sīmā
          prakaṭa gokula-indu
nadīyā-nagare       prati ghare ghare
          uthala ānanda-sindhu
Text 2 (Refrain) kibā kautuka paraspare
śacī-debī bhāle          putra laiyā kole
          bilase sūtikā-ghare
Text 3 bālake dekhite        dhāya cāri-bhite
          keha nā dharaye dhṛti
grahaṇāndhakāre          ke cine kāhāre
          asaṅkhya lokera gati
Text 4 bālaka-mādhurī        dekhi āṅkhi bhari
          pāsare āpana deha
narahari kaya       śacīra tanaya
          prakāśe ki naba leha


     Text 1 When, on the Phālguna-pūrṇimā, He who is the supremely auspicious moon of Gokula was manifest in Nadīyā-nāgara, an ocean of bliss flooded house after house.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Placing Him on her lap, Śacī gazed at her newborn son. Both were fill with bliss. The maternity-room was filled with glorious splendor.
     Text 3 From the four directions everyone ran to see the child. No one was peaceful. In the darkness of the eclipse, who could see anyone? Numberless people came.
     Text 4 Gazing at the infant's sweetness, everyone filled his eyes. They forgot their own bodies. Narahari says: Why did everyone fall in love with Śacī's newborn son?


Song 6 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 parama śubha śacī-gabhe bilasata gaura gokula nāha
kara-i stuti-nati deba-gaṇa ghana bhabane bhara-i uchāha
Text 2 śubhaga phālguna pūrṇimā-niśi śaśī udaye rāhu garāsi
aiche samaye prakāśe pahuṁ nija nāma pahile prakāśi
Text 3 hota jaya jaya-kāra jaga-bhari dhiraja dharata nā ko-i
miśra-bhabane prabeśi śiśu abaloki unamata ho-i
Text 4 bibidhi maṅgala raca-i naba naba saba manoratha pūra
bhaṇata narahari bipula-bali kali garaba-bhare bhela cūra


     Text 1 Manifesting a fair form, Gokula's master was gloriously manifest from Śacī's supremely auspicious womb. The demigods came there. Filling the room, they bowed down and offered prayers.
     Text 2 On the auspicious full-moon night of Phalguna month, Rahu swallowed the rising moon. At that time the Lord manifested His holy name first. Only in the next moment did He manifest His form.
     Text 3 Sounds of "Jaya! Jaya!" filled the world. No one was peaceful. Gazing at the infant in Jagannātha Miśra's house, everyone became wild with bliss.
     Text 4 Newer and newer kinds of glory and auspiciousness were manifest. Everyone's desires were fulfilled. Narahari says: At that moment powerful Kali-yuga's pride was crushed into dust.


Song 7 (Basanta-rāga)


Text 1 jaya jaya jaya maṅgala-raba, phālguna-pūrṇimā-niśi naba śobhita
          śacī-garbhe prakaṭa gaura baraja-raṇjanā
jhalakata bara bālaka-tanu, kuṅkuma thira dāminī janu
          camakata mukha-canda madhura dhairaja bhara bhaṇjanā 
Text 2 pahuṁ prakāśe nirakhata, ghana-gaṇa saha sura-gaṇa gagane baraṣata
          kusumābalī bipula pulaka bharala aṅgahī
karata kata manoratha cita, cañcala bhaṇi cāru carita
          locana jala-chala kata chabi pāyata bahu raṅgahī
Text 3 gāyata kinnara sudhaṅga, bāyata mṛdutara mṛdaṅga
          dhādhiki dhikitā dhik dhik dhik kaṭatak dhinnānā
nṛtya-sura nartakī-caya, bibidha bhāti karu abhinaya
          ughaṭatata kathai thai thai ti a-i a-i atennānā
Text 4 nirmala daśa-diśa ujora, malayānila bahata thora
          pika-kula kuhu kata basanta ṛtu-pati sara sāya-e
uchalata sura-sarita-bāri, nadīyā mahi muda bithāri
          miśra-bhubana kautuke narahari hiya unamatāya-e


     Text 1 There are auspicious sounds of "Jaya! Jaya!  Jaya!" On a beautiful full-moon night of Phālguna from Śacī's womb is manifest the fair form of Lord Gaura, Lord Gaura who is in truth Kṛṣṇa, the delight of Vraja. Infant Lord Gaura is effulgent. He is like kuṅkuma or like an always-shining lightning flash. The sweetness of His moonlike face fills everyone with wonder, breaks into pieces the peaceful composure of everyone.
     Text 2 Sitting on the clouds, the demigods gaze at Lord Gaura. From the sky they shower flowers. The hairs of their bodies stand erect in ecstasy. How many desires come from the demigods' hearts, desires manifested as restless, beautiful words? How much delightful effulgence flows from the demigods' eyes, effulgence pretending to be tears?
     Text 3 The Kinnaras sweetly sing. "Dhādhiki dhikitā dhik dhik dhik kaṭatak!", the mṛdaṅgas sweetly say. The celestial dancing-girls dance. Many glorious dramas are enacted in their dances. "Kathai thai thai ti a-i a-i!", the drums declare.
     Text 4 The ten directions are effulgent and clear. Fragrant breezes blow from the Malaya Hills. The cuckoos chant “Kuhu!" How many glorious signs of spring, the king of seasons, are manifest? The heavenly Gaṅgā sweetly flows. Nadīyā is overcome with bliss. The wonder who has appeared in Jagannātha Miśra's home makes Narahari's heart wild with bliss.


Song 8 (Basanta-rāga or Toḍi-rāga)


Text 1 bhubana-mano-corā          gokula-pati gorā
          cāndera janama ki śubha-kṣaṇe
dekhiyā putra-mukha      śacīra yata sukha
          tāhā ki kahibāra pāre āne
Text 2 nadīyā-pura-nārī      ā-ise sāri sāri
          la-iyā thāri bhari drabya bahu
su-sajje sura-priyā      mānuṣe miśā-iyā
          bālake nirakhiyā thira nahu
Text 3 śrī-sītā-debī āsi          sūtikā-gṛhe paśi
          dekhiyā śiśu ulasita hiyā
mālinī ādi saṅge         bhāsāye nānā raṅge
          karaya kata nā maṅgala-kriyā
Text 4 goyālinī bā kata      goyālā śata śata
          la-iyā dadhi āse cāru sāje
sabe bihwala-cite        pūrba swabhābete
          chaḍāya dadhi āṅgināra mājhe
Text 5 raciyā karatāli       hāsiyā nāce bhāli
          tā dekhi debe gopa-beśa-dhārī
nācaye āṅgināte          ke bā nā nāce tāte
          saghane jaya jaya-dhwani kari
Text 6 bājaya bādya hena          kautuka nāhi yena
          miśrālaye se nandālaye rīti
narahari ki kaba         prabhu janmotsaba
          utsahe karu kichu nāhi smṛti


     Text 1 Gokula's master, who steals the hearts of all the worlds, has come as Lord Gaura. At that auspicious moment, of what use was the ordinary moon in the sky? Gazing at her son's face. Śacī became filled with bliss. How can anyone describe what she felt?
     Text 2 Multitude after multitude of Nadīyā-pura's women came carrying plates with gifts. Elegantly dressed and decorated demigoddesses mingled with the human women. Once gazing at the newborn infant boy, no one remained peaceful.
     Text 3 Śrī Sītā-devī came to the maternity room. Gazing at the infant, she became blissful at heart. Mālinī and many other ladies also came. They floated in bliss. What auspicious ritual did they not perform?
     Text 4 How many cowherd ladies came? Hundreds and hundreds of cowherd men came bringing gifts of yogurt. Everyone was beautifully dressed and decorated. Their hearts were overcome with bliss. They filled the courtyard of the house with their gifts of yogurt.
     Text 5 Some played the karatālas and others laughed and danced. Disguised as cowherd men, the demigods watched all of this. In the courtyard the people encouraged each other to dance. Who did not dance? There were loud calls of "Jaya! Jaya!"
     Text 6 Instrumental music playeed. There was great bliss. Nothing could be compared to it. Jagannātha Miśra house became like Mahārāja Nanda's palace. Narahari says: Is anything like this festival of the Lord's birth? I cannot think of anything like it.


Song 9 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 nadīyāra nārī puruṣa       sukṛti māni
          mane mahā ānandita haiyā
nimā-ira anna-prāśane         sakale ā-isena
          nānā sāmagrī laiñā
Text 2 śacī-suta-śobhā       dekhe āṅkhi bhari
          nīlāmbara bhāgyamantera kole
naba naba ābharaṇamaya        kaṭi-taṭe paṭṭa-dhaṭī
          añcala dole
Text 3 hema-sarasija         jini tanu-khāni
          mukhe ki upamā cāndera ghaṭā
miṣṭa-anna-kaṇikā        grahaṇe kibā adbhuta
          mṛdu hāsira chaṭā
Text 4 ehena utsabe          kebā dhare dhṛti
          kahite kautuka nā ā-ise mukhe
sabe śacī         jagannātha praśaṁsaye
          narahari hiyā uthale sukhe


     Text 1 Intent on performing a pious ritual, joyful at heart, and bringing various articles for the ceremony, the men and women of Nadīyā come to Nimāi's anna-praśāna ceremony.
     Text 2 They filled their eyes with the splendor of Śacī's son as, decorated with new ornaments, and a silk garment tied about His waist, He sits on fortunate Nīlāmbara's lap on the edge of a swing.
     Text 3 His body defeats the gold lotus flowers. How can the weak glory of the moon be compared to His glorious face? How can it be compared to the splendor of the wonderful sweet smile that lights His face as He accepts the first drop of sweet-rice?
     Text 4 At this festival who can remain peaceful? No one can place on his mouth words to describe the bliss he feels. Everyone praises Śacī and Jagannātha Miśra. Narahari's heart is flooded with bliss.


Song 10 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 jagannātha miśra mahā-sukhe
putra kole kari cumba deya cānda-mukhe
Text 2 śire keśa-bhūṣaṇa sājāya
āguli calite sneha uthale hiyāya
Text 3 nimā-i bāpera kola haite
bhaṅgī kari nāmaye aṅgane beḍā-ite
Text 4 hāmāguḍi beḍāya aṅgane
soṅāra nūpura bāje su-cāru caraṇe
Text 5 calite hera-i ulaṭiyā
calana-mādhurī miśra dekhe dāṇḍā-iyā
Text 6 samukhe āsiyā kahe māya
kole caḍasiyā bāpa dhūli lāge gāya
Text 7 jananīra hāte hāta diyā
kole uṭhe lahu lahu hāsiyā hāsiyā
Text 8 dugdha-bindu sama danta-jyoti
hāsite prakāśa tāya kebā dhare dhṛti
Text 9 duṭī āṅkhe yāra pāne cāya
tāre nirantara sukha-samudre bhāsāya
Text 10 jananīre kole bhāla śohe
narahari nichani bhubana-mana-mohe


     Text 1 Happily placing Him in his lap, Jagannātha Miśra kisses his son's moonlike face.
     Text 2 Carefully he decorates his son's hair. His heart is flooded with love.
     Text 3 Then, with a gesture indicating His desire, little Nimāi clambers from His father's lap and enters the courtyard.
     Text 4 Crawling on all fours, He travels in the courtyard. On His graceful feet the gold anklets jingle.
     Text 5 The crawling infant turns and looks. Jagannātha Miśra stands and watches the sweetness of His motions.
     Text 6 Facing His father, the infant says, "Mama!" Pickign Him up and placing Him on His lap, the father brushes the dust from His body.
     Text 7 Then he places the child in His mother's hands. Gently gently laughing and laughing, the child stands in His mother's lap.
     Text 8 The splendor of His teeth is like drops of milk. Who can be peaceful and indifferent when He smiles and luaghs?
     Text 9 With her eyes drinking the sight of her son, the mother felt herself always floating in an ocean of bliss.
     Text 10 In His mother's lap that child is splendid nad glorious. Narahari worships that child, a child who enchants the hearts of all the world.


Song 11 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 śacī ṭhākurāṇī cāru chānde
hāṭana śikhāya gorācānde
Text 2 mṛdu mṛdu kahena hāsiyā
dhara mora aṅguli āsiyā
Text 3 śuni sukhe nadīyāra śaśī
māyera aṅguli dhare hāsi
Text 4 dhīre dhīre uṭhiyā dāṇḍāya
du-i cāri pada cali yāya
Text 5 chāḍiyā aṅguli paḍe bhūme
śacī kole lāñā mukha cume
Text 6 kole caḍi caraṇa dolāya
bājāye nūpura rāṅgā pāya
Text 7 aṅgule kacāli sthāna piye
nāhi ye upamā tāya diye
Text 8 cāri-dike cāhe bhaṅgī kari
tāhāte nichani narahari


     Text 1 Śacī Ṭhākurāṇī gracefully ties Gauracandra's topknot.
     Text 2 Gently gently smiling, Śacī says: "Hold my finger."
     Text 3 Hearing these words, He who is the moon of Nadīyā happily smiles and grasps His mother's finger.
     Text 4 Slowly slowly she stands Him up. Taking two or four steps, He begins to walk.
     Text 5 Letting go of her finger, He falls to the ground. Śacī places Him in her lap and kisses His face.
     Text 6 Standing in her lap, He moves His feet. The anklets on His reddish feet jingle.
     Text 7 First stroking with His finger, He drinks from her breast. I cannot speak any metaphors or similes to describe how glorious He is.
     Text 8 From the four directions everyone gazes at Him. Narahari worships Him.


Song 12 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 niśi parabhāta samaye ye-rūpa ānanda śacīra ghare
śata śata yuge sahasra badane kiñcit barṇite nāre
Text 2 nija jane sukha dite kata raṅga jānaye gauracānda
bujhibā āṅginā mājhete phāndila bhubana-mohana phānda
Text 3 śeja teji dhāñā dhāñā yata jana ā-ise ānanda kare
se śobhā sāyare ḍube puna phire yā-ite nāraye ghare
Text 4 ati aparūpa prīti anukṣaṇa upaje sabāra mane
o rāṅgā caraṇe saṁpe tanu mana dāsa narahari bhaṇe


     Text 1 At dawn a great bliss fills Śacī's house. Speaking for hundreds and hundreds of yugas with His thousand mouths, Lord Śeṣa cannot describe anything of it.
     Text 2 How much bliss does child Gauracandra give to His associates? I know a trap has been set in Śacī's courtyard, a trap to enchant all the worlds.
     Text 3 Leaving His bed, child Gauracandra runs and runs. Anyone who comes near is filled with bliss. They are all plunged in the ocean of Gauracandra's charming glory. They have no power to leave and return to their homes.
     Text 4 At every moment wonderful love takes birth in their hearts. They offer their hearts and bodies to child Gauracandra's reddish feet. This Narahari says.


Song 13 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 āhā mari mari gaurāṅgacāndera carite keba na jhure
nadīyā-nibāsī niśi adaraśe parāṇa dharite nāre
Text 2 śutiyā swapane āna nāhi jāne mana sarabasa gorā
rajanī-prabhāte gorā gorā bali jāgiyā se rase bhorā
Text 3 bṛddha bṛddha yata puruṣa prakṛti upamā nāhika kāru
kata na yatane kebā sirajila swabhāba carita cāru
Text 4 narahari pahuṁ nichani se saba bṛddha parijana pāśe
gorā sneha-bhare gara gara kichu kahe su-madhura bhāṣe


     Text 1 Alas! Alas! Alas! Who does not weep because of child Gaurāṅgacandra's pastimes? Unable at night to see child Gauracandra, Nadīyā's people cannot maintain their lives.
     Text 2 Lying on their beds to sleep, they cannot think of anything but child Gaurāṅgacandra. Their hearts are rapt in thinking of child Gaurāṅgacandra. At dawn they rise and say, "Gaura! Gaura!" They are overcome with the nectar of love for child Gaura.
     Text 3 The men and women cannot think of any metaphors or similes to describe child Gaura. How many times did they try? No one could think of anything that would compare to child Gaura's beautiful glories.
     Text 4 With their friends at their side, all the adults of Nadīyā worship the child that is Narahari's master. To child Gaura they speak sweet words filled with love.


Song 14 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 śuna he su-mati ati nirajane kahiye gupata kathā
baraje baraja-pati suta bujhi prakaṭa ha-ila ethā
Text 2 nadīyā-nagare hena nāhi keha na jhure uhāra guṇe
śrībāsa murāri ādi yata tāra nā jiye daraśa bine
Text 3 śāntipura-bāsī adwaita tapasī satata ethāya rahe
kibā se madhura guṇa yāre tāre kata na yatane kahe
Text 4 āhā mari mari hena aparūpa bālaka habe ki āra
narahari sarabasa gauracānde karaha galāya hāra


     Text 1 Please listen, O friend with the saintly heart, and in a secluded place I will tell you a great secret. The son of Vraja's king came to this place.
     Text 2 No one is like HIm in Nadīyā-nāgara. No one was unhappy when his glories were manifest. Without seeing Him, Śrīvāsa, Murari Gupta, and so many great devotees could not even stay alive.
     Text 3 Lord Advaita, the great tapasvī from Śāntipura, stayed here in Nadīyā. With how many sweetnesses and glories is Nadīyā filled. Even with the greatest effort I could not describe them all.
     Text 4 Alas! Alas! Alas! Will there ever again be a wonderful child like Gauracandra? Please place a necklace around child Gauracandra's neck, child Gauracandra who is Narahari's everything.


Song 15 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 āju śubha-kṣaṇe pohā-ila niśi
ānande magana nadīyā-bāsī
Text 2 dekhite gaurāṅgacāndere snehe
dhāñā ā-ise saba śacīra gehe
Text 3 āṅgināra mājhe bilase gorā
jaga-jana mana nayana corā
Text 4 parikara śobhe sakala diśe
uḍu madhi bidhu upamā ki se
Text 5 kichu smṛti nā-i kāhāra mane
sabākāra āṅkhi o mukha-pāne
Text 6 narahari eka mukhe ki kabe
nija nija rase ulase sabe


     Text 1 Night has ended. Now is an auspicious moment. The people of Nadiya are plunged into bliss. 
     Text 2 Filled with love, everyone runs to Śacī's house to see child Gauracandra.
     Text 3 In the courtyard Gaura is splendid and glorious. He steals the eyes and hearts of the world's people.
     Text 4 His associates aroundim on every side, He glistens like a moon surrounded by a host of stars.
     Text 5 Who thinks of anyone but Him? Everyone drinks with their eyes the sight of His face.
     Text 6 Every person is blissful, tasting the nectar of his own relationship with Lord Gaura. Someday will Narahari see His face?


Song 16 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 adwaita-gharaṇī sītā ṭhākurāṇī kebala rasera rāśi
animikha āṅkhe nirakhi sundara gaura mukhera hāsi
Text 2 o naba carita bhābite bhābite ha-ila pūraba pārā
dhairaja dharite naraye yugala nayane bahaye dhārā
Text 3 kata kata kathā upajaye cite snehete ātura mati
yatana kariyā kare upadeśa se-rūpa śacīra prati
Text 4 aśeṣa āśiṣa diyā praśaṁsaye sukhera nāhika pāra
narahari kahe e saba carita bujhite śakati kāra


     Text 1 Lord Advaita's wife Sītā Ṭhākurāṇī, who is flooded with the nectar of spiritual love, with unblinking eyers looks at child Gaura's handsome smiling face.
     Text 2 Again and again rapt in meditation on His youthful glories, she cannot remain peaceful. A flood of tears flows from her eyes.
     Text 3 How many words of love take birth in her heart? Her heart is overcome. Speaking to Śacī, she struugles to express her feelings.
     Text 4 She offers every blessing. She speaks words of praise. The ocean of her happiness has no shore. Narahari says: Who has the power to understand all that is in her heart?


Song 17 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 śrībāsa-banitā ati su-carita snehera mūrati yena
satata lajjita satī pativratā jagata nāhika hena
Text 2 praphullita tanu anupama ādha basana jhāpiyā mukhe
sītāya samīpe dāṇḍā-iyā ghana nirikhe manera sukhe
Text 3 āṅgināra mājhe priya parikara beṣṭita basiyā gorā
sundara badana-cānda jhalakaye ga-khāni soṅ\āra pārā
Text 4 naba naba saba ki kaba mālyāni se śobhā sāyare bhāse
aparūpa prema-bālā-i la-iyā maru narahari dāse


     Text 1 In this world no saintly wife wife devoted to her husband is like Śrīvāsa's wife, who is always modest and saintly, and who is like spiritual love personified.
     Text 2 Her peerless form blossoms with happiness. Her face is half covered by her garment. Standing next to Sītā, she gazes at the small boy who brings joy to her heart.
     Text 3 Surrounded by His dear associates, child Gaura stands in the courtyard. The handsome moon of His face shines. His limbs glisten like gold. 
     Text 4 He is decorated with garlands of newer and newer flowers. He floats in an ocean of splendor. Narahari dāsa is attacked by a great calamity of wonderful love for Him.


Song 18 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 rajanī-prabhāte śacī-debī cite ānandera nāhi ora
o mukha nirakhi nāre sambarite nayane bahaye lora
Text 2 sītāra caraṇe dhariyā yatane kahaye madhura bāṇī
kebala tarasā tomādera ogo bhela manda nāhi jāni
Text 3 āpana jāniyā nimā-i-cāndere satata prasanna habā
cira āyu haiñā sukhe thāke yena e-ise āśiṣa dibā
Text 4 keha nāhi mora kata nibediba e śiśu āṅkhira tārā
e-i karo yena ghare thāke sadā ghucaye cañcala dhārā
Text 5 āra bali biśwarūpa mora e-i nimā-i jībana prāṇa
tila ādha yena nā haya biccheda e-i bara dibe dāna
Text 6 e-i rūpa kata kahiyā turite karaya maṅgala nīta
narahari eka mukhe ki kahibe atula māyera prīta


     Text 1 At sunrise the bliss in Śacī's heart has no end. As she gazes at her son's face, so many tears flow from her eyes she cannot see. 
     Text 2 Grasping Sītā's feet, she earnestly speaks sweet words. She says, "I have all faith in you. You are good and saintly. I know nothing bad of you."
     Text 3 Sītā says, "I know you well. May Nimāicandra always be pure. May He live long. May He always be happy. These benedictions I will give."
     Text 4 Śacī says, "I will not ask any benedictions for myself. How many benedictions will I request? I ask that you give the benediction that the stars of my son's eyes will peacefully remain at home. I will destroy the great flood of His restlessness. 
     Text 5 "Nimāi is my life and breath. Only my Viśvarūpa is like Him. Let Him not be separated from me for even a single sesame seed's worth of time. Please give that benediction to me." 
     Text 6 How many words are spoken like this? Then the auspicious ritual is quickly performed. Narahari has only one mouth. How can he describe the peerless love mother Śacī feels for Lord Gaura?

Song 19 (Bibhāsa-rāga)

Text 1 āju ki ānanda śrī-śacī-bhubane rajanī-prabhāta-kāle
priya-parikara mājhe biśwambhara bilase bhaṅgimā bhāle
Text 2 yāra ye-i bhāba se-bhābe bḥabita sabāre karaye sukhī
bhubana-mohana guṇa-maṇi hena su-ghaḍa kabhu nā dekhi 
Text 3 bṛddha bṛddha-nārī yata atiśaya ātura snehera bhare
o mukha-candramā heri heri keha dhairaja dharite nāre
Text 4 nayanete bāri bahe anibāra marama ānanda-mane
narahari prāṇa gaurāṅga-carita punaḥ paraspara bhaṇe


     Text 1 At dawn bliss fills Śacī's house. In the middle of His friends, child Viśvambhara gracefully plays.
     Text 2 He delights everyone. Everyone is rapt in thinking of Him. He is like a jewel of virtues. He charjms all the worlds. No one has seen anyone like Him.
     Text 3 The adults, the men and women, are filled with love for Him. Gazing and gazing at His moonlike face, no one can remain peaceful.
     Text 4 Without stop tears flow from their eyes. Their hearts are filled with bliss. Again and again they recount the pastimes of child Gaurāṅga, Gaurāṅga who is Narahari's very life and breath.


Song 20 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 nadīyāra ati          puṇyabatī pati-
          bratā-gaṇera ki manera gati
nija-putre mana          nā-i anukṣaṇa
          bhaṇe śacīsuta-carita rīti
Text 2 niśi śeṣa dekhi       śayana upekhi
          tila ādha nāhi dairaja bāndhe
nānā drabya thāri        bhari sāri sāri
          laiyā cale dite nadīyā-cānde
Text 3 śacīra gṛhete         prabeśita cite
          uthalaye kata kautuka sindhu
dekhaye sakale      jananīra kole
          khele basi gorā gokula-indu
Text 4 juḍāya nayāna         nārīgaṇa-prāṇa
          pā-iyā kole kari pāsare dehā
kahe narahari       āhā mari mari
          kibā sirajila e hena lehā


     Text 1 Where do the thoughts of Nadīyā's saintly ladies run? Not to their own children. At every moment the ladies talk of Śacī's son.
     Text 2 Leaving their beds at sunrise, even for a half a sesame seed's worth of time they cannot be peaceful. Gathering many gifts, they hurry to give them to child Gaura, who is like the moon of Nadīyā.
     Text 3 How many oceans of bliss flood their hearts when they enter Śacī's house? Playing on His mother's lap, child Gaura allows them to see Him, Gaura who in truth is Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself, Kṛṣṇa the moon of Gokula.
     Text 4 For these ladies child Gaura is like their life and breath. He brings cooling bliss to their eyes. Hugging Him, the ladies forget their own bodies. Narahari says: Ah! Ah! Ah! Someday will I love child Gaura as these great devotees do?


Song 21 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 nāce āre bāpa biśwambhara
kara bhari khā-ite diba nanī kṣīra sara
Text 2 patibratā-gaṇa cāri-pāśe
kahe kata nimā-i-cāndere mṛdu-bhāṣe
Text 3 hari haribola bali bali
sabe mili saghane racaye kara-tāli
Text 4 cāhi gorā jananīra pāne
haribola bali nāce bibidha bandhāne
Text 5 kibā cānda-mukhe mṛdu hāsi
bhulāya bhubana ḍhāle sudhā rāśi rāśi
Text 6 nayana cāhani cāru chānde
bbujera bhaṅgimā dekhi kebā sthira bāndhe
Text 7 ki madhura madhura kiraṇe
jhalake aṅgane hena aṅgera kiraṇe
Text 8 kiṅkiṇī nūpura bāje bhāle
narahari nichani caraṇa-tala-tāle


     Text 1 Ah! Child Viśvambhara dances. The ladies place excellent butter and milk in His hand for Him to eat.
     Text 2 The saintly ladies gather around Him on four sides. How many sweet words do the speak to Nimāicandra?
     Text 3 Gathering around Him, the ladies clap their hands. “Hari! Haribol!", they sing and sing.
     Text 4 Glancing at His mother, child Gaura also sings, “Haribol!" In many ways He gracefully dances.
     Text 5 On His moonlike face a gentle smile appears, a smile that is a flood of nectar cascading over the worlds.
     Text 6 His movoing eyes cast graceful glances. His arms gracefully move. Seeing Him, who could remain peaceful?
     Text 7 Rays of sweet sweet glory shining from His limbs fill the courtyard.
     Text 8 His belt and anklets jingle. Narahari worships the soles of His feet.


Song 22 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 raṅge nācaye śacīra bālā
rūpe karaye bhubana ālā
Text 2 jini hema sarasija tanu
dhūli dhusara parāga janu
Text 3 beśa bhūṣaṇa śobhaye bhāla
hari bali de-i kara-tāla
Text 4 mṛdu hāsaye madhura chānde
tāhe kebā dhairaja bāndhe
Text 5 cāri-dike ki kautuke cāya
kari bhari sara deyata māya
Text 6 bhaṅgī kari ghana ghana ghume
dhaṭī añcala loṭāya bhūme
Text 7 kaṭi kiṅkiṇī su-cāru chaṭā
tāya jhinini śabada chaṭā
Text 8 bāje jhununu nūpura pāya
narahari se nichani tāya


     Text 1 Śacī's small son dances in the dancing-circle. His form fills the worlds with glorious light.
     Text 2 His form defeats the golden lotus flowers. The dust on His body is like pollen on a lotus.
     Text 3 His garments and ornaments are glorious. Clapping His hands, He chants, "Hari!"
     Text 4 His gentle smile is sweet. Who can remain peaceful and indifferent in His presence?
     Text 5 He playfully looks in the four directions. He grasps His mother's hand. 
     Text 6 Gracefully He turns as He dances. The edge of His garemnt trails on the ground.
     Text 7 "Jhinini!", His glistening belt of bells declares.
     Text 8 "Jhununu!", His ankle bells say. Narahari worships Him.


Song 23 (Maṅgala-rāga)


Text 1 āji āṅgina para       nadīyā bālaka sāñe
          raṅge khelata śacī-bālā
nakhata-nikara mājhe          eka-śaśī rāje
          karata dika ujala
Text 2 bibidha khelana       le-i sakala mili
          khelata bibidha khelā
sabahu banade       hasa bikaśita
          janu eka sāñe bahu padamaka melā
Text 3 so khelā daraśane          gara gara antara
          ānande śacī utarola
daṇḍe śata-beri          cume badana-cānda
          biśwambhara kari kola
Text 4 basana-añcale         śrama-jala muchi
          śrī-aṅge karata bātāsa
kare cāmara le-i         pāse ṭhāri rahu
          pāmara narahari dāsa


     Text 1 Śacī's small son now happily plays with Nadīyā's boys. His fingernails and toenails are like a single regal moon filling the directions with light.
     Text 2 Gathering together, the boys play many different games. They play many different games. Laughter blossoms in every mouth. Child Gaura and the boys are like one lotus flower playing with many lotus flowers.
     Text 3 Watching the boys play, Śacī feels delight in her heart. Placing small Viśvambhara in her lap, she kisses His face a hundred times.
     Text 4 With the edge of her garment she wipes away His perspiration. She fans His graceful body. Standing at the side, the sinner Narahari moves the cāmara fan in his hand.


Song 24 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) ki ānanda nadīyā-nagare
śrī-sacī-debīra putra         dharibena yajṇa-sūtra
          e-i kathā prati ghare ghare
Text 2 snehete bihwala haiñā         keba na calaye dhāñā
          nānā-drabya lañā miśrālaye
nirupama miśrālaya       loka-bhīḍa atiśaya
          se śobhāya keba na bhulaye
Text 3 miśra mahā harṣa hañā        kare beda-mata kriyā
          yajṇa-sūtra de-i gorācānde
gaura-mūrti manohara          paridhāna raktāmbara
          hāte dibya daṇḍa-jhuli kāndhe
Text 4 prabhu bhikṣā kare raṅge        dekhi deba-nārī saṅge
          mānuṣe miśāya bhikṣā dite
prabhu-priya-gaṇa yārā        kata nā kautuke tārā
          bhikṣā de-i prabhura jhulite
Text 5 maṅgala bidhāna yata       ke tāhā kahibe kata
          kibā strī-gaṇera yajakāra
bipre beda-dhwani kare        śuni ke dhairaja dhare
          bhāṭa-gaṇe kahe kāyabāra
Text 6 jaya jaya kala-raba        byāpila se diśa saba
          nṛtya-gīta bādya nānā bhānti
dāsa narahari bhaṇe      yācaka ucita dāne
          bhaṇaye su-yaśa sukhe māti


     Text 1 (Refrain) What bliss has come to Nadīyā-nagara? “Śacī's son will accept the sacred-thread!" This news now travels from house to house.
     Text 2 Who, bearing gifts and overcome with ecstatic love, does not run to Jagannātha Miśra's house? Great crowds come to peerless Jagannātha Miśra's house. Who is not charmed by his glories?
     Text 3 Delighted Jagannātha Miśra performs the Vedioc ritual and offers the sacred-thread to young Gauracandra. Lord Gauracandra's fair form enchants the heart. His garments are saffron. A splendid brahmacāri-daṇḍa and a cloth jhuli rest in His hand and on His shoulder.
     Text 4 Youthful Gauracandra happily begs alms. Infiltrating the crowd of human ladies, the demigoddesses gaze at Him and offer Him alms. How many blisses do the Lord's dear associates not feel? They happily place their offerings in His jhuli bag.
     Text 5 Who can describe these auspiciousn rituals? How many gloriosu ladies have come to watch? The brāhmaṇas chant the Vedic hymns. Hearing them, who can remain peaceful and indifferent? The poets recite many poems.
     Text 6 Sounds of "Jaya! Jaya!" fill the directions. There are many kinds of splendid singing, dancing, and instrumental music. Narahari dāsa says: The beggars are offered gifts. Wild with bliss, they praise Lord Gauracandra.


Song 25 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1  gaurasundara parama śubha-kṣaṇe dharala yajṇopabīta
beda bihita kriyā-nipuṇa śacī miśra nirupama rīta
Text 2 bibidha maṅgala kota kula badhū ulu-lu-lu-lu-lu-lu deta
bhāṭa-gaṇa bhaṇa su-yaśa śubha śobhā su-diṭhi bharileta
Text 3 gāna karu naba-tāla guṇī marujādi bāyata su-raṅga
nṛtya kṛta nartaka ukhaṭi ghana dhādhi dhikadha dhilaṅga
Text 4 deba-gaṇa-mana-magana atiśaya nirakhi lalita bilāsa
bhubana bhari jaya jaya-dhwani nichani narahari dāsa


     Text 1 At a supremely auspicious moment youthful Lord Gaurasundara accepted the sacred-thread. Learned in Vedic rituals, Śacī and Jagannātha Miśra performed the peerless rite.
     Text 2 Many auspicious rituals were performed. "Ulu-lu-lu-lu-lu-lu!", the saintly ladies cheered. The poets recited glorious poems praising Lord Gaurasundara. Every eye was filled with Lord Gaurasundara's glory.
     Text 3 Singers sang. On maruja and other drums drummers joyfully played in the nine rhythms. Dancers danced, their footsteps sounding, "Dhādhi! Dhikadha! Dhilaṅga!"
     Text 4 Their hearts plunged in bliss, the demigods gazed at Lord Gaurasundara's graceful pastimes. Sounds of "Jaya! Jaya!" filled the worlds. Now Narahari dāsa worships Lord Gaurasundara.


Song 26 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 ballabha-duhitā       lakṣmī su-caritā 
          sakhīte beṣṭita haiyā
snāna karibāre           cale gaṅgā tīre 
          cakita caudike cā-iyā
Text 2 gaurāṅgacāndere       dekhi kichu dūre 
          uthale nigūḍha lehā
se-rūpa mādhurī          sudhā-pāna kari 
          dharite na rahe thehā
Text 3 gorā guṇa-maṇi        nija-priyā cini
          cāhaye lakṣmīra pāne
jini kāñcā-soṇā          lakṣmī-tanu jenā
          prabeśa marama thāne
Text 4 dohe diṭhi koṇe       mili su-sandhāne
          āne nā jānite pāre
narahari pahuṁ      hāsi lahu lahu
          ānande calila ghare


     Text 1 Accompanied by her girlfriends, and cautiously looking in the four directions, Vallabha Acārya's saintly daughter Lakṣmīpriyā walks to the Gaṅgā's bank for her bath. 
     Text 2 Seeing Lord Gaurāṅgacandra a little distance away, she feels flooded with secret love. Tasting the sweet nectar of the sight of His form, she cannot remain peaceful.
     Text 3 Lord Gaura casts a glance at His beloved Lakṣmīpriyā, who is rich with the jewels of all virtues and whose graceful form defeats the purest gold. His glance enters her heart.
     Text 4 The two of Them glance at each other from the corners of Their eyes. They know nothing but each other. Sweetly, sweetly smiling, Narahari's master blissfully walks to His home.


Song 27 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 ki ānanda nadīyā-nagare
nimā-ira bibāha-kathā prati ghare ghare
Text 2 ki nārī puruṣa nadīyāra
bibāha dekhite hiyā uthale sabāra
Text 3 bhāṭa-gaṇa calaye dhā-iyā
pā-iba aneka dhana mane bicāriyā
Text 4 nartaka bādaka ādi yata
kare dhā-oyā dhā-i kata kari manoratha
Text 5 calaye gaṇaka-gaṇa dāñā
kara-iba bibāha apūrba lagna pāñā
Text 6 mālī-gaṇa calaye ullāse
nānā puṣpa-hāra lañā śrī-śacī ābāse
Text 7 eka mukhe kahibe ke kata
daridra yācaka tārā cale śata śata
Text 8 narahari-mane e-i āśa
dekhiba du-āṅkhi bhari bibāha bilāsa


     Text 1 What kind of bliss fills Nadīyā-nagara? The news of Nimāi's wedding goes from house to house.
     Text 2 What has happened to the men and women of Nadiya? Every heart is flooded with the wish to see Nimāi's wedding.
     Text 3 The poets run. In their hearts they think they will find a priceless treasure.
     Text 4 The dancers, musicians, and other artists also run. How many desires fill their hearts?
     Text 5 The astrologers also run. They have a wonderful auspicious moment for the wedding.
     Text 6 Joyfully the florists run. They bring many varieties of flower garlands to Śacī's house.
     Text 7 What person with only one mouth has the power to describe all these pastimes? How many mouths are enough to describe them? Hundreds and hundreds of poor beggars come to the house.
     Text 8 This wish stays in Narahari's heart: I wish, filling my own two eyes with the sight, I will someday see the pastimes of Lord Nimāi's wedding.


Song 28 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 śrī-śacī-alaya        ati śobhamaya
          uthalibe tāhe ānanda-sindhu
adhibāsa āji        bilasiba sāji
          sukhamaya gorā gokula-indu
Text 2 eta kahi cite         nāre sthira haite
          cāhi cāri-bhite kulera bālā
upamā ki mena       ghara haite yena
          bā-ira halo cāru cāndera mālā
Text 3 bicitra basana        śohe ābharaṇa
          prati aṅge beśa binyāsa bhāla
nānā bhaṅgī kari         cale sāri sāri
          nadīyāra patha kari ālo
Text 4 kata abhilāṣe         giyā ā-i pāśe
          praṇamite kata ādare ā-i
narahari nāthe      pāñā āṅgināte
          juḍā-ila hiyā se mukha cā-i


     Text 1 Śacī's house is very beautiful and glorious. Soon it will be flooded with an ocean of bliss. Today is the adhivāsa ceremony. Today joyful Lord Gaura, who is Kṛṣṇa Himself, Kṛṣṇa the moon of Gokula, will enjoy many pastimes.
     Text 2 No heart is peaceful. From the four directions the teenage girls come. To what can I compare them? They are like a garland of glorious moons shining together.
     Text 3 The girls wear wonderful colorful garments and beautiful glistening ornamants. Their every limb is beautifully dressed and decorated. With graceful gestures and motions they walk. Row upon row of teenage girls fill the streets of Nadīyā with light.
     Text 4 How many are their desires? They approach Mother Śacī. They bow down before her and worship her. Narahari's master now enters the courtyard. Seeing His face, every person feels his heart become filled with cooling bliss.


Song 29 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 śobhāmaya śacīra aṅgane
catur-dike beda-dhwani kare bipra-gaṇe
Text 2 (Refrain) āju ki ānanda parakāśa
śubha-kṣaṇe nimā-i-cāndera adhibāsa
Text 3 gandha-mālya de-i atma-gaṇe
diśa ālo kare gorā aṅgera kiraṇe
Text 4 sabhā-madhye gorā dwija-maṇi
bilāsaye kata na arbuda kāma jini
Text 5 bāreka ye cāya gorā pāne
nā dhare dhairaja se āpanā nāhi jāne
Text 6 ye-jana ā-ila adhibāse
gandha-candanādi diyā sabe paritoṣe
Text 7 bidhimate kari adhibāsa
ballabha ācārya gelā āpanā ābāsa
Text 8 kahite sukhera anta nā-i
ā-i ho śu-iho lañā śubha karma kare ā-i
Text 9 nari-gane de-i yajakara
bhāṭa-gaṇe karaye maṅgala kāyabāra
Text 10 nṛtya gīta bādya nānā bhāti
upamā dibāra nā-i kāhāra śakati
Text 11 kebā nā balaye bhāla bhāla
jaga-bhari jaya jaya śabada rasāla
Text 12 mānuṣe miśāye deba=gaṇe
dekhi adhibāsa-raṅga narahari bhaṇe


     Text 1 In Śacī's beautiful courtyard the brāhmaṇas fill the four directions with the sounds of the Vedas. 
     Text 2 (Refrain) What bliss has come now? At this auspicious moment is the ritual of Lord Nimāicandra's's adhivāsa.
     Text 3 Every guest is given a fragrant flower-garland. The effulgence of Lord Gaura's limbs fills the directions.
     Text 4 In the midst of the assembly Lord Gaura, the jewel of the brāhmaṇas, enjoys glorious pastimes. How many millions of Kāmadevas does He not defeat?
     Text 5 Once glancing at Lord Gaura, no one can keep their peaceful composure. No one can even remember who they are.
     Text 6 Every guest at that adhivāsa is given sandal-paste, fragrances, and other gifts. Everyone is satisfied.
     Text 7 After properly performing the adhivāsa ritual, Vallabha Acarya returns to his own home.
     Text 8 No one has the power to say where the bliss of that festival comes to an end. Mother Śacī is glorious. Her actions are all auspicious.
     Text 9 The ladies give gifts. The poets recite auspicious poems.
     Text 10 There are many glorious kinds of dancing, singing, and instrumental music. Who has the power to speak proper metaphors and similes to compare these activities to anything else? No one has that power.
     Text 11 Who does not say, "Excellent! Glorious!"? The whole world is filled with sweet sounds of "Jaya! Jaya!"
     Text 12 Mingling amongst the human beings, the demigods watch Lord Gaura's adhivāsa festival. This Narahari says.


Song 30 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) āju snehete bihwola haiyā
ballabha ācārya          adhibāsa kārya
          kare ātma-bipra-bargera la-iyā
Text 2 kata sādhe māya       lakhinī kanyāya
          parā-iya bāsa bhūṣaṇa bhāli
su-cāru aṅgane      dibya siṁhāsane
          basā-iyā sukhe bhāsaye ālī
Text 3 śubha-kṣaṇe dite      gandha-mālā cite
          dekhe alakhita cāri-bhite deba-ramaṇī ghaṭā
Text 4 śaṅkha ghaṇṭā ādi          bādya nānā-vidhi
          nṛtya gīta śubha bhāṭete bhaṇe
nārī yajakāre       dhṛti dharibāre
          nāre narahari nichani mene


     Text 1 (Refrain) Now everyone is overcome with spiritual love. Accompanied by his brāhmaṇa friends, Vallabha Acārya performs the adhivāsa ritual.
     Text 2 How many austerities did Lakṣmīpriyā's mother perform to attain such a daughter? Dressed in fine garments and decorated with glorious ornaments, Lakṣmīpriyā sits on a splendid throne in the beautiful courtyard. Her friends are plunged in spiritual bliss. 
     Text 3 At an auspicious moment she is offered a fragrant flower-garland. Her heart is joyful. Her limbs are effulgent. No heart is peaceful and quiet. Unnoticed, the demigoddesses stand on four sides and watch. 
     Text 4 Conchshells, bells, and a great variety of musical instruments sound. There are graceful singing and dancing. The poets recite glorious poems. The ladies offer gifts. No one is peaceful. Narahari offers respectful worship.


Song 31 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 adhibāsa niśi pohā-ile
bibāhera kārya yata karaye sakale
Text 2 bipra-gaṇe ha-iyā beṣṭita
nimā-i karena kriyā ye beda-bihita
Text 3 loka bhīḍa kahile nā haya
leha deha bākya kolāhala atiśaya
Text 4 bāje nānā bādya nirantara
gāyaka-gaṇete gāna kare pūrbāpara
Text 5 bhāṭa-gaṇe paḍe kāyabāra
nārī-gaṇe de-i su-madhura yajakāra
Text 6 sabāra ullāsa strī-ācāre
narahari bhāse senā sukhera sāyare


     Text 1 In this way the night of the adhivāsa gradually came to an end. Now everyone makes arrangements for the wedding.
     Text 2 Surrounded by a host of brahmanas, Lord Nimai performs the Vedic rituals.
     Text 3 Great crowds speak loving words glorifying Lord Nimai. There is a great tumult.
     Text 4 Various kinds of musical instruments always sound. Singers sing from beginning to end.
     Text 5 Poets recite poems. Ladies offer sweet gifts.
     Text 6 During the rituals everyone is joyful. Narahari floats in bliss.


Song 32 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) kibā śrī-śacī-bhabana mājhe
bibidha maṅgala kala-rabe sabe, bhramaye bibāha kāje
Text 2 se ye gorā gokulera indu
bibāha bihita sthāna atiśaya, uthale ānanda-sindhu
Text 3 kula-badhū su-madhura chānde
su-cāru kuntale taila diba bale, bāre bāre ā-ulāñā bāndhe
Text 4 keha haldi mākhāya gāya
haldi malina heri hāse sabe, parāṇa nichaye tāya
Text 5 keha gandha-drabya de-i aṅge
se nā anga gandhe gandha-mada hare, upamā diba ki saṅge
Text 6 abhiṣeka kaila gaṅgā-jale
narahari pāni-tolā la-iyā tanu pochaye kautuka chale


     Text 1 (Refrain) Many kinds of auspicious sounds fill Śacī's house. Everyone is busy with the rituals of Lord Gaura's wedding.
     Text 2 Lord Gaura is Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself, Lord Kṛṣṇa the moon of Gokula. The place of His wedding is flooded with bliss.
     Text 3 With oil the saintly ladies anoint His graceful hair. Again and again His hair is put in disarray.
     Text 4 Someone anoints His face and limbs with turmeric paste. Seeing Him anointed in this way, everyone smiles. With every breath they worship Him.
     Text 5 Someone anoints His limbs with fragrances. Are not His limbs already fragrant of their own accord? How can they be compared to anything else?
     Text 6 With Ganga-water the abhiseka of Lord Gaura is performed. Narahari raises his hands. Pretending only to be curious, he gazes at Lord Gaura's form.


Song 33 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 āju kata nā ānanda mane
basiyā āsane, biśwambhara beśa, racaye bayasya gaṇe
Text 2 gandha candana carace gāya
biracaye cāru lalāṭa tilaka, keba nā bhulaya tāya
Text 3 bāndhi cañcara cikura bhāle
manera ullāse madhura chānde, beḍāye mālatī māle
Text 4 kāṇe kuṇḍala arpaṇa kare
jhalakaye gaṇḍa-taṭe gaṇḍa-yuga darpaṇa darapa hare
Text 5 gale de-i maṇimaya hāra
parisara buke dole su-lalita ke dibe upamā tāra
Text 6 bāhu aṅgada balaya kare
aṅgule aṅguri soṁpi mukha-pāne, cāhila dhairaja dhare
Text 7 siṁha jini mājā-khāni kṣīṇa
soṅāra śikali sājā-ite āṅkhi ha-ila nimiṣa-hīna
Text 8 beśa-binyāsa bhubana lobhā
rakta-prānta bāsa parā-iyā narahari nikharaye śobhā


     Text 1 Placing Lord Viśvambhara on a throne, His friends dress Him with splendid garments and ornaments. How many blisses fill His friends' hearts?
     Text 2 They anoint His limbs with fragrances and sandal paste. On His graceful forehead they place tilaka. Who amongst them is not overcome?
     Text 3 They tie His graceful curly hair. With joyful hearts they place a sweet jasmine garland upon Him.
     Text 4 On His ears they place earrings, earrings that glisten on cheeks that take away the pride the glistening mirrors feel.
     Text 5 On His neck they place a jewel necklace, a necklace that gracefully swings to and fro on His chest. Who can describe it with metaphors and similes?
     Text 6 On His wrists and arms they place bracelets and armlets. On His fingers someone places rings. They peacefully gaze at his face.
     Text 7 The place a golden-link belt about His slender waist, a waist that defeats even the lion's graceful waist. With unblinking eyes they gaze at Him.
     Text 8 They dress Him in a garment with a red border. The whole world yearns to see Him in His glorious garments and ornaments. Narahari gazes at His graceful glory.


Song 34 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) beśa banā-iyā sahacare
śasī sama, subarṇa darpaṇa de-i kare
Text 2 nimā-i cāndera beśa dekhi
ānera ki debe-o phira-ite nāre āṅkhi
Text 3 nija sakhī saha śacī ā-i
karaye maṅgala kata putra mukha cā-i
Text 4 naba badhū-gaṇa dūre raiyā
nā dhare dhairaja gorācānda pāne cāñā
Text 5 ulu lulu deya nārī-gaṇe
bibāha binoda kathā bharila bhubane
Text 6 praṇamiya jananīra pāya
bibāha karite yātrā kare gaura rāya
Text 7 beda dhwani kare bipra-gaṇe
bāje nānā-bādya śabda bhedaye gagane
Text 8 kautuka kahite kebā pāre
narahari sātāraye se sukha pāthāre


     Text 1 (Refrain) When the garments and ornaments were all arranged, the friends placed a golden mirror in Lord Gaura's hand. Lord Gaura was splendid like the moon.
     Text 2 Seeing Lord Nimāicandra so gloriously dressed and decorated, who could look at anyone but Him? No one could turn his eyes from Him.
     Text 3 Accompanied by her friends, how many auspicious rituals did mother Śacī perform? She gazed at her son's face.
     Text 4 The young girls stayed far away. Somehow gazing at Lord Gauracandra's face, they could not contain their excitement.
     Text 5 "Ulu-lulu!", the ladies chanted. The world was filled with descriptions of Lord Gaura's blissful wedding.
     Text 6 Lord Gaura Rāya bowed before His mother's feet. Then He began the journey to His wedding ceremony.
     Text 7 Brāhmaṇas chanted the Vedas. Various musical instruments were sounded. The tumultuous sounds tore the sky in two.
     Text 8 Who has the power to describe the bliss at that festival? Narahari swims in that great ocean of bliss.


Song 35 (Bhūpālī-rāga)


Text 1 āju go-dhūli samaya śubha-kṣaṇa, gaura guṇa maṇi bhubana mohana,
     beśa biracita bibaha bihita, su-mṛdula tanu chabi chala kāya.
koṭi manamatha garaba bhaṇjana, kaṇja-diṭhi jana-hṛdaya-raṇjana,
     cāhi diśa cahu, hāsi lahu lahu, caḍata cauḍala jhalakāya.
Text 2 calata ballabha bhabana bhūsura, beḍi gati ati manda su-madhura,
     bandī-gana, bhuri maṅgala-bhaṇa, bhubana-bharu jaya jaya dhwani.
naṭata naṭa-gaṇa ughaṭi thaitata, thoṅga thoṅgina gāna rata kata,
     biraci rucira caritra sura sāña, sarasa rasa baraṣata guṇī.
Text 3 bādya kata kata bhānti bāyata, bādya pāṭha abhaṅga bhāyata,
     sughara bādaka-bṛnda, bādya-samudra mathi janu santare.
gagane sura-gaṇa magana atiśaya, saghane animikha nayane nirakhaya,
     bipula pulaka alakṣa kṣiti utarata, ki kautuka antare.
Text 4 nārī puruṣa asaṅkhya dhāyata, prasara patha nirupama suhāyata,
     dīpa śata śata ujora yāminī nātha kara parakāśa-i.
dharaṇī adhika uchāhe praphullita, jāhnabī jala-bhela uchalita,
     dāsa narahari karaba kiye, paśu pākhī saba sukhe bhāsa-i.


     Text 1 Now at dusk, at the time when returning cows raise dust with their hooves, at an auspicious moment, Lord Gaura, who has the jewels of all virtues, who charms the worlds, whose form is graceful. delicate, and effulgent, and who is dressed in glorious garments, is married. His handsomeness breaks the pride of millions of Kāmadevas. His lotus glances delight the peoples' hearts. Gently, gently smiling, He glances in the different directions. His effulgence fills the four directions with light.
     Text 2 Accompanied by a host of saintly brahmanas, with graceful stately strides He walks to Vallabha Acārya's home. The poets speak auspicious words. The worlds are filled with sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!" The dancers dance. "Thaitata! Thoṅga! Thoṅgina!", their dancing footsteps sing. How many dances do they dance? They are graceful and glorious. They shower nectar.
     Text 3 How many musical instruments sound how many glorious melodies? The musicians gracefully play together. The musicians seem to churn the great ocean of sweet music. They swim in that ocean. Gathering in the sky, the demigods watch with unblinking eyes. The hairs of their bodies stand erect. Unseen, they descend to the earth. What joy is in their hearts!
     Text 4 Countless men and women run on the streets. Their happiness has no equal. Hundreds and hundreds of lamps glisten. The moon, the master of the night, brilliantly shines. The whole world blossoms with bliss. The Ganga overflows. What shall Narahari dāsa say? Even the birds and beasts float in an ocean of bliss.


Song 36 (Bhūpālī-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) gauracandera bibāha dekhibāre
kata na manera sādhe dhāya         nadīyāra naba-badhū-gaṇa
          dhairaja dharite ke-u nāre
Text 2 nirupama beśa bāsa         bhūṣaṇa bhūṣita tanu
          jhalamala kare se bhaṅgimā śohe bhālo
calite bājaye kaṭi       kiṅkiṇī nūpura pade
          su-madhura gamana karaya patha ālo
Text 3 se rasa ābeśe paraspara kata, kaya kibā su-lalita
          beśara dolāye nāsā-mūle
ghuṇṭe ābṛta maṇju-mukhe      mṛdu mṛdu hāsi hāsi chaṭā
          ghaṭāya kebā bā nāhi bhule
Text 4 aṇjane raṇjita mana-raṇjana khaṇjana-pākkhī jini
          maṇju-nayana cāhani cāri bhite
narahari parāṇa nāthera nirakhiyā hiyā uthalaye
          ballabha bhabana prabeśita


     Text 1 (Refrain) Their hearts filled with longings, how many young girls of Nadīyā run to see Lord Gauracandra's wedding? Who amongst them can remain patient?
     Text 2 His form is decorated with peerless garments and ornaments. His glistens with graceful handsomeness. As the girls sweetly walk the bells at their waists and ankles jangle. They fill the streets with light.
     Text 3 How many nectar words do they talk among themsleves? They are graceful and playful. At their noses veśara ornaments move to and fro. Veils cover their lotus faces. Their gentle gentle smiles are effulgent. Did they forget everything, or not?
     Text 4 With graceful eyes, eyes decorated with black anjana, eyes that delight the eheart, eyes that defeat the playful restless khaṇjana birds, the girls look in the four directions. Seeing that person who is the master of Narahari's life, and their hearts now flooded with bliss, they at once enter Vallabha Acārya's house.


Song 37 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 ballabha bhabane gaura rāya
ballabha miśrera mahā ānanda bāḍhāya
Text 2 ballabha ha-iya ullasita
karaya maṅgala kārya bibāha-bihita
Text 3 biśwambhara sarasa hiyāya
dāṇḍā-ilā piḍira upare choḍalāya
Text 4 aṅgera bhaṅgīte prāṇa hare
rūpera chaṭāya daśa-dik ālo kare
Text 5 cānda-mukhe upamā ki dite
amiyā garaba nāśe īṣat hāsite
Text 6 nayana cāhani cāru chānde
yāra pāne cāya se dhairaja nāhi bāndhe
Text 7 makara kuṇḍala śruti-mūle
cañcara keśera beśe ke bā nāhi bhule
Text 8 aṅgada balaya bhāla sāje
śobhā dekhi kata nā madana mare lāje
Text 9 ehena barere uruthita
kanyāra jananī cale āyo-gaṇa sāte
Text 10 se śobhā kahite kabe pāre
sapta-dīpa hate sapta-pradakṣiṇa kare
Text 11 parama adbhuta strī-ācāre
bara urathiyā ghare gamana sabāra
Text 12 ballabha ācārya bhāgyabān
ānā-ilā kanyāya karite kanyā-dāna
Text 13 basā-ilā dibya-siṁhāsane
ha-ila ujwala mahā aṅgera kiraṇe
Text 14 ati su-komala tanu-khāni
hāsi makha badana pūrṇimā-cānda jini
Text 15 paridheya bicitra basana
jhalamala kare nānā ratna ābharaṇa
Text 16 hena kanyā bibidha bidhāne
karila pradāna miśra śacīra nandane
Text 17 bipra-gaṇe kare beda-dhwani
ulu-lulu de-i yata kulera kāminī
Text 18 bāje bādya bibidha prakāra
nācaye nartaka bhāṭa paḍe kāyabāra
Text 19 deba-gaṇa bimāne caḍiyā
bariṣe kusuma alakhita jaya diyā
20. bhubana byāpila mahā sukhe
narahari kata na kahiba eka mukhe


     Text 1 Lord Gaura Rāya arrives at Vallabha Acārya's house. Now Vallabha Acārya is filled with bliss.
     Text 2 Now joyful Vallabha Acārya performs the auspicious wedding ceremony.
     Text 3 His heart filled with the nectar of happiness, Lord Viśvambhara stands under the wedding-canopy on the veranda.
     Text 4 The graceful motions of His limbs steal away everyone's life-breath. The effgulgence of His form fills the ten directions with light.
     Text 5 What metaphors or similes can describe His moonlike face? His gentle smile destroys the pride of nectar.
     Text 6 His eyes cast graceful glances. None who see Him can remain peaceful.
     Text 7 Shark-shaped earrings decorate His ears. Who would not be overcome by seeing His graceful curly hair?
     Text 8 He is gracefully decorated with bracelets and armlets. How many Kāmadevas become ashamed when they see Him?
     Text 9 Seeing that the bridegroom has come, the bride's mother comes with seven maidservants.
     Text 10 Who has the power to describe Lord Gaura's handsomeness? Seven lamps in her hand, the bride's mother sven times circumambulates Lord Gaura.
     Text 11 She performs the ritual of welcoming the bridegroom, and they all enter the house.
     Text 12 Fortunate Vallabha Acārya now brings his daughter for the wedding ceremony.
     Text 13 He has her sit on the splendid throne. Her body is effulgent.
     Text 14 Her body is soft and delicate. Her smiling face defeats the full moon.
     Text 15 Her garments are colorful and wonderful. Her multi-jeweled ornaments glisten.
     Text 16 Performing many rityals, Vallabha Acārya offers his beautiful daughter to Śacī's son.
     Text 17 The brāhmaṇas chant the Vedas. The beautiful girls make sounds of "Ulu-lulu!"
     Text 18 Musical instruments are sounded in many different ways. Dancers dance. Poets recite poems.
     Text 19 From their airplanes the demigods shower flowers. Unnoticed, they come and chant, "Jaya!"
     20. The whole world is filled with bliss. How many details of this pastime Narahari will not describe, will not describe because he has only one mouth?


Song 38 (Bhūpālī-rāga)


Text 1 gorā guṇa-maṇi prāṇa priyā-saha bilasaye śoja bāsara ghare
kula-badhū-gaṇa ghana ghana karu gatāgati kata kautuka bhare
Text 2 keha nānā chala kari parihāsa kare hāsi hāsi manera sukhe
keha gorā-kara-kamale tāmbūla diyā kahe deha lakṣmīra mukhe
Text 3 keha gorā-bidhu-badane tāmbūla dite dite bahu bāḍhaye prīti
keha paraśera sādhe bāndhe keśa ā-ulā-ite nāre dharite dhṛti
Text 4 keha biśwambhara kole lakhimīre basā-iyā cāru bhaṅgīte cāhe
bhaṇe narahari bāsare se rasa uthalaye nāhi upamā tahe


     Text 1 Accompanied by His beloved and decorated with the jewels of virtues, Lord Gaura Rāya enjoys many pastimes in Vallabha Acārya's home. How many saintly girls come and go? How much bliss fills this house?
     Text 2 Some girls speak joking words that make the new couple smile and laugh, jokes that fill the couple's hearts with joy. Some girls place betelnuts in Lord Gaura's lotus hand and tell Him to place them in Lakṣmīpriyā's mouth.
     Text 3 Some girls place betelnuts directly in Lord Gaura's mouth. They please Him greatly. Some girls arrange His hair. They cannot remain calm and peaceful.
     Text 4 Some girls make Lakṣmīpriyā sit in Lord Gaura's lap. They gaze at the graceful couple. Narahari says: On that day everyone is flooded with nectar. No metaphors or similes can do justice to these pastimes.


Song 39 (Toḍi-rāga)


Text 1 gorācandera bibāha para-dine
kata ānanda uthale tāya rajanī bihāne
Text 2 kula-badhū-gaṇa cāri-dike dhāya
dekhi bara-kanyā-śobhā sabe nayana juḍāya
Text 3 kibā ballabha-ghariṇī bhāgyabatī
pā-iyā jāmātā-ratna nā jānaye āche kati
Text 4 miśra-ballabha udāra atiśaya
nija jāmātā maṅgala hetu kibā na karaya
Text 5 bhāle ballabha jāmātā gaura-hari
harṣe ha-ilena bibāha-bihita karma kari
Text 6 kaila kārya samādhāna su-bidhāne
narahari kahe ballabha praśaṁse deba-gaṇe


     Text 1 How much bliss floods the house on the morning after Lord Gauracandra's wedding?
     Text 2 From the four directions the saintly girls run. Gazing at the beauty of the bride and groom, their eyes are filled with cooling bliss.
     Text 3 How did Vallabha Acārya's fortunate wife attain such a jewel of a son-in-law? She does not know.
     Text 4 How did saintly and generous Vallabha Acārya attain such an auspicious son-in-law? He does not know.
     Text 5 When the wedding ceremony was complete, Lord Gaura-Hari, now Vallabha Acārya's son-in-law, was joyful.
     Text 6 Now that the wedding ceremony is comple, Narahari says: Now all the demigods praise Vallabha Acārya.


Song 40 (Toḍi-rāga)


Text 1 gaura gokula-candra calu nija gehe niśi parabhāta
birale ballabha sneha kahi kata kahala lakhimī ki bāta
Text 2 heri patha yata nārī dhairaja nā dhara-i jhura-i nayāna
lakhimī sahacarī jāne lakhimīka nātha karaba payāna
Text 3 śaṅkha dundubhi bherī bājata bādya bibidha prakāra
naṭata nartaka-bṛnda gāyata gīta guṇī anibāra
Text 4 beda ucarata bipra-gaṇa guṇa bandī karu parakāśa
bhubana bhari jaya jaya ki narahari bhabana pahuṁ bilāsa


     Text 1 Lord Gaura, who in truth is Lord Kṛṣṇa, Lord Kṛṣṇa who is like a moon shining in Gokula, departs at dawn for His own home. In a private room Vallabha Acārya speaks affectionate words to his daughter. Ah, what words he speaks to Lakṣmīpriyā!
     Text 2 Watching the new couple proceeding opn the street, the ladies cannot remain peaceful. Tears flow from their eyes. Lakṣmīpriyā's friends know well that Lakṣmīpriya and her husband will soon depart.
     Text 3 Conchshells, dundubhis, and bheris all sound. Musical instruments play in many different ways. Dancers dance. Singers sing glorious songs without stop.
     Text 4 Brāhmaṇas chant the Vedas. Poets praise the new couple's glories. Sounds of "Jaya! Jaya!" fill the worlds. In this way He who is the master of Narahari's house enjoys pastimes.


Song 41 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 bibāha kariyā biśwambhara
śwaśru-ālaya haite ā-ila nija-ghara
Text 2 ye ānanda kahite na pāri
karaya maṅgala yata patibratā nārī
Text 3 śacī putra-badhū kole laiyā
kaila āśirbāda bahu dhānya dūrbā diyā
Text 4 śrī-śacī sukhera nāhi pāra
putra-mukha badhū-mukha dekhe kata bāra
Text 5 lakṣmī-biśwambhara-sobha dekhi
keha phirā-ite nāre animikha āṅkhi
Text 6 bhubana-mohana gorā rāya
su-madhura bhāṣe paritoṣaya sabāra
Text 7 bhāṭa naṭa bādakādi yata
karilena pūrṇa sakalera manoratha
Text 8 narahari kahe ubha-rāya
dekhi yena ehena kautuka nadīyāya


     Text 1 When the wedding was complete, Lord Viśvambhara left the house of His mother-in-law and returned to His own home.
     Text 2 I have no power to describe the bliss He felt. The saintly ladies devoted to their husbands blessed Him with all auspiciousness.
     Text 3 Śacī hugged her son and daughter-in-law. She offered Them paddy and dūrvā grass. She spoke many words to bless Them.
     Text 4 Śrī Śacī's happiness was like an ocean that had no shore. How many times did she gaze at the face of her son and the face of her daughter-in-law?
     Text 5 Seeing the beauty of Lakṣmīpriyā and Viśvambhara, no one could turn away, or even blink his eyes.
     Text 6 Lord Gaura Rāya charmed all the worlds. Speaking sweet words, He pleased everyone.
     Text 7 He fulfilled every desire of the poets, dancers, musicians, and all others.
     Text 8 Narahari says: Gazing at the glorious couple, all of Nadīyā became filled with bliss.


Song 42 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 lakṣmī prāya lakṣmī ṭhākurāṇī
śāśaḍīra sebā kare dibasa rajanī
Text 2 pati-prati acala bhakati
pati-sebā kare dina rāti
Text 3 pāṭha deya nimā-i paṇḍita
paḍuyā asaṅkhya āse haite cāri-bhite
Text 4 hena śikṣā kothā-o nā pāya
bṛhaspati pāṭha yena deya nadīyāya
Text 5 gaṅgādāsa śiṣya biśwambhara
sarba-bidyā biśārada se bidyā-sāgara
Text 6 hena phāṅki karena nimā-i
yāhāra uttara dite karo sādhya nā-i
Text 7 sandhyā-kāle śiṣya-gaṇa laiñā
bidyāra bilāsa kare gaṅgā-tīre yāñā
Text 8 cāri-dige nimā-ira yaśa
narahari ānandete ha-ila abaśa


     Text 1 Lakṣmīpriyā, who is like Goddess Lakṣmī Herself, serves her mother-in-law day and night.
     Text 2 Her devotion to her husband never wavers. She serves her husband day and night.
     Text 3 Lord Nimāi is a great paṇḍita. He teaches. He has numberless students in the four directions.
     Text 4 No one could find better instruction anywhere. He is like Bṛhaspati giving classes in Nadīyā.
     Text 5 Lord Viśvambhara is a student of Gaṅgādāsa. Lored Viśvambhara is learned in all subjects. He is an ocean of learning.
     Text 6 Lord Nimāi set out His logical arguments like a great trap. No one had the power to reply to His arguments.
     Text 7 Taking His students with Him, at dawn He would go to the Gaṅgā's bank and enjoy pastimes of learning.
     Text 8 Lord Nimāi's fame is spread in the foure directions. Narahari is now overcome with bliss.


Song 43 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 nadīyā-nagare haila dhwani
kariba bibāha punaḥ gorā guṇa-maṇi
Text 2 sanātana miśra bhāgyabāna
karibena nimā-i-cāndere kanyā-dāna
Text 3 biṣṇupriyā nāma se kanyāra
rūpa guṇe bhubane tulanā nāhi tāra
Text 4 kāli habe śubha adhibāsa
dekhiba nayana bhari bibāha bilāsa
Text 5 kata-kṣaṇa niśi pohā-iba
śrī-śacī bhabane pāṇi sā-ite yā-iba
Text 6 narahari kahe hena bāsi
to sabhāra anurāge pohā-ila niśi


     Text 1 In Nadīyā comes the news: Lord Gaura, who is wealthy with the jewels of all virtues, will marry again.
     Text 2 Fortunate Sanātana Miśra will give his daughter in marriage to Lord Nimāicandra.
     Text 3 His daughter's name is Viṣṇupriyā. In beauty and virtues, no girl is her equal in all the worlds.
     Text 4 Tomorrow will be the auspicious adhivāsa. Filling their eyes, everyone will see the pastime of the Lord's wedding.
     Text 5 How many moments did it take for that long night to pass? To Śrī Śacī's house he will go to ask for the hand.
     Text 6 Narahari says: The people of Nadīyā passed that night filled with love for Lord Nimāicandra.


Song 44 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 gorā bidhu adhibāsa sukhe kenā baise prabeśiyā bhubana mājhe
gorā priyā-gaṇa nita naba naba nipuṇatā adhibāsera kāje
Text 2 mālā candanādi de-i jane jane se-i ati kautuka ke kata kare
sabhā madhye bilasaye śacī-suta yena purandara beṣṭita debe
Text 3 miśra sanātana-gaṇa saha śubha-kṣaṇe āsi nānā sāmagrī laiyā
choyā-iyā gandha gorā mukha pāne animiṣa āṅkhe bahaye cāhiñ\
Text 4 bipre beda-dhwani kare nārī yajakāra cāru raṅga bhaṭete bhaṇe
gāya narahari adhibāsa-rasa baya nānā bādya bādaka-gaṇe


     Text 1 What kind of bliss has entered the house during Lord Gauracandra's adhivāsa ceremony? Lord Gaura's associates expertly perform the ceremony of adhivāsa.
     Text 2 To person after person they offer flower-garlands, sandal-paste, and other gifts. How much bliss everyone feels! In the midst of the assembly Śacī's son is very glorious. He is like Indra surrounded by the devas.
     Text 3 At an auspicious moment Sanātana Miśra's associates come with fragrances and various ritual ingredients. With unblinking eyes everyone gazes at Lord Gaura's face. 
     Text 4 The brāhmaṇas chant the Vedas. The ladies offer yajakāra. The poets recite beautiful poems. The musicians play many musical instruments. Narahari sings this song describing the nectar of Lord Gaura's adhivāsa.


Song 45 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 hota śubha adhibāsa śubha-kṣaṇe, gagane sura-gaṇa magana gaṇa sane
     paraspara bahu carita bhaṇi anibāra muda-mati gati nayī
gauraba samaya rasika śekhara, sarasa āsane bilase rucira
     kara kanaka darapaṇa darapa bhara hara, madala tanu manamatha jayī
Text 2 badana-bidhu bidhu-garaba-bhaṇjana, hāsa mṛdu mṛdu hṛdaya raṇjana
     maṇju diṭhi yuga kaṇja jhalakata, bhāle tilaka śohaye
bhujaga bhuja-bara bakṣa parisara, kṣīṇa kaṭi prati aṅga su-rucira
     cikaṇa cāñcara cikura nirupama bhubana jana-mana mohaye
Text 3 aiche mādhurī heri guṇi-gaṇa, māni sukṛti uchāhe ghana ghana
     bibidha rāga ālāpi gāyata bīṇa gahi śruti sarasaye
sughaḍa bādaka bṛnda bhāyata, madhura mṛdaṅga muraja bāyata
     thoṅga thoṅkṛṇa jhikiku jhāṅkiṭa ṭhiṭiṭhi tanana nana nāye
Text 4 naṭata nartaka hasta abhinaya, lalita bhaṅgī bithāri atiśaya
     badata taka taka thaita thaitata dhādhili lilili lalala-i
niyata jaya jaya śabada bhubi bharu, bhūri bhūsura beda-dhwani karu
     deta ulu lulu nārī-gaṇa ghanaśyāma hiyā sukhe uthala-i


     Text 1 At an auspicious moment Lord Gaura's auspicious adhivāsa ritual is celebrated. At that moment the demigods assemble in the sky. With happy hearts they talk always of Lord Gaura's pastimes. At the auspicious moment Lord Gaura, the crown of rasikas, sits on the throne. He shines with great splendor. His effulgence defeats the pride of the golden mirrors. His graceful form defeats Kāmadeva.
     Text 2 The moon of His face breaks into pieces the pride of the moon in the sky. His gentle gentle smile delights the heart. His eyes are charming. They glisten like lotus flowers. The tilaka on His forehead is glorious. His arms are like two snakes at the edge of His chest. His waist is slender. His every limb is graceful and pleasing. His curly hair glistens. He has no peer. He charms the heart of every soul in this world.
     Text 3 Gazing at His sweetness, the saintly people think they must have performed many pious deeds. The musicians play many different rāgas on the vīṇā. The sweet sounds are nectar for the ears. The musicians play their instruments. The mṛdaṅgas and murajas make sweet sounds of "Thoṅga thoṅkṛṇa jhikiku jhāṅkiṭa ṭhiṭiṭhi ṭanana nana!" 
     Text 4 The dancers dance. They make graceful dramatic gestures with their hands. The move gracefully. Their dancing footsteps declare, "Taka taka thaita thaitata dhādhili lilili lalala-i!" Sounds of "Jaya! Jaya!" fill the world. The brāhmaṇas chant the Vedas. The ladies make sounds of “Ulu-lulu!" Now Ghanaśyāma's heart is flooded with bliss.


Song 46 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 ki ānanda śacīra bhabane
karaye maṅgala karma ā-iha su-iha gaṇe
Text 2 bibāha bihita snāna kari
baisena apūrba siṁhāsane gaura hari
Text 3 rūpera chaṭāya mana mohe
cāñcara cikaṇa keśa pīṭhe bhāla śohe 
Text 4 gorā pāśe āse priya-gaṇa
bāreka cāhiya nāre phirāte nayana
Text 5 kata nā ānande sabe mati
bibāha bihita beśa race nānā bhānti
Text 6 kahite ki jāne narahari
nirupama beśera bālā-i laiya mari


     Text 1 What bliss fills Śacī's house!  Now the auspicious ritual is performed.
     Text 2 The ritual bath in the wedding ceremoiny now complete, Lord Gaura-Hari sits on a wonderful throne.
     Text 3 The glory of His handsome form charms the heart. His glistening curly hair is graceful and glorious.
     Text 4 At Lord Gaura's side are His dear associates. Once seeing Him, none can turn his eyes from Him.
     Text 5 How much bliss fills every heart? No one knows. The garemnts and decorations for the wedding are multifarious and glorious.
     Text 6 How can Narahari describe it? He is overcome by the peerless glory of it all.


Song 47 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 sanātana miśrera bhabane
ye maṅgala-kriyā tā kahite kebā jāne
Text 2 bāje nānā bādya śobhamaya
uthale ānanda-kolāhala atiśaya
Text 3 bandhu-gaṇa sane sanātana
āgu-sari āse nite jāmātā-ratana
Text 4 jāmātā ki manohara sāje
jhalamala kare dibya catur-dola mājhe
Text 5 catur-dike brāhmaṇa sajjana
asaṅkhya lokera bhide nā yāya gaṇana
Text 6 kare hāte hāta andha
dāṇḍā-iyā rahaye ye-dike gauracandra
Text 7 paṅgu-gaṇa rāja-pathe āsi
dekhaye manera sādhe gorā-rūpa-rāśi
Text 8 yeba ke-u calite nā pāre
dhariyā laguḍa pathe ā-ise dhīre dhīre
Text 9 kebā nāhi gorā-guṇa gāya
nā jānaye kata sukha bāḍhaye hiyāya
Text 10 nānā bādya bāje nānā chānde
nāce bāla bṛddha ke-u thira nāhi bāndhe
Text 11 kata śata mahā-dīpa jwale
dharaṇī chā-ila ālo gagana maṇḍale
Text 12 keha kula-raṅga prakāśaya
byāpaye sakala mahī-tale yāhā haya
Text 13 miśra mahā ullasita mane
jāmātā la-iyā kole prabeśe bhabane
Text 14 apūrba āsane basā-iyā
kare puṣpa-bṛṣṭi cānda-mukha-pāne cāñā
Text 15 jaya jaya dhwani anibāra
bādābādi baya bādya bādaka doṅhāra
Text 16 miśra kare jāmātā baraṇa
narahari tāhā dekhi juḍāya nayana


     Text 1 Who can describe the auspicious rituals performed at Sanātana Miśra's home?
     Text 2 A great variety of musical instruments are beautifully played. A tumult of bliss floods everything.
     Text 3 Accompanied by his kinsmen, Sanātana Miśra enters. He sits down with his jewel son-in-law, Lord Gaura.
     Text 4 How charming is his son-in-law, splendid as He sits on a palanquin.
     Text 5 In the four directions is a host of brāhmaṇas and devotees. Numberless guests have come. No one can count them all.
     Text 6 Hand-in-hand, a host of blind people come. They stand before Lord Gauracandra.
     Text 7 A host of lame people come. With eager hearts they gaze at Lord Gaura's glorious handsomeness.
     Text 8 Even though they have no power to walk, grasping their canes they had slowly, slowly walked on the path.
     Text 9 Who did not sing of Lord Gaura's glories? Who did not feel his heart fill with bliss?
     Text 10 A veriety of musical instruments are sounded in many different ways. The young and old dance. No one is peaceful.
     Text 11 How many hundreds of great lamps glisten? The sky and the earth are filled with light.
     Text 12 Everyone is blissful. The guests fill the whole area.
     Text 13 With a joyous heart Sanātana Misra hugs his son-in-law and takes Him into the house.
     Text 14 He makes Lord Gaura sit on a wonderful throne. He showers Him with flowers. He gazes at His moonlike face.
     Text 15 "Jaya! Jaya!" everyone calls without stop. The musicians play their instruments.
     Text 16 Sanātana Miśra formally welcomes his son-in-law. Gazing at all this, Narahari feels his eyes become filled with cooling bliss.


Song 48 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 dekhi pahuṅka bibāha mādhurī ko-i dhara-i nā theha
śeṣa śiba bihi indra gaṇapati ādi pulakita deha
Text 2 bhīḍa atiśaya gagana pathe bahu roki deba bimāna
hota jaya jaya śabada su-madhura bhaṅgī bhaṇa-i na jāna
Text 3 bhūri kautuka paraspara bara sarasa carita ucāri
karata kusuma su-bṛṣṭi alakhita lalita raṅga bithāri
Text 4 dwija sanātana bhāga-bhara paraśaṁsi parama bithora
dāsa narahari āśa iha sukhe mātaba ki mati mora


     Text 1 Watching the sweetness of Lord Gaura's wedding ceremony, no one can remain peaceful. Now the hairs stand erect on the bodies of Śeṣa, Śiva, Brahmā, Indra, Gaṇeśa, and a host of demigods.
     Text 2 Traveling on the pathways in the sky, many demigods arrive in their airplanes. There are sounds of "Jaya! Jaya!" There are graceful words and gestures.
     Text 3 The demigods are filled with bliss. Amongst themselves they talk of the Lord's sweet pastimes. They shower flowers. Unnoticed, they gracefully come to the earth.
     Text 4 Overcome, the brāhmaṇa Sanātana Miśra praises Lord Gaura. Narahari dāsa wishes that someday when he sees these pastimes, his heart will become wild with bliss.


Song 49 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 deba-ramaṇī-bṛnda biraci beśa bibidha bhānti
bājata tharamāhi atula jhalake kanuka kānti
Text 2 bhramata gagana patha agaṇita yūthahiya utsāha
mānata diṭhi sakala nirakhi gaura-bara bibāha
Text 3 miśra bhabana rīta rucira ucāri pulaka gāta
naba naba abhilāṣa karaha dhṛti dhara-i nā jāta
Text 4 nirupama pahuṁ preyasī chabi locana bharineta
narahari kata bhākhaba sabhe prāṇa nichani deta


     Text 1 The demigoddesses dress in different kinds of splendid garments and ornaments. They glisten like peerless gold.
     Text 2 Numberless hosts of goddesses eagerly travel on the pathways in the sky. With eager eyes they gaze at Lord Gaura's wedding ceremony.
     Text 3 Coming to glorious ceeremonies at Sanātana Miśra's house, they find the hairs of their bodies stand erect with joy. They are filled with newer and newer yearnings. They cannot remain peaceful.
     Text 4 Their fill their eyes with the sight of peerlerss Lord Gaura and His effulgent beloved. How many times will Narahari glorify Lord Gaura? Narahari has dedicated his life's breath to the worship of Lord Gaura.


Song 50 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 āhā mari mari sura-nārī-gaṇa, nadīyā-cāndera bibāha dekhi
se sobha sāyare sāntāriyā sabhe, tirapita kare tṛṣita āṅkhi
Text 2 keha karu-prati kahe dekha miśra-sanātana sukhe nā dhare hiyā
kṛṣṇe kanyā-dāna kari kata sādhe kahe kata nānā yautuka diyā
Text 3 keha kahe jāmātāra bāme kanyā, basā-iyā dhanya āpana māne
kare homa-kriyā tāhā nāhi mana cāhi rahe cānda-mukhera pāne
Text 4 keha kahe dekha miśrera gharaṇī unamata pārā bibāha dhūme
narahari nāthe dekhe kata chale, ulasita pada nā paḍe bhūme


     Text 1 Ah! Ah! Ah! Gazing at Lord Gaura's wedding, the demigoddesses find them selves swimming in an ocean of glory. With great pleasure their thirsty eyes gaze at Lord Gaura, who is like a moon shining in Nadīyā.
     Text 2 One demigoddess says to another: "Look! Overcome with bliss, Sanātana Miśra cannot keep his heart peaceful. How eagerly does he offer his daughter in marriage to Lord Kṛṣṇa? How many variegated presents does he give as her dowry?"
     Text 3 Another demigoddess says: "He makes his daughter sit at the left of his son-in-law. In his heart he thinks of his own good fortune. He performs the homa, but that is not where his thoughts lie. He is rapt in gazing at Lord Gaura's moonlike face."
     Text 4 Another demigoddess says: "Look! As the smoke rises from the wedding ceremony, Sanātana Miśra's wife is overcome with bliss. On how many pretexts does she gaze at Narahari's master? Filled with bliss, she thinks her feet no longer touch the ground."


Song 51 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 deba deba-ramaṇī ullāse
bibāha-prasaṅge sabe kahe mṛdu-bhāṣe
Text 2 bhāgyabanta loka nadīyāra
ha-ila bibāha dekhi ullāsa sabhāra
Text 3 rūpabatī kanyā yāra ghare
se sakala bipra mane mahā-kheda kare
Text 4 ehena barere kanyā dite
nā pārāli hena sukha nāhika bhāgyete
Text 5 e-i-mata keha kata kaya
sakale-i sanātana miśra praśaṁsaya
Text 6 sanātana miśra bhāgyabāna
homa-karma ādi saba kaila samādhāna
Text 7 kanyā jāmātāya nirakhiyā
tile tile bāḍhe sukha uthalaye hiyā
Text 8 kahite ke jāne lokācāra
ghana ghana nārī-gaṇa de-i yajakāra
Text 9 biṣṇupriyā-debī gorācānde
la-ite bāsara ghare keba thira bāndhe
Text 10 narahari pahuṁ gora-rāya
cale bāsara ghare kata kautuka hiyāya


     Text 1 With gentle words the demigods and goddesses joyfully speak of Lord Gaura's wedding ceremony.
     Text 2 The fortunate people of Nadiya joyfully gaze at Lord Gaura's wedding ceremony.
     Text 3 The brāhmaṇas (assemble) at the beautiful bride's home. Each one laments in his heart (that his daughter was not to be Lord Gaura's bride).
     Text 4 Sanātana Miśra gives his daughter in marriage to Lord Gaura. Sanātana does not know how he had become so fortunate, how he had become so blissful.
     Text 5 How many guests speak? Everyone praises Sanātana Miśra.
     Text 6 Fortunate Sanātana Miśra performs the homa and other cermenies. Everything is completed.
     Text 7 Gazing at his daughter and son-in-law, Sanātana Miśra feels his heart gradually become flooded with bliss.
     Text 8 Who can describe Lord Gaura's wedding? The assembled ladies offer yajakāra gifts.
     Text 9 Taking Viṣṇupriyā-devī with Him, Lord Gauracandra goes to the wedding pavilion. Who remains peaceful?
     Text 10 How many guests, their hearts filled with bliss, follow Narahari's master, Lord Gaura Rāya, to the wedding pavilion?


Song 52 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 baraja-bhūṣaṇa-gaura-bidhu-bara, kari bibāha binoda-gati para
     preyasī saha cala-i nija ghara, parama adbhuta śohaye
caḍhala caudala māhi jhalakata, rūpa amiya prabāha uchalata
     balita nayana śiṅgāra anupama, nikhila jana-mana mohaye
Text 2 hota jaya jaya śabda abirata, nārī purukha asaṅkhya nirakhata
     paraspara bhaṇa lakhimī lakhimīka-nātha duṅhu bilasata janu
bandī-gaṇa mana moda atiśaya, ucarita naba naba carita madhumaya
     bhūri bhūsura karata ghana ghana, beda-dhwani pulakita tanu
Text 3 bādya bahu-bidha muraja muradala, trisari kuṇḍali paṭaha puṣkala
     ku-ku nu-nu-nu-nu-nudhā, bibidha bāyata madhura bādaka ghaṭā
naṭata nartakī nartakābalī, ughaṭi tadhikā dhikitā dhini
     nidhi dhennā dhiki taka tala dharu, paga-bhaṅgī camakata tanu chaṭā
Text 4 jāti-śruti swara-grāma murachana, tāna naba naba naba ālāpana
     śunata kānana tyaji mṛga, guṇī-bṛnda nikaṭahi dhāya-e
bhabana cahu diśa bipula kala-kala, dāsa narahari hṛdaya ucalala
     samaya go-dhūli lalita suradhunī tīre birami ghare āya-e


     Text 1 The pastimes of His wedding now complete, gloriously decorated Lord Gauracandra returns home with His bride. He is wonderfully handsome and glorious. Riding in a palanquin, He is splendid and glorious. His handsomeness is like a flooding stream of nectar. The sight of His peerless glorious decorated form fills every eye. He charms the people's hearts.
     Text 2 Without stop the people call, "Jaya! Jaya!" Numberless men and women gaze at Him. The people say amongst themselves: "They are glorious like Goddess Lakṣmī and Lord Nārāyaṇa." Their hearts filled with bliss, the poets recite sweet prayers describing the divine couple's new new pastimes. The brāhmaṇas, who are like demigods on the earth, chant the Vedas. The hairs of their bodies stand erect with bliss. 
     Text 3 The musicians play murajas, maradalas, trisaris, kuṇḍalis, paṭahas, puṣkalas, and many other musical instruemnts. "Ku-ku nu-nu-nu-nu-nu!", the band's instruments sweetly declare. The dancers dance many dances. “Tādhika dhikitā dhini! Nidhi dhennā dhiki taka!", the rhythms of their dances declare. Their forms move in wonderful graceful gestures.
     Text 4 The musicians play newer and newer and newer melodies, melodies that enchant the ears of every being. Hearing these melodies, the deer leave the forest and run to the assembly of saintly revelers. The sweet music fills all the directions and enters every house. The music floods Narahari dāsa's heart with bliss. At the time when the cows raise dust with their hooves, the wedding party stops at the charming Gaṅgā's banks and then goes to Lord Gaura's home.


Song 53 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 gorācānda bibāha kariyā
ā-isena ghare ati ulasita haiyā
Text 2 alakhita haiyā deba-gaṇa
karaye sakala pathe puṣpa bariṣaṇa
Text 3 sukhera pāthāra nadīyāya
bibāha-prasaṅga ke-u kahe śacī-māya
Text 4 śuni mahā-bādya kolāhala
śacī-debī ha-ilena ānande bihwola
Text 5 bāḍīra bahira śacī ā-i
nichiyā phelaye yata drabya lekhā nā-i
Text 6 snehe cānda-badana cumbiyā
prabeśe bhabane putra-badhū putre laiyā
Text 7 biṣṇupriyā saha biśwambhara
baise siṁhāsane dekhe yata parikara
Text 8 ulu lu-lu de-i nārī-gaṇa
ha-ila maṅgalamaya sakala bhabana
Text 9 bhāṭa-gaṇe paḍe kāyabāra
birpa-gaṇe beda-dhwani kare anibāra
Text 10 nānā bādya baya sabe sukhe
narahari kata ba kahiba eka-mukhe


     Text 1 His wedding ceremony now completed, with a joyous heart Lord Gaura returns to His home.
     Text 2 Unseen, the demigods shower flowers on His every path.
     Text 3 To mother Śacī someone describes the wedding. All of Nadīyā is flooded with an ocean of bliss.
     Text 4 Hearing the tumultuous music, Śacī-devī is overcome with bliss.
     Text 5 Mother Śacī runs out of the house. It cannot be written how many gifts were brought.
     Text 6 Śacī joyously kisses her son's moonlike face. She takes her daughter-in-law and son into the house.
     Text 7 Viṣṇupriyā and Viśvambhara sit on a throne. Everyone gazes at Them.
     Text 8 "Ulu lu-lu!", the ladies warble. The house is filled with auspiciousness. 
     Text 9 The poets recite poems. Without stop the brāhmaṇas chant the Vedas.
     Text 10 Musical instruments are sounded. Everyone is joyful. How much can Narahari, who has only one mouth, describe of these pastimes?


Song 54 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 gorā guṇa-maṇi sughaḍa śekhara parama mudita hiyāya
loka bahuta bibāhe ātula deya-i bidāya
Text 2 bhāṭa naṭa gītajṇa bādaka bhikṣu bhūsura bhūri
deta sabe bahu bastra bhūṣaṇa dhana manorama pūri
Text 3 atihi su-madhura bacane su-nipuṇa paritoṣa kara-i sabhāya
calala nija nija gehe sabe mili gaura-hari yaśa gāya
Text 4 śrī-śacī saba nārī jane jane kayala kata sammāna
bhaṇata narahari so sakala sukhe geye kayala payāna


     Text 1 Decorated with the jewel-crown of virtues, Lord Gaura is joyful at heart. To the many wedding guests He now bids farewell.
     Text 2 To the many poets, dancers, singers, musicians, beggars, and brāhmaṇas He gives valauble garments and ornamenst. Giving them great wealth, He fulfills their desires and delights their hearts. 
     Text 3 Expert at speaking sweet words, He satisfies everyone. The guests return to their own homes. There they assemble and sing Lord Gaura-Hari's glories.
     Text 4 Śrī Śacī respectfully speaks to all the ladies. Narahari says: Everyone happily departs.


Song 55 (Karṇāṭa-rāga)


Text 1 nācata bhubana-mohana campaka kanaka kaṇja jini baraṇa
su-balita tanu mṛdu malayaja raṇjita pahiraṇa cīna basana ghana kiraṇa
Text 2 himakara-nikara-nindi madhurānana, hāsata madhura sudhā manu jhara-i
bhurū-yuga bhaṅga pānti lasa locana ḍagamaga aruṇa-kiraṇa bhara hara-i
Text 3 dolata maṇimaya hāra harata dhṛti, ḍhalamala kuṇḍala jhalakata śrabaṇe
cācara cikura bhaṅgī bhāra bhare, bilulita halata-timira tāra janu pabane
Text 4 abhinaya lalita kalita kara kiśalaye, yata śata tāla dharata paga dharaṇe
narahari parama ulasa yaśa gāyata, śobhā bipula kaunaka bibaraṇe


     Text 1 His graceful form charming the hearts of all the world, Lord Gaura dances. His complesion dfeats the campaka, lotus, and gold. His garecful arms are anointed with sandal-paste. He wears glistening silken garments.
     Text 2 His charming face eclipses a host of cooling moons. His smiles are a flowing stream of sweet nectar. His eyebrows gracefully arch. His glorious restless reddish eyes eclipse the rising sun.
     Text 3 A jewel necklace rocks to and fro on His chest. His peacefulness is robbed. Earrings glisten on His ears. His glistening hair is curly. His hair is like a great darkness restlessly moving in the wind.
     Text 4 His garceful hands are like budding twigs. How many hundreds of rhythms rest in the clapping of His hands? With great joy Narahari sings His glories. How many of His glories can I describe?



Song 1 (Bibhāṣa-rāga)


Text 1 gaurāṅga nahite       tabe ki ha-ite
          kemane dharite de
rādhāra mahimā      prema-rasa-sīmā
          jagate jānā-ite ke
Text 2 madhura bṛndā-        binipna mādhuri
          prabeśa cāturī sāra
baraja yubatī       bhābera bhakati
          śakati ha-ite kāra
Text 3 gā-o punaḥ punaḥ      gaurāṅgera guṇa
          sarala ha-iya mana
e bhaba-sāgare      emana dayāla
          na dekhi ye eka-jana
Text 4 gaurāṅga baliyā       na genu galiyā
          kemane dharinu de
narahari hiyā       pāṣāṇa diyā
          kemana gaḍiyāche


     Text 1 
     Text 2 
     Text 3 
     Text 4 
     Text 5 
     Text 6 
     Text 7 
     Text 8 


Song 5 (Gāndhāra-rāga)


Text 1 gora mora sudha-i kanca sona
yatane karaha labha      dhani ha-ibara yara
          maramete achaye basana
Text 2 hena nikasita hema         bhubane na mile ara
          atulana gora dwija-mani
satati bajara dhana      ekeka manika naki
          e manikera mulya nahi jani
Text 3 goloka baikuntha-pure      e dhana gopana chila
          sri-radhara prema-kota-raya
jibera nistara hetu      santipura-natha tahe
          hunkare anila nadiyaya
Text 4 narahari dasa bhane        jibera kapala gune
          ha-ila gauranga abatara
bina-mule gora-dhana          yadi kara akincana
          aya nita-ira premera bajara


     Text 1 
     Text 2 
     Text 3 
     Text 4 


Song 21 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 nimā-i cañcala khepā kichu-i nā māne go śuna eka dibasera kathā
māyera añcale dhari phiraye aṅgane go āpanāra chāyā dekhi tathā
Text 2 chāḍiyā añcala chāyā-sahita khelāya go tāhāte āchila eka phaṇi
tāhāra dāruṇa phaṇe śayana kariyā go ki ānanda kichu-i na jāni
Text 3 hāya hāya kari sabe dhā-iyā ā-ise go palā-ite nāga punaḥ dhare
kāmpaye sakale śacī byākula ha-iyā go yatane dhariyā kole kare
Text 4 hena-i samaye eka pākhī uḍi yāya go kibā se bhaṅgīte tā-i heri
de more dhariyā iha bali bāre bāre go kāndaye māyera galā dhari
Text 5 nīlamaṇi hāra pārā dhārā du-nayane go ghucila se kājarera rekhā
o cānda-badana-khāni malina ha-ila go tāhā kiye āṅkhe yāya dekhā
Text 6 ke-u kichu kaya kāru kathāya nā bhule go prāṇa phaṭe krandana śuniyā
narahari prāṇa śiśu āpani bhulila go teṁhi ye su-sthira haila hiyā


     Text 1 Some people think child Nimāi is never restless or reckless. Ah, please hear this story of what He did one day. Grasping the edge of His mother's garment, He walked in the courtyard. Then He saw His own shadow.
     Text 2 Letting go of the edge of His mother's garment, He played with His shadow. Then He came upon a snake. Then He reclined on that fearsome snake's coils. What happiness did He find in that? I do not know.
     Text 3 Screaming, "Haya! Haya!", everyone ran there. The snake tried to flee, but child Nimāi grabbed Him. Everyone sobbed. Śacī was wild. With a great struggle she pulled Nimāi into her arms.
     Text 4 Another time child Nimāi motioned to a great bird flying in the sky. "That bird wants to carry Me away!", Nimāi said again and again. Clinging to His mother's neck, He sobbed.
     Text 5 The tears from His eyes made His black kajjala run like two strings of sapphires or like spots on the moon of His face. What did He see with His eyes?
     Text 6 Here someone may say: "I am not fooled by these words. Still, when I hear them my life's breath begins to break and I fall into weeping. Lord Nimāi, the child who is Narahari's very life and breath, may perhaps be bewildered as He enjoys these pastimes, but His devotees are not. Without wavering, their hearts know the true identity of the child Nimāi.


     Text 1 He who is the moon of Nadiya and the crown of rasikas is resplendant in His glorious wedding-garments. 
     Text 2 His graceful limbs are anointed with sandal-paste. Sandal-paste tilaka adorns the half-moon of His forehead.
     Text 3 He wears a crown of many different flowers. Who is not enchanted by seeing Him?
     Text 4 Black kajjala decorates His eyes. 


Part 26 Nayanānanda dāsa


Song 1 (Kedāra-rāga or Maṅgala-rāga)


Text 1 jaya re jaya re gorā       śrī-śacī-nandana
          maṅgala naṭana suṭhāna re
kīrtana ānande      śrībāsa rāmānande
          mukunda bāsu guṇa gāna re
Text 2 drāṁ drāṁ drimi drimi      mādala bājata
          madhura madirā rasāla re
śaṅkha karatāla          ghaṇṭā-bara bhāla
          malina pada-tala tāla re
Text 3 ko-i de-i aṅge        sugandhi candana
          ko-i de-i mālatī-māla re
pirīti phula-śare        marama bhedala
          bhābe sahacara bhora re
Text 4 keha bole gora        jānakī-ballabha
          rādhāra priya pāñcabāṇa re
nayanānandera mane       āna nāhi jāne
          āmāra gadādharera prāṇa re


     Text 1 Glory, glory to Śacī's son Gaura, the abode of auspicious dancing! In the bliss of kīrtana Śrīvāsa, Rāmānanda, Mukunda, and Vasudeva Ghoṣa sing His glories.
     Text 2 "Dṛaṁ drāṁ drimi drimi!", the drums declare. The sweet nectar cymbals chime. The conchshells, karatālas, and bells make a sweet sound. The dancers' footsteps mark the beat.
     Text 3 Someone anoints Lord Gaura's limbs with fragrant sandal-paste. Somone offers Him a jasmine garland. The devotees are overcome with ecstatic love, their hearts pierced by flower-arrows of love for Lord Gaura.
     Text 4 Some say that Lord Gaura is Jānakī's beloved Rāma, that He is Rādhā's beloved Kṛṣṇa, handsome like Kāmadeva. In Nayanānanda's heart this thought arises: Lord Gaura is the life's breath of my Gadādhara. I do not know anything more than this.


Song 2 (Paṭha-maṇjarī-rāga)


Text 1 goloka chāḍiya prabhu kena bā abanī
kāla-rūpa kena haila gorā-baraṇa-khani
Text 2 hāsa bilāsa chāḍi kena pahuṁ kānde
nā jāni ṭhekila gorā kāra prema-phānde
Text 3 kṣaṇe kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa bali kānde ghana-ghana
khaṇe sakhī sakhī bali karaye rodana
Text 4 mathurā mathurā bali karaye bilāpa
kṣaṇe bā akrūra bali kare anutāpa
Text 5 kṣaṇe kṣaṇe bale chiye cānda candana
dhūlāya loṭāye kānde yata nija-jana
Text 6 chāra parāṇa kulabatīra nā yāya
kahite ākula pahuṁ dhūlāya loṭāya
Text 7 gadādhara kānde prāṇa-nātha laiyā kole
rāya rāmānanda kānde praṇaya bikale
Text 8 svarūpa śrī-rūpa kānde soṅari bilāsa
nā bujhiyā kānde nayanānanda dāsa


     Text 1 Why did the Supreme Lord leave Goloka? Why did He change His dark form into a form with a fair complexion?
     Text 2 Why, leaving behind His pastimes of joking and laughter, does the Lord now weep? I do not know. Why and for whom did Lord Gaura set His trap of ecstatic spiritual love? 
     Text 3 One moment He calls out "Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!" and weeps. The next moment He calls out, "Sakhī! Sakhī!"
     Text 4 One moment He calls out, "Mathurā! Mathurā!" Another moment He calls out, "Akrūra!" He is distraught.
     Text 5 Moment after moment He calls out, "Wretched moon! Wretched sandal paste!" He rolls in the dust. Surrounded by His companions, He weeps.
     Text 6 "Although they have been burned into ashes, the saintly gopīs do not give up their lives!", He says. Filled with distress, He rolls on the ground.
     Text 7 Gadādhara weeps. He hugs the master of his life. Rāmānanda Rāya weeps. He is tossed to and fro by ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 8 Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rūpa Gosvāmī also weep. Remembering these pastimes, but not understanding anything of them, Nayanānanda dāsa also weeps.


Song 3 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 gorā mora guṇera sāgara
premera taranṅa tāya uṭhe nirantara
Text 2 gorā mora akalaṅka śaśī
hari-nāma-sudhā tāhe kṣare dibā-niśi
Text 3 gorā mora himādri-śekhara
tāhā haite prema-gaṅgā bahe nirantara
Text 4 gorā mora prema kalpa-taru
yāṅra pada-chāye jība sukhe bāsa karu
Text 5 gorā mora naba-jaladhara
baraṣi śītala yāhe kare nārī-nara
Text 6 gorā mora ānandera khani
nayanānandera prāṇa yāhāra nichani


     Text 1 My Lord Gaura is an ocean of spiritual virtues, an ocean where waves of ecstatic spiritual love are always rising. 
     Text 2 My Lord Gaura is a spotless moon, a moon where the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names flows day and night.
     Text 3 My Lord Gaura is a Himalayan mountain peak, a mountain peak from which a Gaṅgā of ecstatic spiritual love always streams.
     Text 4 My Lord Gaura is a kalpa-taru tree of ecstatic spiritual love, a tree whose shade gives a blissful residence to the spirit souls.
     Text 5 My Lord Gaura is a new raincloud, a raincloud that showers cooling rains on all men and women.
     Text 6 My Lord Gaura is a mine filled with the jewels of spiritual bliss. He purifies the life's breath of Nayanānanda.


Song 4 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 kinā se sukhera sarobare
premera taraṅga uṭhaliyā pade dhare
Text 2 nācata pahuṁ biśwambhare
prema-bhare pada-dhare dharaṇī nā dhare
Text 3 bayāna kanayā-cānda chānde
kata sudhā bariṣaye thira nāhi bāndhe
Text 4 rāja-haṁsa priya sahacara
keha bhela madhukara keha ba cakora
Text 5 naba naba naṭana laharī
prema lachimā nāce nadīyā-nāgarī
Text 6 naba naba bhakati-ratane
ayantane pā-ila saba dīna-hīna-jane
Text 7 nayanānanda kahe sukha sāre
se-i bṛndābana bhela nadīyā-nāgare


     Text 1 Is this not a lake of spiritual bliss, a lake where waves of ecstatic love rise and fall?
     Text 2 Lord Viśvambhara dances. Overcome with love, the earth cannot remain peaceful with the touch of His feet.
     Text 3 Lord Viśvambhara is like a golden moon. How many streams of nectar does He shower? He cannot remain peaceful. 
     Text 4 Some of His dear associates are swans. Some are bumblebees. Some are cakora birds.
     Text 5 Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, the people of Nadīyā dance. There are newer and newer waves after waves of dancing.
     Text 6 Now even the poor and fallen people easily gather newer and newer jewels of devotional service.
     Text 7 Nayanānanda says: The supremely blissful spiritual land of Vṛndāvana is now present in the towns of Nadīyā.


Song 5 (Bālā-rāga or Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 ā-ota pirīti          mūrati-maya sāgara
          aparūpa pahuṁ dwija-rāja
naba naba bhakata        naba rasa yābata
          naba tanu ratana samāja
Text 2 (Refrain) bhāli bhāli nadīyā-bihāra
sakala baikuṇṭha bṛndābana sampada 
sakala sukhera sukha sāra
Text 3 dhani dhani ati dhani      aba bhela suradhunī
          ānande bahe rasa-dhāra
snāna pāna abagāha       āliṅgana saṅgama
          kata kata bāra
Text 4 pratipura mandira          prati taru-kula-tala
          phula bipina bilāsa
kahe nayanānanda         preme biśwambhara
          sabākāra pūrā-ila āśa


     Text 1 A wonderful Lord who is an ocean of spiritual love personified and who is the king of the brāhmaṇas has come. His devotee companions are filled with newer and newer glory. The spireitual nectar of love He tastes is always newer and newer. His form is like a treasury of newer and newer precious jewels.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Glory, glory to the Lord who enjoys pastimes in Nadīyā! He brings with Him the glory of Vṛndāvana and all the Vaikuṇṭha worlds. He brings with Him the best of all kinds of happiness.
     Text 3 Glory, glory, great glory to Him! Now a flooding celestial nectar Gaṅgā of spiritual love blissfuly flows. How many times does He drink from that nectar river, bathe in it, and plunge into it? How many times does He embrace His companions?
     Text 4 In every house, in every flower-filled garden, and under every tree He enjoys pastimes. Nayanānanda says: Giving away the gift of ecstatic spiritual love, Lord Viśvambhara fulfills every person's desires.


Song 6 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 kali-ghora-timire          garāsala jaga-jana
          dharama karama rahu dūra
asādhane cintāmaṇi       bidhi milā-ola āni
          gorā baḍa dayāra ṭhākura
Text 2 (Refrain) bhā-i re bhā-i, gorā guṇa kahane na yāya
kata kari-badana         kata caturānana
          baraṇiyā ora nā pāya
Text 3 cāri beda ṣaḍa daraśana paḍiyāche
          se yadi gaurāṅga nāhi bhaje
kibā tāra adhyayana      locana bihīna yena
          darapaṇe andha kibā kāje
Text 4 beda bidyā du-i kichu-i nā jānata
          se yadi gaurāṅga jāne sāra
nayanānanda bhaṇe        se-i se sakala jāne
          sarba-siddhi kara-tale tāra


     Text 1 The horrible darkness of Kali-yuga swallowed the people of the world. Religion and pious deeds fled far away. Into that situation very merciful Lord Gaura brought a cintāmaṇi jewel.
     Text 2 (Refrain) My brothers! O, my brothers! No one has the power to describe all of Lord Gaura's glories. How many Ganeśas and how many Brahmās may try to describe Him? They have no power to describe all of His glories?
     Text 3 Of what use is a person's learning if he studies the four Vedas and the six systems of philosophy, but does not worship Lord Gaurāṅga? He is like a person without eyes. He is like a blind man trying to see himself in a mirror. Of what use is all his studying?
     Text 4 A person who does not know that Lord Gaurāṅga is the Supreme does not know anything of Vedas or philosophy. Nayanānanda says: A person who knows that Lord Gaurāṅga is the Supreme knows everything. All mystic powers rest in the palm of his hand.


Song 7 (Dhānaśrī-rāga)


Text 1 mukha-khāni purṇimāra śaśī kibā mantra jape
bimba biḍambita adhara sadā-i kena kāmpe
Text 2 (Refrain) gorā nāce naṭana raṅgiyā
akhila jībera mana bāndhe prema diyā
Text 3 cānda kandaye mukha chānda dekhiyā
tapana kānde āṅkhi jalada heriyā
Text 4 kāñcā kāñcana jini naba rasera gorā
buka bāhi paḍe prema paraśera dhārā
Text 5 kahaye nayanānanda manera ullāse
punaḥ ki dekhiba gorā gadādhara paśe


     Text 1 The full-moon of His mouth chants japa of the mahā-mantra. Why do His lips, lips that mock the bimba fruits, always tremble?
     Text 2 (Refrain) Lord Gaura gracefully dances. He places a gift of ecstatic spiritual love in every living entity's heart.
     Text 3 Seeing the moon of Lord Gaura's face weep, every person's eyes have become like monsoon clouds shedding showers of tears.
     Text 4 Sweet with new nectar, Lord Gaura defeats new gold. A flood of tears of ecstatic love streams down His chest.
     Text 5 Nayanānanda says: With a joyful heart will I again see Lord Gaura at Gadādhara's side?


Part 27 Paramānanda dāsa


Song 1 (Gaurī-rāga)


Text 1 jaya kṛṣṇa caitanya nityānanda candra
advaita ācārya jaya gaura-bhakta-vṛnda
Text 2 rādhe kṛṣṇa govinda yamunā bṛndābana
śrī-caitanya nityānanda rūpa sanātana
Text 3 rūpa sanātana mora prāṇa-sanātana
kṛpā kari deha more yugala caraṇa
Text 4 rādhe kṛṣṇa raṭa mana rādhe kṛṣṇa raṭa
bṛndābana yamunā pulina baṁśī-bāṭa
Text 5 rādhe kṛṣṇa raṭa mana rādhe kṛṣṇa raṭa
vraja-bbūme bāsa kara yamunā nikaṭa 
Text 5 rādhe kṛṣṇa rādhe kṛṣṇa rādhe kṛṣṇa raṭa re
nabadvīpe gorācānda pātiyāche hāṭa re
Text 6 rādhe kṛṣṇa rādhe kṛṣṇa rādhe kṛṣṇa raṭa re
śacīra nandana gorā kīrtane lampaṭa re
Text 7 rādhe kṛṣṇa rādhe kṛṣṇa rādhe gobinda
śrī-rādhā-ramaṇa bande e paramānanda


     Text 1 Glory to Lord Kṛṣṇa Caitanya! Glory to Lord Nityānandacandra! Glory to Lord Advaita Acārya! Glory to all the devotees of Lord Gauara!
     Text 2 Glory to Śrī Rādhā! Glory to Lord Kṛṣṇa! Glory to Lord Govinda! Glory to the Yamunā! Glory to Vṛndāvana! Glory to Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda! Glory to Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī!
     Text 3 Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī are eternally my very life and soul. O Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī, please be merciful and give to me service ot the divine couple's feet.
     Text 4 O my heart, please chant, "Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa!" Please chant, "Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa!" Please chant, "Vṛndāvana! Vaṁśīvāṭa on the Yamunā's banks!"
     Text 5 O my heart, please chant, "Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa!" Please chant, "Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa!" Please reside in Vrajabhūmi near the Yamunā.
     Text 6 Please chant, "Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa! Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa! Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa!" In Navadvīpa Lord Gauracandra established His marketplace!
     Text 7 Please chant, "Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa! Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa! Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa!" Please be eager to chant the holy names of Śacī's son, Lord Gaura!
     Text 8 Please chant, "Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa! Rādhe! Kṛṣṇa! Rādhe! Govinda!" Paramānanda bows down before Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa.


Song 2 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 gorā abatāre yāra na haila bhakti-rasa
     āra tāra na dekhi upāya
rabira kiraṇe yāra āṅkhi parasanna naila
     bidhātā bañcita bhela tāya
Text 2 (Refrain) bhaja gorācāndera caraṇa
e tina bhubane bhā-i          dayāra ṭhākura nā-i
          gorā baḍa patita-pābana
Text 3 hema jalada kiye      prema sarobara
          karuṇā-sindhu abatāra
pā-iyā yemana na haya śītala
          ki jāni kemana mana tāra
Text 4 bhaba-taribāre hari-nama-mantra bhela kari
          āpani gaurāṅga kare pāra
bhabe ye du\biyā māre          keba uddhāribe tāre
          paramānandera parihāra


     Text 1 Now that Lord Gaura has descended to this world, anyone who does not relish the sweet nectar of bhakti is like a person whose eyes cannot see even when the sun is shining bright. I do not see any way to help such a person. Destiny has cheated him.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Please worship Lord Gauracandra's feet. O my brothers, in all the three worlds no one is merciful like Lord Gaura. He is the great purifier of the fallen souls.
     Text 3 He is like a monsoon cloud made of gold. He is a great lake of ecstatic spiritual love. He is an ocean of mercy descended to this world. What kind of heart will not find cooling bliss when it meets Lord Gaura? How can I understand such a heart?
     Text 4 The mantra of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names has come to carry everyone across the ocean of birth and death. Lord Gaurāṅga personally carries everyone to the farther shore of that ocean. The souls now drowning in that ocean will all be lifted up and rescued. Only Paramānanda is still left behind.


Song 3 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) gorā dayāra abadhi guṇa-nidhi
suradhunī-tīre      nadīyā-nagare
          gaurāṅga bihare nirabadhi
Text 2 bhuja-yuga āropiyā bhakatera kāndhe
cali yā-ite nā pāre gorācānda hari hari kande
Text 3 preme chala chala          nayana-yugala
          kata nadī bahe dhāre
pulake pūrila       gorā-kalebara
          dharaṇī dharite nāre
Text 4 saṅge pāriṣada        phire nirantara
          hari hari bola bole
priya-sakhāra kāndhe          bhuja-yuga diyā
          helite dulite cale
Text 5 bhubana bhariyā preme utarola patita-pābana nāma
śuniyā bharasā paramānandera manete nā laya āna


     Text 1 (Refrain) Lord Gaura is a treasure-house of virtues. His mercy is the highest limit of all mercy. In the towns of Nadīyā and on the Gaṅgā's banks Lord Gaurāṅga enjoys pastimes without stop.
     Text 2 He tries to walk. He has no power to do it. Resting both His arms on two devotees' shoulders, Lord Gauracandra weeps, “Hari! Hari!"
     Text 3 How many flooding rivers of tears of ecstatic love flow from His eyes? The hairs of His body stand erect. The earth has no power to support His fair form.
     Text 4 Surrounded by His associates, He turns and dances. “Hari! Haribol!", He calls. His arms clinging to the shoulders of two dear friends, He staggers as He walks. 
     Text 5 He makes the whole world agitated with ecstatic spiritual love. That is why He bears the name Patita-pāvana (the purifier of the fallen). Hearing His glories, Paramānanda has faith in Him alone. No other kind of faith rests in Paramānanda's heart.


Song 4 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 paraśa-maṇira saṅge       ki diba tulanā
          paraśa choyā-ile haya nāki soṇā
āmāra gaurāṅgera guṇe         nāciyā gā-iyā re
          ratana ha-ila kata janā
Text 2 (Refrain) śacīra nandana bana-mālī
e tina bhubane yāra      tulanā dibāra nā-i
          gorā mora parāṇa putali
Text 3 gaurāṅga-cāndera chānde         cānda kalaṅkī re
          emana ha-ite nāre āra
akalaṅka pūrṇa candra         udaya nadīyā-pure
          dūre gela manera andhāra
Text 4 e-guṇe surabhi sura-       taru sama nahe re
          māgile se pāya kona jana
nā māgite akhila         bhubana bhari jane jane
          yāciÑā de-ola prema-dhana
Text 5 gorācandera tulanā         kebala gorāra saha
          bicāra kariyā dekha sabe
paramānandera mane       e baḍa ākuti re
          gaurāṅgera daya kabe habe


     Text 1 How shall I say Lord Gaurāṅga is like a touchstone? By its touch a touchstone turns objects into mere gold. But by His touch My glorious Lord Gaurāṅga creates how many priceless jewels, jewels that even sing and dance?
     Text 2 (Refrain) Śacī's son is Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself, Lord Kṛṣṇa who wears a forest garland. Nothing in the three worlds is equal to Him. My Lord Gaura is the Deity I worship with my every breath.
     Text 3 The moon of Lord Gaurāṅga is supremely glorious. The ordinary moon of this world is marked with spots. No moon of this world is equal to Lord Gaurāṅga. When the spotless moon of Lord Gaurāṅga rises in Nadīyā, blinding darkness flees from every heart.
     Text 4 Neither the surabhi cow nor the kalpa-taru tree are equal to Lord Gaurāṅga. Before obtaining a boon from them one must first place a request. Even without receiving any request, Lord Gaurāṅga gives His gifts to all the worlds. Indeed, it is He who begs everyone please to accept His gift of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 5 Only Lord Gaurāṅga Himself is equal to Lord Gaurāṅga. Reflect on this and you will see that it is true. In Paramānanda's heart this prayer resides: When will Lord Gaurāṅga give His mercy to me?


Part 28 Prasāda dāsa


Song 1 (Barāḍī-rāga)


Text 1 keśera bese bhulila deśa, tāhe rasamaya hāsi
nayana-taraṅga bikala karala, biśeṣe nadīyā-bāsī
Text 2 (Refrain) gaurasundara nāce
nigama-nigūḍha prema bhakati, yāre tāre pahuṁ yāce
Text 3 bhābe aruṇa gaura-baraṇa, tulanā rahita śobhā
calani manthara ati manohara heri jaga-mano-lobhā
Text 4 kampa sweda bheda bāṇi gada gada kata bhāba parakāśa
se aṅga bhaṅgima rūpa-taraṅgima tulanā diba se kise
Text 5 saṅge sahacara ati su-catura gā-ota pūraba līlā
prasāda kahe se guṇa śunite, darabaye dāru śilā


     Text 1 His hair and garments are in disarray. His smiles and laughter are nectar. Waves of tears flow from His eyes. He is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. He is the glory of Nadīyā.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Lord Gaurasundara dances. The Lord begs the people to accept His gift, the gift of ecstatic spiritual love, a gift hidden even from the Vedas.
     Text 3 His complexion is fair. Still, He is reddened with ecstatic spiritual love. No one is glorious like Him. Gracefully and slowly he walks. He charms every heart. Gazing at Him, the hearts of all the world yearn to attain His company.
     Text 4 He trembles. He perspires. He speaks broken words in a choked voice. How many symptoms of ecstasy does He manifest? His limbs are graceful. His form is waves of graceful glory. Who is His equal? 
     Text 5 His companions gracefully sing songs describing His previous pastimes as Kṛṣṇa. Prasāda dāsa says: Hearing His glories, even the dry sticks and hard rocks melt in ecstasy.


Part 29 Prema dāsa


Song 1 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 bhāgyabān śacī jagannātha
putra-rūpe pā-ila jagannātha
Text 2 phālgune grāsila rāhu-cānda
śacī-kole śobhe naba-cānda
Text 3 labhi miśra yogārādhya-dhana
dīna-jane dila kata dhana
Text 4 janma-gṛha dīpta binā dīpe
mahānanda āji nabadwīpe
Text 5 ekatra milita sura-nara
nāce gāya gandharba kinnara
Text 6 ā-ilā prabhu ha-ite bhū-bhāra
atulana ānanda sabhāra
Text 7 gorā-prema ha-iyā udāsa
se ānande bhāse prema-dāsa


     Text 1 Fortunate Jagannātha Miśra and Śacī-dev.i attained Lord Jagannātha Himself as their son.
     Text 2 As Rāhu swallowed the moon in the month of Phālguna, an infant moon shone with great splendor in Śacī's arms.
     Text 3 How much wealth, wealth of yoga and worship, did Jagannātha Miśra then give in charity to the poor?
     Text 4 Although there were no lamps, the maternity-room was filled with light. At that moment Navadvīpa was filled with great bliss.
     Text 5 Demigods and humans assembled at that place. The Gandharvas an Kinnaras sang and danced.
     Text 6 The Supreme Personality of Godhead had personally come to remove the earth's burden. Now everyone was filled with peerless bliss.
     Text 7 Turning away from worldly things, everyone is now filled with love for Lord Gaura. Prema dāsa now floats in bliss.


Song 2 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 phālguna-pūrṇimā niśi      śacī-aṅkākāse āsi
          gauracandra ha-ila udaya
se śaśīra sahacara       bhakta-tārakā-nikara
          cāri-dike prakāśita haya
Text 2 pāpa ghora andhakāra       sarbatra chila bistāra
          bidhūdaye prasthāna karila
jībera bhāgya kumuda          hari śaśī mano-mada
          premānande hāsite lāgila
Text 3 pāpa amā-niśi bhora        hariṣe bhakta-cakora
          tulila ānanda kolāhala
prema-kaumudīra sudhā         pīye dūra kaila kṣudhā
          sabā-i ha-ila su-śītala
Text 4 se prema-sudhāra kaṇā      pāÑā tṛpta sarba-jana
          jība-kula bhela ānandita
āpana karama doṣe        na pā-iyā naba leśe
          prema-dāsa dhūlāya luṇṭhita


     Text 1 On the full-moon night of Phālguna month, the moon of Lord Gaura arose in the sky of Śacī's lap. Around that moon in the four directions the stars of the devotees shone.
     Text 2 When that moon rose the horrible all-pervading darkness of sin was chased far away. Seeing that moon, the lotus flowers of the people's good fortune smiled with ecstatic love. Their hearts became wild with bliss.
     Text 3 The cakora birds of the devotees, long distraught over the moonless night of sins, now let out a blissful clamor. Drinking the nectar moonlight, those birds felt their hunger flee far away. Everyone became filled with cooling bliss.
     Text 4 Drinking that nectar moonlight of spiritual love, the living entities became filled with bliss. Because of his past misdeeds, Prema dāsa did not drink even a single ray of that nectar moonlight. That is why he now rolls about in the dust.


Part 30 Premānanda dāsa


Song 1 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 prema bali nāma ati adbhuta
     śruta haite kāra kāṇe
śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmera swa-guṇa mahimā
     kebā jānā-ite āra
bṛndā bipinera mahā madhurimā
     prabeśa ha-ite kāra
kebā jānā-ite rādhāra mādhurya
     rasa yaśa camatkāra
bhāba anubhaba sāttwika bikāra
     gocara chila bā kāra
braje ye bilāsa          rāsa mahā-rāsa
          prema parakīya tattwa
gopīra mahimā       byabhicārī sīmā
          kāra abagati chila eta
Text 2 dhanya kali dhanya         nitā-i caitanya
          parama karuṇā kari
bidhi-agocara       ye prema-bikāra
          prakāśe jagata bhari
Text 3 uttama adhama         kichu nā bāchila
          yāciyā dileka kola
kahe premānanda          emana gaurāṅga
          antare dhariyā dola


     Text 1 Without Śacī's son, whose ears would have heard the great wonder of the holy names chanted with ecstatic love? Who would have known the glories of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names? Who would have entered into the great sweetness present in Vṛndāvana? Who would have understood the wonder of Śrī Rādhā's fame, nectar, and sweetness? Who would have understood the bhava, anubhava, and sattvika-bhava ecstasies? Who would have understood the pastimes in Vraja, the rāsa and mahā-rāsa pastimes, the nature of prema, parakīya-rasa, the glories of the gopīs, and the highest limit of the vyabhicāri-bhāvas?
     Text 2 The Kali-yuga is fortunate and glorious, for Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda mercifully revealed in the Kali-yuga the great ecstasy of pure spiritual love, an ecstasy of love even the demigod Brahmā finds beyond His reach.
     Text 3 Without considering who was exalted and who degraded, Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda begged everyone to accept this gift of ecstatic spiritual love. They embraced everyone. Premānanda says: In your hearts please embrace Lord Gaurāṅga.


Song 2 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) emana gaurāṅga binā nāhi āra
hena abatāra habe ki      hayeche hena prema pracāra
Text 2 duramati ati          patita pāṣaṇḍī
          prāṇe nā mārila kāre
hari-nāma diyā      hṛdaya śudhila
          yāciÑā ye ghare ghare
Text 3 bhaba biriñci ye        durlabha prema
          jagata phelila ḍāli
kāṅgāle pā-iyā        khā-iya nāciyā
          bājā-ila karatāli
Text 4 hāsiyā kāndiyā        preme gaḍāgaḍi
          pulake byāpila aṅga
caṇḍāle brāhmaṇe         kare kolākuli
          kabe na chila e raṅga
Text 5 ḍākiyā hākiyā         khola karatāle
          gā-iyā dhā-iyā phire
dekhiyā śamana      tarāsa pā-iyā
          kapāṭa hānila dwāre
Text 6 e tina bhubana        ānande bharila
          uṭhila maṅgala sora
kahe premānanda          emana gaurāṅga
          rati nā janmila mora


     Text 1 (Refrain) No one is like Lord Gaurāṅga! Will there ever be an avatāra like Him, an avatāra that preached ecstatic spiritual love as He did?
     Text 2 He did not kill the fallen wicked-hearted blasphemers. Instead he went from house to house visiting them. He begged them to chant Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. He gave them the holy names and purified their hearts.
     Text 3 To the world He freely gave the rare gift of ecstatic spiritual love, a gift even Brahmā and Śiva attain only with difficulty. Attaining that gift, the poor people of this world dance and clap their hands.
     Text 4 They laugh and weep. Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, they roll on the ground. The hairs of the bodies stand erect. The brāhmaṇas and caṇḍālas hugged. There was great bliss.
     Text 5 Loudly they called out the holy names. They played the khola and karatālas. They sang, ran, and danced in a circle. Seeing all this, peaceful composure became afraid, fled, and knocked on people's doors.
     Text 6 An auspicious tumult arose. The three worlds were filled with bliss. Premānanda says: Alas! Love for Lord Gaurāṅga did not take birth in me.


 Part 31 Rādhā-mohana


Song 1 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 jaya jaya śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya dayā-sindhu
patita uddhāra hetu jaya dīna-bandhu
Text 2 jaya prema-bhakti-dātā dayā kara more
dante tṛṇa kari ḍāke e dāsa pāmare
Text 3 pūrbete sākṣāta yata pātakī tārilā
se bicitra nahe yāte abatāra kailā
Text 4 mo hena pāpiṣṭha ebe karaha uddhāra
āścarya dayāla guṇa ghuṣuka saṁsāra
Text 5 bicāra karite muñi nahe dayā-pātra
āpanā sva-bhāba guṇe karaha kṛtārtha
Text 6 biśeṣa pratijṇā śuni e-i kali-yuge
e-i bharasāya rādhāmohana pāpī māge


     Text 1 Glory, glory to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, who is an ocean of mercy! Glory to the friend of the poor! Glory to the savior of the fallen!
     Text 2 Glory to the Lord who gives the gift of prema-bhakti! O Lord, please be merciful to me. Placing a straw between his teeth, this insignificant servant calls out to You.
     Text 3 In ancient times You personally delivered many sinners. This is not surprising, for that is why You descend to this material world.
     Text 4 Now please deliver the sinners like me. All the worlds praise Your wonderful mercy.
     Text 5 If You think I am not worthy to recieve Your mercy, then please make me worthy.
     Text 6 Hearing of Your promise of mercy in the Kali-yuga, the sinner Rādhāmohana begs to take shelter of You.


Song 2 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 jaya jaya śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya nāma-sāra
aparūpa kalapa birikha abatāra
Text 2 ayācite bitara-i durlabha prema-phala
bañcita na bhela pāmara sakala
Text 3 cintāmaṇi nahe se-i phalera samāna
ā-caṇḍāla ādi kari tāhā kailā dāna
Text 4 hena prabhu na sebile kona kāja naya
e rādhāmohana māge caraṇe āśraya


     Text 1 Glory, glory to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, whose holy name is the most glorious! Once in a day of Brahmā He descends to this world.
     Text 2 The people do not ask for it, but still He gives them the rare gift of spiritual love. He does not deprive anyone, even the most fallen and insignificant.
     Text 3 Even the cintāmaṇi jewel does not give a result as glorious as the result that comes from His gift. He gives that gift to everyone, even down to the caṇḍālas.
     Text 4 This Rādhāmohana, who has never served the Lord and has never done any work for Him, now begs to take shelter at His feet.


Song 3 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 vande viśvambhara-pada-kamalam
khaṇḍita-kali-yuga-jana-malasam alam
Text 2 saurabha-karṣita-nija-jana-madhupam
karuṇā-khaṇḍita-viraha-vitāpam
Text 3 nāśita-hṛd-agata-māyā-timiram
vara-nija-kāntyā jagatām aciram
Text 4 satata-virājitaṁ nirupama-śobham
rādhāmohana-kalita-vilobham


     Text 1 I bow down before the lotus flower of Lord Viśvambhara's feet, a flower that breaks the sins of Kali-yuga into pieces, . . .
     Text 2 . . . a flower with a sweet fragrance that attracts the bumblebees of the devotees, a flower that mercifully breaks the sufferings of separation from the Lord into pieces, . . .
     Text 3 . . . a flower that with its own effulgence at once destroys the darkness of illusion in the hearts of this world, . . 
     Text 4 . . . a flower that is eternally glorious, a flower with peerless beauty, a flower that Rādhāmohana yearns to attain.


Song 4 (Bhairabī-rāga)


Text 1 paśya śacī-sutam anupa-rūpam
khaṇḍitāmṛta-rasa-nirupama-kūpam
Text 2 kṛṣṇa-raga-kṛta-mānasa-tāpam
līlā-prakaṭita-rudra-pratāpam
Text 3 prakaṭitaṁ puruṣottama-saviṣādam
kamalā-kara-kamalāñchita-padam
Text 4 rohita-vadana-tirohita-bhāṣaṁ
rādhā-mohana-kṛta-caraṇāśam


     Text 1 Look at Śacī's son, whose handsomeness has no peer, handsomeness that breaks into pieces the well of peerless nectar.
     Text 2 His heart burns with passionate love for Lord Kṛṣṇa. He enjoys pastimes with King Pratāparudra.
     Text 3 He is overcome with feelings of separation from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. With lotus hands the goddess of fortune worships His lotus feet.
     Text 4 Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, He is speechless. Rādhā-mohana yearns to attain His feet.


Part 32 Rāmakānta dāsa


Song 1 (Dhānaśrī-rāga)


Text 1 kanaka dharādhara mada-hara deha
madana parābhaba subaraṇa geha
Text 2 (Refrain) hera dekha aparūpa gaura-kiśora
kaichana bhāba nahata kichu ora
Text 3 ghana pulakābalī diṭhi jaladhāra
uraṣa nehāri baḍa-i camatkāra
Text 4 nirupama nirajana rāsa-bilāsa
acala su-cañcala gada gada bhāṣa
Text 5 kiye bara mādhurī baṁśī niśāna
iha bali sa-ghane pāte nija-kāṇa
Text 6 swajana tyāji taba calata ekānta
milaba aba jāni kiye rāmakānta


     Text 1 His form is like a charming golden mountain. His golden complexion defeats Kāmadeva.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Look! Look at wonderful Lord Gaura-kiśora! The ecstatic spiritual love He feels has no limit.
     Text 3 The ahirs of His body stand erect. His eyes are two monsoon clouds. Seeing His chest, everyone is filled with wonder.
     Text 4 In a secluded place He hears of Lord Kṛṣṇa's peerless rāsa-dance pastime. Overcome, He speaks broken words with a choked voice.
     Text 5 Saying, "Did I just hear sweet flute music?", He carefully listens with his ears.
     Text 6 Then leaving His companions, He goes to a secluded place. Someday will Rāmakānta dāsa meet Him and attain His association?


Part 33 Rāmānanda


Song 1 (Dhanaśī-rāga or Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 kīrtana rasamaya      āgama agocara
          kebala ānanda-kanda
akhila loka-gati         bhakata-prāṇa-pati
          jaya gaura nityānanda canda
Text 2 heri patita gana      karunabalokana
          jagabhari karala apāra
bhaba-bhaya-bhaṇjana          durita-nibāraṇa
          dhanya śrī-caitanya abatāra
Text 3 hari-saṅkīrtane       majila jaga-jana
          sura nara nāga paśu pākhī
sakala beda sāra         prema sudhā-dhāra
          deyala kāhu nā upekhi
Text 4 tri-bhubana maṅgala        nāma-prema-bale
          dūra gela kali āndhiyāra
śamana-bhabana-patha          sabe eka rodhala
          bañcita rāmānanda durācāra


     Text 1 Glory to the two moons who are Lord Gaura and Lord Nityānanda, two moons who taste the sweet nectar of chanting the holy names, who are beyond the touch of the Vedas, who are the roots of transcendental bliss, who are the goals of all living beings, and who are the masters of the devotees' lives!
     Text 2 Glory to glorious Śrī Caitanya, who descended to this world, who glances with merciful eyes at the fallen souls, who fills the world with a limitless flood of mercy, who breaks the fear of repeated birth and death, and who destroys sins! 
     Text 3 Into the nectar of chanting the holy names He plunged the demigods, humans, nāgas, beasts, birds, and all other creatures in the world. He gave the nectar flood of ecstatic spiritual love, a flood that is the best thing in all the Vedas, to everyone. He did not neglect anyone.
     Text 4 Then the three worlds became auspicious. Then the power of love for the holy name chased Kali-yuga's darkness far away. Then everyone walked on the glorious and peaceful spiritual path. Only misbehaved Rāmānanda did not walk on that path. Only he was cheated.


Song 2 (Barāḍī-rāga)


Text 1 (Refrain) dekha dekha jība gaurāṅga cāndera līlā
lākhe lākhe gopī nimikhe bhulā-iyā       ki lāgi sannyāsī haila
Text 2 pīta-basana chāḍi          ḍorā-kaupina pari
          bākuyā karilā daṇḍa
kālindīra tīre      sukha parihari
          sindu-tīre paracaṇḍa
Text 3 rāma abatāre          dhanuka dhariyā
          gokule pūrila baṁśī
ebe jība lāgi       karuṇā dhariyā
          daṇḍa dhariyā sannyāsī
Text 4 dhari naba-daṇḍa      la-iyā karaṅga
          sindhu-tīre kaila thānā
rāmānanda kaya      sannyāsīra beśa naya
          pāṣaṇḍa-dalana bīrabānā


     Text 1 (Refrain) O spirit-souls, look! Look at Lord Gaurāṅgacandra's pastimes! Why, in the blinking of an eye forgetting millions and millions of gopīs, has He now become a sannyāsī?
     Text 2 Rejecting His yellow garments, now He wears a sannyasi's garments. Now He carries a daṇḍa. Turning away from His blissful pastimes on the Yamunā's banks, now He stays by the seaside.
     Text 3 When He descended as Rāmacandra to this world, He carried a bow. When He stayed in Gokula He filled the flute with melodies. Now, out of compassion for the fallen souls, He carries a daṇḍa. Now He is a sannyāsī.
     Text 4 Carrying a waterpot and a new daṇḍa, He stays by the seaside. Rāmānanda says: If He had not accepted a sannyāsī's garments He would have been a heroic warrior, a warrior who ripped the blasphemers into shreds.


Song 3 (Gāndhāra-rāga)


Text 1 dekha dekha adabhuta       sundara śacī-suta
          aparūpa bihi niramāṇa
ḍagamaga hiraṇa          kiraṇa jini tanu-ruci
          hari hari bolata bayāna
Text 2 bhālahi malayaja      bindu-birājita
          tachu-para alakā-hilola
kanaka saroja       cānda janu ujora
          tahi beḍi ali-kula dola
Text 3 du-nayana aruṇa       kamala-dala gaṇjana
          khaṇjana jiniyā cakora
yaichana śikhila         gānthala moti-phala
          taiche bahata ghana lora
Text 4 nija guṇa nāma        gāna-rasa-sāyare
          jaga-jana nimagana kela
dīna hīna rāmānanda      taṅhi bañcita
          kiñcita paraśa nā bhela


     Text 1 Look! Look at Śacī's wonderfully handsome son! What a wonder has destiny created in Him! His form is more glorious than gold. His mouth is filled with the words, “Hari! Hari!"
     Text 2 His forehead is splendidly decorated with drops of sandal-paste. His curly hair falls in waves. He is splendid like a moon or a golden lotus, a golden lotus surrounded by the restless black bees of His hair.
     Text 3 His two eyes rebuke the red lotus petals. His eyes defeat the khaṇjana and cakora birds. His tears teach the strings of pearls how to shine with glory.
     Text 4 He plunges the people of the world into the nectar ocean of songs chanting His holy names and describing His transcendental glories. Poor fallen Rāmānanda is cheated of that ocean of nectar. He cannot touch even a drop of it.


Song 4 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 dekhata bekata        gaura adabhuta
          ujora suradhunī-tīre
jāmbūnada tanu      basana jiniyā bhānu
          sundara sughaḍa sudhīra
Text 2 braja-līlā-guṇa       soṅari soṅari ghana
          raha-i nā pāra-i thira
pulake pūrala tanu       phuṭala kadamba jānu
          jhara jhara nayanaka-nīra
Text 3 abirata bhakata       gāna-rase unamata
          kambu-kaṇṭha ghana dola
pulake pūrala jība       śuni puna nācata
          saghane bolaye hari-bola
Text 4 deba-deba abideba          jana ballabha
          patita-pābana abatāra
kali-yuga kāla      byāla bhaye kātara
          rāmānande kara pāra


     Text 1 Look at Lord Gaura, wonderful and glorious on the Gaṅgā's bank. His form is like gold. His garments defeat the sun. He is handsome and saintly and wise.
     Text 2 Remembering and remembering Lord Kṛṣṇa's Vraja pastimes and glories, He cannot remain peaceful. Like kadamba filaments, the hairs of His body stand erect. A river of tears flows from His eyes.
     Text 3 Without stop tasting the nectar of the devotees' songs, He has become wild with bliss. His conchshell neck sways to and fro. Hearing these songs, He begins to dance. The hairs of His body stand erect. He calls out, "Haribol!" 
     Text 4 O master of the demigods! O dear master of the devotees! O purifier of the fallen! O Lord who descended to this world! Please take Rāmānanda to the farther shore of this ocean of birth and death, Rāmānanda who is terrified of the black snake of Kali-yuga.


Part 34 Śaṅkara Ghoṣa


Song 1 (Beloyāra-rāga)


Text 1 dekha re dekha re sundara śacī-nandanā
ā-jānu-lambita bhuja bāhu su-balanā
Text 2 maya-matta hātī bhāti calanā
kiye mālatīra mālā gorā aṅga dolanā
Text 3 śarada-candra jini sundara badanā
preme ānanda-bari pūrita nayanā
Text 4 sahacara le-i saṅge anukhaṇa khelanā
nabadwīpa mājhe gorā hari hari bolanā
Text 5 abhaya-caraṇāravinde makaranda lolanā
kahaye śaṅkara ghoṣa akhila-loka-taraṇā


     Text 1 Look! O, look at Śacī's graceful son! His graceful arms reach to His knees.
     Text 2 His steps are like the graceful steps of an intoxicated elephant. A garland of mālatī flowers sways to and fro on His fair body.
     Text 3 His handsome face defeats the autumn moon. A flood of blissful spiritual love flows as tears from His eyes.
     Text 4 At every moment He enjoys pastimes with His associates. “Hari! Hari!", He chants in the town of Navadvīpa.
     Text 5 His fearless lotus feet are the abode of the sweetest nectar. Śaṅkara Ghoṣa says: He delivers all the worlds.


Part 36 Saṅkarṣaṇa dāsa


Song 1 (Bibhāsa-rāga)


Text 1 śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya jaya patita-pābana
prakāśila kali-kāle nāma-saṅkīrtana
Text 2 jaya nityānanda jaya adhama-tāraṇa
dayā bitarile dekhi dīna-hīna jana
Text 3 jaya advaitacandra bhaktera jībana
ānilena gauracandra kari ākarṣaṇa
Text 4 jaya jaya bhakta-bṛnda pāriṣada-gaṇa
adhame tārile ebe tāra saṅkarṣaṇa


     Text 1 Glory to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, the purifier of the fallen! In the age of Kali He revealed the nāma-saṅkīrtana movement of chanting Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names.
     Text 2 Glory to Lord Nityānanda, the savior of the fallen. Seeing the poor fallen people, He was merciful to them.
     Text 3 Glory to Lord Advaitacandra, the life of the devotees! He brought Lord Caitanya to this world.
     Text 4 Glory, glory to the devotees, the personal associates of the Lord. They delivered the fallen souls. Now I pray they will deliver Saṅkarṣaṇa dāsa.


Song 2 (Bibhāsa-rāga or Lophā-rāga)


Text 1 gaurāṅga dayāra nidhi guṇa agaṇana
tulanā dibāra nāhi anya sthāna
Text 2 kalpa-taru abhilāṣa karaye pūraṇa
ye jana tāhāra sthāne karaye yācana
Text 3 sindhu bindu deya tathā karila gamana
indu kari eka pakṣa kiraṇa barṣaṇa
Text 4 pātrāpātra nāhi māne gaurāṅga ratana
samaya bicāra ten3ha nā kare kathana
Text 5 yāciñā amūlya dhana kare bitaraṇa
ekala bañcita kebala dāsa saṅkarṣaṇa


     Text 1 Lord Gaurāṅga is a treasure-house of mercy. His virtues are beyond counting. Nothing is like Him.
     Text 2 A kalpa-taru tree fulfills desires only after one approaches it with a request.
     Text 3 The ocean may splash a single drop and then retreat. The moon showers bright moonlight only at some times of the month.
     Text 4 Lord Gaurāṅga does not consider who is worthy and who is not worthy to receive the jewels He gives away. He does not consider what is an appropriate time and what is not.
     Text 5 Begging everyone please to accept it, He always gives away a precious treasure. He has given it to everyone. Only to Saṅkarṣaṇa dāsa was it not given. Only he was cheated.


Song 3 (Bibhāsa-rāga or Te-oṭa-rāga))


Text 1 phālguna-pūrṇimā śaśī      rāhu candrere paraśi
          dekhi sabe bole haribola
bājāya keha mṛdaṅga      keha jhāṇjari mocaṅga
          śaṅkha ghaṇṭā śabde lāge gola
Text 2 dekhi dina śubha-kṣaṇe       prabhu śacīra bhabane
          janama la-ilā su-maṅgala
deba-gaṇa saṅgopane      āsi kare daraśane
          dṛṭha nahe śuni kolāhala
Text 3 nadīyāra nara-nārī         śuni sukha pāya bhāri
          dekhibāre yāya twarā kari
kibā bālakera ṭhāma      mano-lobha abhirāma
          mane haya rākhi āṅkhi bhari
Text 4 dekhiyā ānanda kanda       bhakta-gaṇera ānanda
          mane jāne ha-ibe nistāra
gaurāṅga nahila rati          saṅkarṣaṇa manda-mati
          dayā kara śacīra kumāra


     Text 1 During the Phālguna-pūrṇimā seeing Rāhu touch the moon, everyone called out, “Haribol!¢ Soem played mṛdaṅgas. Others played flutes or gongs. There was a great tumult of bells and conchshells.
     Text 2 Watching for the auspicious dya and moment, the Supreme Personality of Godhead took birth in Śacī's house. Disguising their true identities, the demigods came to see. Not yet seeing, they had heard the tumult.
     Text 3 Hearing the tumult, the joyful men and woemn of Nadiya hurried to see. Standing before the child, their hearts were filled with longings. Bliss entered their thoughts. Their eyes were filled with the sight of the infant boy.
     Text 4 Seeing the boy, the devotees were filled with bliss. In their hearts they knew that now they would be delivered. Only wicked-hearted Saṅkarṣaṇa dāsa has no love for Lord Gaurāṅga. O son of Śacī, please be merciful to him anyway.


Part 37 Śekhara dāsa


Song 1 (Gāndhāra-rāga)


Text 1 sanakādi muni-ga/ne         cāhi bule deba-ga/ne
          biri/nci dheyāne nāhi pāya
dig-ambara paśupati      bhrami bule dibā-rāti
          pa/nca-mukhe yāṅra gu/na gāya
Text 2 yāṅra pada dhauta haite         śuci haila tri-jagate
          hara-śire jaṭāra bhūṣa/na
so pahuṁ nadīyā-pure          abatari śacī-ghare
          sa/nge laiyā pāriṣada-ga/na
Text 3 dekhi śacī-nandana         jība saba acetana
          prakāśila nāma-sa/nkīrtana
biṣayī yabana yata       tāra haila unamata
          nā ha-ila paḍuyā adhama
Text 4 prema-jala mahā-banyā      pṛthibī karila dhanyā
          tri-bhubana calila bāhiyā
tārkika pāṣa/nḍa yata          palā-ila haiyā bhīta
          abhimāna-naukhāya caḍiyā
Text 5 śrī-caitanya nityānanda        tāṅra pada makaranda
          ye jana karaye tāra āśa
tāṅhāra cara/na dhūli          tāhe mora snāna-keli
          dukhiyā śekhara tāra dāsa


     Text 1 Sanaka-kumāra and the sages gaze at Him and speak many prayers. Brahmā and the demigods meditate on Him but cannot attain Him. Śiva, garbed only by the four directions, wanders about, his five mouths singing His glories.
     Text 2 The water that has washed His feet, water that purifies the three worlds, rests as the ornament on Śiva's matted locks. Surrounded by His associates, He, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, descended to this world in Nadīyā-pura, in Śacī's house.
     Text 3 Please gaze at Śacī's son. To the dull and lifeless fallen souls He revealed nāma-sa/nkīrtana, the chanting of the holy names. The yavanas, hedonists, fallen, and unlettered He made wild with the ecstasy of spiritual love.
     Text 4 He made the earth glorious. He flooded it with the waters of ecstatic spiritual love, waters that passed beyond the boundaries of the three worlds. Terrified, the blasphemers and false philosophers fled. Clambering onto the boat of false pride, they escaped.
     Text 5 My pastime is bathing in the dust of the devotees' feet, devotees who yearn for the honey at Lord Caitanya's and Lord Nityānanda's feet. Sad Śekhara dāsa is the servant of those great devotees.


Song 2 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 gaurā/nga rasera nadī premera tara/nga
uthaliyā yā-iche dhārā kabhu nahe bha/nga
Text 2 abhirāma sāra/nga tāya taṭa du-i-khāni
acyutānanda tāhe premera ghurā/ni
Text 3 srota bahi yāya tāhe śrī-adwaitacandra
du/bāri kā/nḍāri tāhe prabhu nityānanda
Text 4 prema jalacara śrībāsādi sahacara
swarūpa śrī rūpa bhela premera khakara
Text 5 thākuka ḍubibāra kāja paraśa nā pā-iyā
duḥkhiyā śekhara kānde phukāra kariyā


     Text 1 From Lord Gaurā/nga flows a great river of nectar. The waves of that river are waves of ecstatic spiritual love. That flooding river never stops flowing.
     Text 2 Abhirāma Ṭhākura and Sāra/nga Ṭhākura are that river's two banks. Acyutānanda is its whirlpool of ecstatic love.
     Text 3 Śrī Advaitacandra is that river's current. Lord Nityānanda is both the diver that swims in that river and the captain of the boat that plies its waters.
     Text 4 Śrīvāsa Thakura and his associates are the fish that swim in those waters of spiritual love. Svarūpa Gosvāmī and Rūpa Gosvāmī are the sunlight of ecstatic love glistening on that river.
     Text 5 Alas, unable to swim in that river, sad Śekhara dāsa stays on the bank and loudly weeps.


Song 3 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 jagannātha miśrera sukṛti bīja haite
janamila gaura-kalpa-taru nadīyāte
Text 2 yatane nitā-i mālī se taru sebila
nānā śākhā upaśākhā tāhāra ha-ila
Text 3 dharila tāhāte adabhuta prema-phala
rase paripur/na tāhā mādaka kebala
Text 4 ānande nitā-i mālī se phala pāḍiyā
dīna duḥkhi-jane deya du-hāte bilā\Yā
Text 5 se phalera rasa yena sudhākara-sudhā
ye jana cuṣiyā khāya yāya tāra kṣudhā
Text 6 āpani se phala khā-iyā nitā-i mālī
unamata haiyā nāce māthe kari ḍāli
Text 7 dhara ne-o ne-o bali se phala bilāya
kebala ba/ncita tāhe e śekhara rāya


     Text 1 In Nadīyā, from the seed of Jagannātha Miśra's past pious deeds was born the kalpa-taru tree of Lord Gaura.
     Text 2 The gardener Nitāi came and carefully tended that tree. From that tree many branches and sub-branches grew.
     Text 3 That tree bore many wonderful fruits, fruits filled with wildly delightful nectar.
     Text 4 The gardener Nitāi happily picked those fruits. Wikth both hands He offered those fruits to the poor unhappy souls.
     Text 5 The nectar of those fruits was like the sweet nectar found in the celestial moon. Anyone who sucked the juice of one of those fruits found that his hunger had fled far away.
     Text 6 Then the gardener Nitāi personally ate one of those fruits. Wild with bliss, He danced. Then He placed those fruits in a basket and balanced the basket on His head.
     Text 7 Saying, "Take! Take! Please take!", He distributed those fruits to everyone. Only Śekhara Rāya did not take any of those fruits. Only he was cheated.


Song 4 (Tuḍī-rāga)


Text 1 hāṭera pattana        śrī-śacīnandana
          karala pā-iyā sukha
hāṭera ṭhākura      nitā-i sundara
          kha/nḍila jībera dukha
Text 2 (Refrain) dekha hāṭha manohara ra/nga
narahari dāsa       hāṭhera biśwāsa
          śrīnibāsa āra sa/nga
Text 3 āra adbhuta      ṭhākura adwaita
          munasi hāṭera mājha
haridāsa ādi        phire hāṭa sadhi
          rāmānanda satyarāja
Text 4 karatāla yata      bādya bāje kata
          mṛda/nga kāhāra ḍhola
hāṭa kalayaba         nṛtya gīta saba
          ghana ghana haribola
Text 5 premera pasāra      laiyā gadādhara
          sa/nge pasārira-ga/na
rāya rāmānanda          murāri mukunda
          bāsudeba sulocana
Text 6 sanātana rūpa     pa/nḍita swarūpa
          dāmodara yāra nāma
basu rāmānanda           sena śibānanda
          bakreśwara gu/na-dhāma
Text 7 pa/nḍita śa/nkara        āra kāśīśvara
          mukunda mādhava dāsa
raghunātha adi          gu/nera abadhi
          pūrala manera āsa
Text 8 kata nāma niba        pasāri e saba
          pasāra la-iyā kāche
pasāra bhūṣa/na      pulaka rodana
          mahā-bhāba ādi āche
Text 9 hāṭera hāṭuyā         bhakata nāṭuyā
          pasāri mahimā jāni
dainya dāna diyā         se prema āniyā
          sadā kare biki kini
Text 10 hāṭera koṭāla        ṭhākura gopāla
          dāna-ghāṭi gopīnātha
hāṭera pālana       śrī-raghunandana
          karena sundara sātha
Text 11 dibā rāti nā-i       bājāra sadā-i
          ye yāya se prema pāya
premera pasāra        karala bithāra
          śacīra dulāla rāya
Text 12 bhā/ngila ākāla       mātila kā/ngāla
          khā-iyā bharala peṭa
dekhiyā śamana      karaye bhābana
          badana kariyā heṭa
Text 13 jarā mṛtyu nā-i      ānanda sadā-i
          śoka-bhaya nāhi haya
āśā-jhuli kari      śekhara bhikhārī
          bājāre māgiya khāya


     Text 1 Śacī's son joyfully established this marketplace. Handsome Lord Nitāi, the marketplace-master, broke into pieces the sufferings of every soul. 
     Text 2 (Refrain) Look at the beautiful marketplace! There Narahari dāsa is the treasurer. Śrīnivāsa Acārya is his associate.
     Text 3 Wonderful Lord Advaita is the secretary of the marketplace. Haridāsa, Rāmānanda, Satyarāja, and others are peddlers who circulate through the marketplace.
     Text 4 How many karatālas, mṛda/ngas, ḍholas, and other musical instruments are played? Sweet music fills the marketplace. There are singing and dancing, and loud calls of "Haribol!"
     5-Text 7 Gadādhara sets out his wares of ecstatic spiritual love. His associates, the other merchants, are Rāmānanda Rāya, Murāri, Mukunda, Vāsudeva, Sulocana, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Pa/nḍita Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāmānanda Vasu, Śivānanda Sena, saintly Vakreśvara, Śa/nkara Pa/nḍita, Kāśīśvara, Mukunda, Mādhava dāsa, Raghunātha dāsa, and many others. They are all supremely virtuous. They satisfy the heart's desire.
     Text 8 Howe many names can I write? All these merchants spread out their goods. They spread out various ornaments, like weeping, standing up of the body's hairs, and other symptoms of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 9 There are merchants selling goods from stalls, and there are devotee dancers dancing. Paying the price of humbleness, the customers buy the goods of ecstatic spiritual love. The buying and selling continues without stop.
     Text 10 Gopāla Ṭhākura is the marketplace-watchman. Gopīnātha is the collector of payments. Śrī Raghunandana is the worker for marketplace-maintenance. He keeps the marketplace beautiful.
     Text 11 Day or night make no difference. This marketplace is always open. Here the customers always came and purchase the wares of ecstatic spiritual love. Śacī's dear son personally spreads out the wares of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 12 In this marketplace all troubles are broken into pieces. Even the poor beggars are joyful. Eating, they fill their bellies. Gazing at this marketplace, Yāmarāja becomes rapt in thought. Humbly he lowers his head.
     Text 13 In this marketpladce there is no old-age and no death. In this marketplace spiritual bliss is alsways manifest. Here there is neither grief nor fear. In this marketplace the beggar Śekhara Rāya bows, begs some food, and eats.


Song 5 (Kānaḍa-rāga)


Text 1 nācata nagare nāgara gaura      heri mūrati madana bhora
          yaichana taḍita rucira a/nga, bha/nga naṭa-bara śobhinī
kāma kāmāna bhurūka jora      karatahi keli śraba/na ora
          gīma śohata ratana padaka jaga-jana-mano-mohinī
Text 2 kusume racita cikura-pu/nja      caudike bhramarā bhramarī gu/nja
          pīṭhe dolaye loṭana tāra śraba/ne ku/nḍala dolanī
māhiṣa dadhi rucira bāsa      hṛdaya jāgata rāsa bilāsa
          jitala pulaka kadamba-koraka anukha/na mana lolanī
Text 3 gaja-pati jini gamana bhānti         preme baraṣa dibasa rāti
          heri gadādhara roṁyata hāsata gada gada ādha bolanī
aru/na nayana cara/na ka/nja          tahi nakha-ma/ni ma/njīra ra/nja
          naṭana bājana jhanara jhanana śuni muni-mana-lolanī
Text 4 badana caudike śohata ghāma          kanaka-kamale mukutā-dāma
          amiyā jhara/na madhura bacana kata rasa parakāśanī
mahā-bhāba rūpa rasika rāja        śohata sakala bhakata mājha
          pirīti mūrati aichana carita rāya-śekhara bhāṣini


     Text 1 Graceful Lord Gaura dances in the city. Gazing at His form, Kāmadeva is overcome with wonder. His limbs glisten like lightning. He is the best of dancers, His form splendid and graceful. His splendid eyebrows are like Kāmadeva's bow. His ears are filled with playful grace. On His neck rests a glistening jewel locket. His form enchants the hearts of all the worlds.
     Text 2 His hair is decorated with flowers. Around Him on four sides the black bees hum. As His body sways to and fro, the earrings on His ears move. His garments are splendid like buffalo-yogurt. Thoughts of Lord Kṛṣṇa's rāsa-dance pastime awaken in His heart. Standing erect, the hairs of His body defeat the kadamba filaments. At every moment His heart is overcome with ecstasy.
     Text 3 His garceful motions defeat the king of elephants. Day and night He showers a monsoon of ecstatic spiritual love. Glancing at Gadādhara, He weeps. Then He laughs. Then He speaks brojken words in a choked voice. His eyes are reddish. His feet are like lotus flowers. His toenails are like jewels. His anklets jangle. Hearing the tumult of his kīrtana and watching Him dance, the sages yearn in their heart to attain His company.
     Text 4 The four sides of His face glistening with perspiration, He is like a golden lotus decorated with strings of pearls. How many streams of nectar flows from His sweet words? He is mahā-bhāva ecstatic love personified. He is the king of rasikas. In the midst of a host of devotees He shines with great splendor. He is pure spiritual love personified. Śekhara Rāya thus describes His pastimes.


Song 6 (Karu/nā-rāga or Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 madhura madhura gaura-kiśora, madhura madhura nāṭa
madhura madhura saba sahacara, madhura madhura hāṭa 
Text 2 madhura madhura mṛda/nga bājata, madhura madhura tāna
madhura rase mātala bhakata, gā-ota madhura gāna
Text 3 madhura helana madhura dolana, madhura madhura gati
madhura madhura bacana sundara, madhura madhura bhāti
Text 4 madhura adhare jini śaśadhara, madhura madhura hāsa
madhura ārati madhura pirīti, madhura madhura bhāṣa 
Text 5 madhura yugala nayana rātula, madhura i/ngite cāya
madhura premera madhura bādara, ba/ncita śekhara-rāya


     Text 1 Sweet sweet is Lord Gaura-kiśora. Sweet sweet is His dancing. Sweet sweet are all His companions. Sweet sweet is His marketplace.
     Text 2 Sweet sweet are the sounds He plays the mṛda/nga. Sweet sweet are His rhythms. His devotees are wild with the sweet nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Sweet sweet is His singing.
     Text 3 Sweet is His leaning on a companion. Sweet is His swaying to and fro. Sweet sweet are His motions. Sweet are His words. Sweet is His handsomeness. Sweet sweet is His effulgent glory.
     Text 4 Sweet are His lips that defeat the moon. Sweet sweet is His laughter. Sweet is His ārati. Sweet is His ecstatic spiritual love. Sweet sweet is His talking.
     Text 5 Sweet are his reddish eyes. Sweet are His gestures and hints. Sweet is His monsoon shower of sweet ecstatic spiritual love. Śekhara Rāya has no experience of that shower. Of it he was cheated.


Song 7 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 sundara sundara gaurā/nga sundara, sundara sundara rūpa
sundara pirīti rājyera ye-mati sughaḍa sundara bhūpa
Text 2 sundara badane sundara hāsani, sundara sundara śobhā
sundara nayāne sundara cāhani, sundara mānasa lobhā
Text 3 sundara nāsāte sundara tilaka, sundara dekhite ati
sundara śraba/ne sundara kuntala, sundara tāhāra jyoti
Text 4 sundara mastake sundara kuntala, sundara meghera pārā
sundara gīmete sundara dolaye, sundara kusuma-hārā
Text 5 sundara nadīyā-nagare bihāra, sundara caitanya-cānda
sundara līlāra saundarya nā bujhe, śekhara janama āndha


     Text 1 Graceful graceful is Lord Gaurā/ngasundara. Graceful graceful is His form. His is the graceful king of the graceful realm of ecstatic spiritual love. 
     Text 2 Graceful is His face. Graceful are His smiles and laughter. Graceful graceful is His glory. Graceful are His eyes. Graceful are His glances. Graceful are the spiritual longings in His heart. 
     Text 3 Graceful is His nose. Graceful is His tilaka. His is sublimely graceful to see. Graceful are His ears. Graceful is His hair. Graceful is His effulgence. 
     Text 4 Graceful is His head. Graceful is His hair. He is like a graceful cloud. Graceful is the flower garland that gracefully he sways to and fro on His graceful neck.
     Text 5 Graceful is Lord Caitanyacandra who enjoys pastimes in graceful Nadīyā-nagara. Śekhara Rāya, who is blind from birth, does nto understand the glorious grace of His graceful pastimes.


Song 8 (Kāmoda-rāga)


Text 1 atula atula gaurā/ngera rūpa, atula tāhāra ābhā
atula atula śaśā/nka bayāne, atula hāsira śobhā
Text 2 atula atula yaj/na-sūtrera gochāṭī, atula gīmete dole
atula rajata-sarit janu, atula himādri kole
Text 3 atula atula śuka-ca/ncu-tula, atula nāsikā śohe
atula atula śapharī nayāne, atula caṭula cāhe
Text 4 atula atula pakwa bimba-phala, jini oṣṭha duṭī tāra
atula atula daśanera ruci, janu mukutara hāra
Text 5 atula helana atula dolana, atula calana tāya
atula rūpete bātula sabahuṁ, ba/ncita śekhara rāya


     Text 1 Peerless peerless is Lord Gaurā/nga's form. Peerless is His glorious splendor. Peerless peerless is Lord Gaurā/nga. Peerless peerless is the moon of His face. Peerless is the splendor of His smile. 
     Text 2 Peerless is the sacred-thread that sways to and fro on His peerless neck. Peerless is the Himalaya mountain of His chest, a mountain where silver-clear mountain-brooks flow. 
     Text 3 Peerless is His nose splendid like a peerless peerless parrot-beak. Peerless are the restless glances He casts from the peerless peerless sapharī fish that are His eyes.
     Text 4 Peerless peerless are his lips that defeat peerless bimba fruits. Peerless peerless is the splendor of His teeth, teeth like a string of pearls.
     Text 5 Peerless is His leaning on a companion. Peerless is His swaying to and fro. Peerless are His restless motions. Peerless is His glorious form that made everyone wild with bliss. Śekhara Rāya never saw that form. Of that sight he was cheated.


Part 38 Śivānanda


Song 1 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 pūrbe ye-i gopīnātha      śrīmatī rādhikā sātha
          se sukha bhābiyā ebe dīna
ye kare muralī bāya      da/nḍa kama/nḍalu tāya
          kaṭi-taṭe e ḍora kaupīna
Text 2 adhare muralī pūri         braja-badhūra mana curi
          kari sukha bāḍaye tāhāra
nayana-kaṭākṣa-bā/ne      marame paśiyā hāne
          se māra/ne bahe aśru-dhāra 
Text 3 yamunāra bane bane         go-dhana rākhāla sane
          naṭa-beśa bijayī bākhāne
nāhi jāni se-i ebe       ki jāni kāhāra bhābe
          bilāsaye sa/nkīrtana sthāne
Text 4 bhābite se saba sukha      dvi-gu/na bāḍaye dukha
          biraha anale jari jari
e śibānandera hiyā       gaḍila pāṣā/na diyā
          nāda-rabe se sukha sobhari


     Text 1 He who was formerly Rādhā's companion and the gopīs' master, has now become a joyful poor mendicant. He who formerly played a flute in His hand now holds a da/nḍa and kama/nḍalu. At His waist a kaupīna is tied.
     Text 2 He who formerly filled the flute at His lips, stole the gopīs' hearts, enjoyed many blissful pastimes, and fired many arrows of sidelong glances at the gopīs' hearts, now sheds flooding rivers of tears from His eyes.
     Text 3 He who fromerly, dressed like a dancing-actor, walked from forest to forest by the Yamunā as He herded the cows, is now overcome with ecstasy. Enjoying pastimes of sa/nkīrtana, He knows nothing but ecstasy.
     Text 4 In the ecstasy of meeting He is filled with bliss. In the agony of separation His sufferings are doubled. Then He burns in flames of suffering. His chanting of the holy names fills with bliss even Śivānanda's heart, a heart built of stone. 


Song 2 (Maṅgala-rāga)


Text 1 akhila bhubana bhari       hari rasa-bādara
          barikhaye caitanya-meghe
bhakata cātaka yata      pibi pibi abirata
          anukha/na prema-jala māge
Text 2 phālguna pūr/nimā tithi          meghera janama tathi
          se-i meghe karala bādara
ucā-nīca yata chila      prema-jale bhāsā-ola
          gorā baḍa dayāra sāgara
Text 3 jībere kariyā yantra       hari-nāma mahā-mantra
          hāte hāte premera a/njali
adhama duḥkhita yata          tāra haile bhāgabata
          bāḍhila gaurā/nga-ṭhākurālī
Text 4 jagā-i mādhā-i chila       tāra preme uddhārila
          hena jībe bilā-ola dayā
dāsa śibānanda bale      kena ra-inu māyā-bhole
          prabhu more deha pada-cchāyā


     Text 1 The raincloud of Lord Caitanya now floods the worlds with a nectar monsoon of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. Without stop drinking and drinking the nectar of this monsoon, the catāka birds that are the devotees pray moment after moment to attain the nectar waters of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 2 On the full-moon day of the month off Phālguna the Lord Caitanya monsoon cloud took birth. At once that cloud began a great monsoon. Every living being, high and low, was plunged into that monsoon's flooding waters of ecstatic spiritual love. In this way Lord Gaura flooded the world with a great ocean of mercy. 
     Text 3 Affectionately folding His hands, to the fallen souls He gave the mahā-mantra of Lord Kṛṣṇa's names. In this way Lord Gaurā/nga transformed the suffering fallen people into exalted devotees.
     Text 4 With great love He delivered Jagāi and Mādhāi. He gave mercy to all the fallen souls like them. Śivānanda dāsa says: Why should I stay in māyā's illusions? O Lord, please give me the shade of Your feet.


Part 39 Uddshava dāsa


Song 1 (Dhanaśī-rāga)


Text 1 caitanya kalpa-taru        advaita ye śākhā-guru
          kīrtana kusuma parakāśa
bhakata bhramara-ga/na         madhu-lobhe anukṣa/na
          hari hari bali phire cāri-pāśa
Text 2 gadādhara mahā-pātra       śītala abhaya chatra
          goloka adhika sukha tāya
tina yuga jība yata      prema binu tāpita
          tāra tale bāsiyā juḍāya
Text 3 nityānanda nāma phala          prema-rase ḍhala ḍhala
          khā-ite adhika lāge miṭha
śrī-śukadebera mane      marama phalera jāne
          uddhaba dāsa tāra kīṭa


     Text 1 In the kalpa-taru tree of Lord Caitanya, Lord Advaita is the great branches. The chanting of the holy name is the blossoming flowers. The bumblebees are the devotees, bees that, always eager to taste the flowers' nectar, chant "Hari!" and fly about on the tree's four sides.
     Text 2 Gadādhara is that tree's great leaves. That tree is like a parasol that gives the cooling shade of fearlessness. The happiness in that shade is more glorious than the happiness in the world of Goloka. Deprived of ecstatic spiritual love, the souls in the three yugas suffer in the heat of the day. But when they sit under this tree, they find cooling bliss.
     Text 3 The fruit of this tree bears the name Nityānanda. That fruit is delicious with the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. That fruit is very sweet to eat. In heis heart Śrī Śukadeva knows how sweet that fruit is. Uddhava dasa is a fly that somehow has landed on one of those fruits.




Part 40 Vasudeva Ghosa

Lord Gaura Descends to This World

Song 1 (Tudi-raga or Karuna-raga)

Text 1 jaya jaya kala-raba nadiya nagare
janama labhiya gora sacira udare
Text 2 phalguna purnima tithi naksatra phalguni
subha-ksane janamila gora dvija-mani
Text 3 purnimara candra jini kirana prakasa
dure gela andhakara pa-iya nirasa
Text 4 dvapare nandera ghare krsna abatara
yasoda udare janma bidita samsara
Text 5 sacira udare ebe janma nadiyate
kali-yugera jiba saba nistara karite
Text 6 basudeba ghosa kahe mane kari asa
gaura-pada-dvandva hrde kariya bharasa


 Text 1 As sweet sounds of "Glory! Glory!" filled the towns of Nadiya, Lord Gaura took birth in Saci's womb.
 Text 2 The day was the full-moon day of the month of Phalguna. The star was Phalguni. At that auspicious moment Lord Gaura, the jewel of the twice-born, took birth.
 Text 3 When Lord Gaura's effulgence defeated the full moon, the blinding darkness gave up all hope. Deeply dejected, it fled far away.
 Text 4 During Dvapara-yuga, Lord Krsn a descended into King Nanda's home. The people of the world thought Krsn a had taken birth in Yasoda's womb.
 Text 5 In the same way, to deliver the fallen souls in Kali-yuga, Lord Gaura took birth in Saci's womb in Nadiya.
 Text 6 Vasudeva Ghosa says: In my heart I keep my hope. In my heart I take shelter of Lord Gaura's feet.


Song 2 (Kalyana-raga)


Text 1 nadiya akase asi  udila gauranga-sasi
 bhasila sakale kutuhale
lajete gagana-sasi mathila badane masi
 kala peye grahanera chale
Text 2 bama-gana ucca-svare jaya jaya dhvani kare
 ghare ghare baje ghanta sankha
damama dagada kamsi sana-i bhem-uda bamsi
 turi bheri ara jayadhaka
Text 3 misra jagannatha mana mahanande nigamana
 sacira sukhera sima na-i
dekhiya nima-i mukha bhulila prasaba-dukha
 animikhe putra-mukha ca-i
Text 4 grahanera andhakare keha na cihnera kare
 deba nare haila misamisi
nadiya nagari sange deba-nari asi range
 heriche gauranga rupa -rasi
Text 5 putrera badana dekhi jagannatha maha-sukhiS kare dana daridra sakale
bhubana ananda-maya gaura-bidhu samudaya
 basu kahe jiba-bhagya-phale


 Text 1 When the moon of Lord Gaura rose in the sky of Nadiya, everyone floated in bliss. Embarrassed, the ordinary moon blackened his face with soot and pretended he was being eclipsed.
 Text 2 The women loudly chanted "Jaya! Jaya!" In home after home bells and conchshells were sounded. Damama trumpets, turi bugles, kamsi cymbals, sanais, and flutes all sounded. Dagada, bheuda, bheri, and jayadhaka drums were beaten.
 Text 3 Jagannatha Misra's heart was plunged in bliss. Saci's happiness had no end. Gazing at Nimai's face, she forgot the sufferings of giving birth. With unblinking eyes she gazed at her son's face.
 Text 4 In ther darkness of the eclipse no one could clearly see the nature of other persons. Disguised as ordinary men and women the demigods and goddesses came to Nadiya and gazed at Lord Gaura's handsome form.
 Text 5 Gazing at hisa son's face, Jagannatha Misra became joyful. He gave charity to all the poor. When the moon of Lord Gaura thus rose the world became filled with bliss. Vasudeva Ghosa says: Then the people of the world became truly fortunate. They attained the results of many past pious deeds.


Lord Gaura's Childhood Pastimes

Song 3 (Suhai-raga)


Text 1 misra purandara kichu mane bicariya
purohita dvija-bare anila dakiya
Text 2 dhana-ratna alankara dvija-bare dila
svasti bacana bali dana tuli nila
Text 3 arghya asisa dvija dhari nija hate
santose tuliya dila goracandera mathe
Text 4 saci thakurani kichu kahite lagila
sata putrera pare ei putra bidhi dila
Text 5 nima-i baliya nama deha dvija-bara
basudeva ghosa kahe judi de-i kara


 Text 1 In his heart Purandara Misra thought: I shall call for great brahmana priests and bring them here.
 Text 2 He greeted them with words of welcvome. He gave them gifts of jewel ornaments.
 Text 3 With his own hands he offered them arghya. He picked up Lord Gauracandra and asked the brahmanas to place blessings on His head.
 Text 4 Saci Thakurani spoke a few words. She said that after seven lost sons destiny had finally given a son to her.
 Text 5 The great brahmanas gave the boy the name Nimai. Folding his hands, Vasudeva Ghosa speaks these words.


Song 4 (Tudi-raga)

Text 1 eka-mukhe ki kahiba goracandera lila
hamagudi nana range yaya saci-bala
Text 2 lale mukha jhara jhara dekhite sundara
paka bimba-phala jini sundara adhara
Text 3 angada balaya sobhe su-bahu-yugale
carane magara khadu bagha-nakha gale
Text 4 sonara sikali pithe patera khopana
basudeva ghosa kahe nichani apana


 Text 1 With only one mouth how can I describe all of Lord Gauracandra's pastimes? Saci's crawling infant enjoyed many pastimes.
 Text 2 Gazing at her son's glorious handsome face, Saci felt tears flow from her eyes. His handsopme lips defeated the ripe bimba fruits.
 Text 3 Bracelets and armlets decorated His wrists and arms. Dolphin anklets rested on His feet and a tiger-claw necklace on His neck.
 Text 4 He wore silk garments and a golden-chain belt. Vasudeva Ghosa says: I worship Him.


Song 5 (Beloyara-raga, Dasakosi)


Text 1 mayera anguli dhari sisu gaura-hari
hanti hanti paya paya yaya gudigudi
Text 2 tani laiYa mora hata cale ksane jore
pada adha ya-ite thekada kari pade
Text 3 saci-mata kole laite yaya dhuli jhadi
akhati kariya gora bhume deya gadi
Text 4 aha aha bali mata muchaya ancale
kole kari cuma deya badana kamale
Text 5 basu kahe e chabala dhulaya lotaba
sneha-bhare tumi mago kata theka-iba


 Text 1 Grasping His mother's finger, infant Gaura-hari walked step by step.
 Text 2 Tugging at His mother's hand, for a moment He walked, carefully taking half-steps. Then He stumbled and fell.
 Text 3 Mother Saci placed Him in her lap and brush the dust from His body. Again trying to walk, infant Gaura-hari again fell to the ground.
 Text 4 Saying, "Aha1 Aha!", with the edge of her garment Mother Saci again wiped the dust from His body. Holding Him in her lap, she kissed His lotus face.
 Text 5 Vasudeva Ghosa says: In this way infant Gaura-hari fell to the dust. Filled with love, he asks: How many times did Gaura-hari fall?


Song 6 (Beloyara-raga, Dasakosi)


Text 1 purnima rajani canda gagane udaya
canda heri goracandera harisa hrdaya
Text 2 canda de ma bali sisu kande ubharaya
hata tuli saci dake aya canda aya
Text 3 na ase nithura canda nima-i byakula
kandiya dhulaya pade hate chinde cula
Text 4 radha-krsna-citra eka misra-grhe chila
putra santa-ite saci taha hate dila
Text 5 citra paYa goracandera mane bada sukha
basu kahe pate pachum hera nija-mukha 


 Text 1 The full moon rises in the evening sky. Seeing the moon, child Gauracandra feels happiness in His heart.
 Text 2 "Mother, give Me the moon!" He loudly demands. Lifting her arms, Mother Saci calls out, "Come here, O moon! Come here!"
 Text 3 The cruel moon does not come. Nimai is very agitated. He weeps. He falls to the dust. With His own hands He tries to pull the hair from His head.
 Text 4 From Jagannatha Misra's house Saci brings a picture of Radha and Krsn a. Stroking Him with her hand, Saci pacifies her son.
 Text 5 Grasping the picture, child Gauracandra feels great bliss in His heart. Vasudeva Ghosa says: Gazing at the picture, Lord Gauracandra sees His own face.


Song 7 (Beloyara-raga, Dasakosi)


Text 1 bhalire nacere mora sacira dulala
cancala balaka meli suradhuni tire keli
 hari-bola diya karatala
Text 2 kutila kuntala sire badane amiya jhare
 rupa jini sona sata bana
yatana kariya maya dhada para-iche taya
 kajare ujora dunayana
Text 3 bhuje sobhe tada bala gale mukutara mala
 kara pada kokanada jini
basu kahe mari mari sagare kamana kari
 hena suta pa-ila saci-rani


 Text 1 Bravo! My Gaura, Saci's son, dances! Meeting other playful boys on the Ganga's banks, He plays games of clapping hands and chanting "Haribol!"
 Text 2 The hair on His head curls cgracefully. Nectar words come from His mouth. His form defeats the purest gold. Mother Saci carefully dresses Him. She decorates His eyes with black kajjala.
 Text 3 Bracelets and armlets glisten on His wrists and arms. A pearls necklace rests on His neck. His hands and feet defeat the red lotus flowers. Vasudeva Ghosa says: I will die. I will die. I will drown myself in the ocean to attain a son like the son Saci Rani attained.


Song 8 (Beloyara-raga, Dasakosi)


Text 1 gora nace sacira dulaliya
caudike balaka meli sabhe deya karatali
 hari bola hari bola baliya
Text 2 galaya sonara kanthi suranga catuna anti
 jhonta bandha su-cancara kesa
kata sadha kari saci parayeche dhadagachi
 bhubana-mohana naba besa
Text 3 rajata kancane gada nana abharane jada
 su-balita tanu-khani saje
rata utapala jini carana yugala jani
 calite nupura ghana baje
Text 4 sacira angana tale anande naciya khele
 mukhe bole adha adha bani
basudeba ghosa bale dhara dhara kara kole
 gora mora paranera parani


 Text 1 Saci's dear son dances. The other boys surround Him in ther four directions. Clapping hands, everyone chants, “Haribol! Haribol!"
 Text 2 On His neck is a golden necklace. His hair is gracefully tied. In how many ways has Saci dressed and decorated Him? His ever-youthful appearance charms the worlds.
 Text 3 He wears many different ornaments of gold and silver. His form is sublimely graceful. The soles of His feet defeat the red lotus flowers. His anklets jangle as He walks.
 Text 4 Joyfully dancing in Saci's courtyard, child Gaura plays. With His mouth He speaks half half words. Vasudeva Ghosa says: Hug, O my hands, hug child Gaura! Child Gaura owns my life's breath.


Song 9 (Beloyara-raga, Dasakosi)


Text 1 kiye hama pekhalum kanaka putaliya
sacira anginaya nace dhuli dhusariya
Text 2 caudike digambara balaka bediya
tara majhe gora nace hari hari baliya
Text 3 ratula kamala pade dhaya dinamaniya
janani sunaye bhala nupura su-dhvaniya
Text 4 basudeba ghosa kahe sisu-rasa janiya
dhanya nadiyara loka nabadvipa dhaniya


 Text 1 What do I see? Do I see a golden puppet dancing in Saci's courtyard, a golden puppet sprinkled with dust Text 2 Around Him are boys clothed only by the four directions. In the middle is child Gaura. Chanting "Hari! Hari!", He dances.
 Text 3 His reddish lotus feet are more effulgent than the sun. Saci clearly hears the jangling of His anklets.
 Text 4 Vasudeva Ghosa says: Tasting the nectar of seeing Lord Gaura's childhood pastimes, the people of Nadiya are fortunate. The people of Navadvipa are especially fortunate.


Song 10 (Beloyara-raga, Dasakosi)


Text 1 sacira anginaya nace bisvambhara raya
hasi hasi phiri phiri mayere lukaya
Text 2 bayane basana diya bale luka-inu
saci bale bisvambhara ami na dekhinu
Text 3 mayera ancala dhari cancala carane
naciya naciya yaya khanjana-gamane
Text 4 basudeba ghosa kaya aparupa sobha
sisu-rupa dekhi haya jaga-mana lobha


 Text 1 In Saci's courtyard Visvambhara Raya dances. Laughing and laughing and turning and turning, He hides from His mother.
 Text 2 Placing a cloth before her face, He says, "Now I will hide from you." Saci says, "Visvambhara, I do not see You!"
 Text 3 Holding the cloth before His mother, on quick feet He dances and dances, restless like a khanjana bird.
 Text 4 Vasudeva Ghosa says: Gazing at Lord Visvambhara's wonderful glorious handsome childlike form, the hearts of the world yearn to attain His association.


Lord Gaura's Glories
Song 11 (Mallara-raga)


Text 1 gora-guna ga-o suni
bahu punya phale so pahum milala
 prema parasamani
Text 2 akhila jibera e soka sayara
 nayana nimese sese
o-i prema lesa parasa na pa-ile
 parana judabe kise
Text 3 aruna nayane baruna alaya
 karunaya nirikhane
madhura alape akhare akhare
 sudha-dhara barisane
Text 4 preme dhala dhala pulake purala
 apada mastaka tanu
basudeba kahe sata dhara bahe
 sumeru sincita tanu


 Text 1 I hear and sing of Lord Gaura's glories. After many pious deeds a soul may meet Lord Gaura, who is a sparsamani jewel of spiritual love.
 Text 2 In an eyeblink He dries up the sufferings of all fallen souls. How can a person who has not even a small fragment of love for Him bring cooling happiness to his own life Text 3 The glances from His reddish eyes are all oceans of mercy. Syllable by syllable, His sweet words are flooding monsoon showers of nectar.
 Text 4 He sheds tears of ecstatic spiritual love. From head to foot the hairs of His body stand erect in bliss. Vasudeva Ghosa says: He is like a golden Mount Meru where hundreds of flooding rivers flow.


Song 12 (Suha-i-raga or Gandhara-raga)

 .
Text 1 gora hema-jalada-abatara
saghane barikhe jala-dhara
Text 2 nija gun e kariya badara
gabhira nade diga talamala
Text 3 karun a-bijuri dina rati
barikhaye arati-piriti
Text 4 sukha-pagka kari ksiti-tale
prema phala-ila nana phale
Text 5 eka phale naba rasa jhare
arati ke kahite pare
Text 6 nama gun a karma cintaman i
kahe basu adabhuta bani
 .

 Text 1 Lord Gaura is like a golden cloud showering torrents of tears.
 Text 2 His virtues are a monsoon shower. The thunder of His voice makes the directions tremble.
 Text 3 The lightning of His mercy shines day and night. Day and night He showers rains of ecstatic spiritual love.
 Text 4 He makes the surface of the earth muddy with bliss. From that mud grow trees bearing many different kinds of fruits of ecstatic spiritual love.
 Text 5 Each fruit is sweet with newer and newer nectar. Who has the power to describe the love they bear Text 6 His names, virtues, and actions are all cintaman i jewels. His voice filled with wonder, Vasu speaks these words.


Song 13 (Suha-i-raga)


Text 1 aha mari gora-rupera ki diba tulana
upama nahila ye kasila bana sona
Text 2 meghera bijuri nahe rupera upama
tulana nahila rupe campakera dama
Text 3 tulana nahila svarna-ketakira dala
tulana nahila gorocana niramala
Text 4 kunkuma jiniya anga-gandha manohara
basu kahe ki diya gadila bidhi gora


 Text 1 Ala! Alas! To what can I compare Lord Gaura's form? I cannot say it is like the purest gold.
 Text 2 I cannot say His form is like lightning. I cannot say His form is like a yellow campaka garland.
 Text 3 I cannot say it is like a golden ketaki petal. I cannot say it is like glistening gorocana.
 Text 4 The charming fragrance of His limbs defeats kunkuma. Vasudeva Ghosa says: How can I compare Lord Gaura to anything

Song 14 (Kamoda-raga)

 .
Text 1 (Refrain) gauragga bihara-i parama anande
nityananda kari sagge gagga-pulina ragge
 hari hari bale nija-brnde
Text 2 kaYca kaYcana man i gora-rupa taha jini
 dagamagi prema-taragge
o naba-kusuma-dama  gale dole anupama
 helana narahari-agge
Text 3 priyatama gadadhara dhariya se bama kara
 nija gun a ga-oye gobinde
bhabe bharala tanu pulaka kadamba janu
 garajana yaichana simhe
Text 4 isata hasiya ksan e arun a-nayana-kon eS royata kiba abhilase
sogari se saba khela brndabana-rasa-lila
 ki baliba basudeba ghose
 .

 Text 1 (Refrain) Filled with bliss, Lord Gauragga enjoys many pastimes. Accompanied by Nityananda and a host of devotees, on the Gagga's banks He chants, "Hari! Hari!" 
 Text 2 His fair form defeats the new topaz. Playing in waves of spiritual love, He dives and surfaces. A peerless garland of new flowers moves to and fro on His neck. He leans against Narahari's body.
 Text 3 Grasping dearmost Gadadhara's left hand, He sings His own glories, the glories of Lord Govinda. His body is overcome with ecstatic love. The hairs of his body stand erect. He roars like a lion.
 Text 4 Another moment He gently smiles. What desire glistens in the glance from the corner of His reddish eyes? He suddenly remembers all His pastimes in Vrndavana. Ah, what will Vasudeva Ghosa say now

Song 15 (Śri-raga)


Text 1 sankirtane nityananda nace
priya parisada-gana kache
Text 2 gobinda madhaba ghosa gana
suni keba dharaye parana
Text 3 patitera galaya dhariya
kande pahum sa-karuna haiya
Text 4 gadagada kahe patitere
suni yaha pasana bidare
Text 5 to sabara dhari bahu dhara
dhara dhara premera prasara
Text 6 to sabara durgati nasiba
byajera sahita prema diba
Text 7 yare paya caya mukha-cande
galaya dhariya tara kande
Text 8 se hena karuna sogariya
basu ghosa maraye bujhiya


 Text 1 His dear associates at His side, Lord Nityananda dances in sankirtana. 
 Text 2 Govinda and Madhava Ghosa sing. Hearing their songs, the wonderstruck listeners stop their breath.
 Text 3 Placing his arms about rthe necks of the fallen souls, merciful Lord Nityananda weeps.
 Text 4 His words choked with emotion, He speaks to the fallen souls. Hearing Him, even the stones break.
 Text 5 He tightly hugs everyone. Tears of love stream form His eyes.
 Text 6 For everyone He destroys whatever inauspiciousness waits in the future. On various pretexts He gives the people ecstatic spiritual love.
 Text 7 A person who sees His moonlike face finds that Lord Nityananda puts His arm on his neck and weeps.
 Text 8 Remembering Lord Nityananda mercy, Vasudeva Ghosa is ?Sovercome.


Song 16 (Sindhuda-raga)

 .
Text 1 nita-i kebala patita janara bandhu
jiba-cira-pun ya-phale bidhi ani mila-ola
 ragka majhe ratanera sindhu
Text 2 diga nehariya yaya dake pahum gora-raya
 abani padaye murachiya
nija sahacara mile nita-i kariya kole
 siYce pahum canda mukha caYa
Text 3 naba-guYjarun a agkhi preme chala chala dekhi
 sumeru upare mandakini
megha-gabhira-nade puna bhaya bali dake
 pada-bhare kampita medini
Text 4 nita-i karun amaya jibe dila prema-caya
 ye prema bidhira abidita
nija gun a prema-dane bhasa-ila tri-bhubane
 basudeba ghosa se baYcita
 .

 Text 1 Lord Nitai is the fallen soul's only friend. After may past pious deeds a soul, by destiny, will meet Lord Nityananda. In the midst of poverty he finds an ocean of jewels.
 Text 2 Glancing in the four directions, Lord Nitai calls out, "Gaura Raya!", and falls unconscious to the ground. The Lord's companions surround Him. Lord Nitai embraces them. Gazing at them, the Lord sprinkles them with tears flowing from the moon of His face.
 Text 3 From the khaYjana birds of His reddish eyes flow streams of tears of spiritual love, streams of tears like a celestial Gagga flowing from golden Mount Sumeru. In a voice like a thundering cloud, again and again He calls for His brothers,the devotees. The weight of His footsteps makes the earth tremble.
 Text 4 To the fallen souls merciful Lord Nitai gave the gift of ecstatic spiritual love, a gift the demigod Brahma did not know even existed. By His own kindness Lord Nitai plunged the three worlds in the flooding nectar of that love. Everyone was plunged. Only Vasudeva Ghosa was not. Only he was cheated of that nectar.


Song 17 Sindhuda-raga)


Text 1 (Refrain) nita-i amara parama dayala
aniya premera banya jagata kariya dhanya
 bharila premete nadi khala
Text 2 lagiya premera dhe-u baki na rahila ke-u
 papi tapi calila bhasiya
sakala bhakata meli se premete kare keli
 keha keha yaya santariya
Text 3 dubila nadiya-pura dube preme santipura
 dohe mili ba-icha khelaya
to dekhi nita-i hase sakale-i preme bhase
 basu ghosa habudubu khaya


 Text 1 (Refrain) My Lord Nitai is supremely merciful. Digging a ?Scanal from the ocean of ecstatic 
spiritual love, Lord Nitai flooded this world. In this way He made this world very fortunate.
 Text 2 When those waves of love flooded the world no one remained untouched. Sinners and ascetics alike swam in that ocean of love. The devotees gathered together and played in that ocean of love. Sometimes one of them would swim across it. 
 Text 3 The towns of Nadiya were plunged in that ocean of love. The town of Santipura was also plunged in that ocean of love. The devotees played in that ocean. Seeing all this, Lord Nitai laughs. Vasudeva Ghosa is tossed to and fro by the waves of that ocean. Sometimes he is pushed above and sometimes he is plunged underneath the waves.


The Abhiseka of Lord Gaura

Song 18 


Text 1 jaya jaya dhvani uthe nadiya nagare
gora abhiseka aji panditera ghare
Text 2 enechi enechi bale advaita gosaYi
maha huhunkara chade bahya-jnana na-i
Text 3 bahu tule nace nada tadhiya tadhiya
pache pache haridasa phirena naciya
Text 4 sribasa sripandita ara srinidhi srirama
harsa-bhare nrtya kare nayanabhirama
Text 5 jaya re gauranga jaya advaita nita-i
bali bhakta-gana ase kari dha-oyadha-i
Text 6 keha preme nace gaya keha preme hase
gora abhiseka-lila gaya basu-ghose


 Text 1 Calls of "Jaya! Jaya!" arise in the towns of Nadiya. Now in Śrivasa's house will be performed the abhiseka of Lord Gaura. 
 Text 2 "Come! Come!", calls Advaita GosaYi. He lets out a great roar. He is not in external consciousness.
 Text 3 Raising His arms, Nar a (Lord Advaita) wildly dances, His steps making sounds of "Tadhiya! Tadhiya!" Behind Him Haridasa turns and dances.
 Text 4 Śrivasa, Śri pati, Śri nidhi, and Śri rama joyfully dance. The sight of them dancing delights the eyes.
 Text 5 Calling out, "Jaya Gauranga! Jaya Advaita Nitai!", the devotees hurry behind.
 Text 6 Some dance and sing in ecstatic love. Others laugh in ecstatic love. Vasudeva Ghosa sings this song describing Lord Gaura's abhiseka pastime.


Song 19 (Dhanasi-raga)


Text 1 gora abhiseka katha adbhuta kathana
suniya pandita ghare dhaya bhakta-gana
Text 2 dha-oyadha-i kari asi nace kutuhale
du-bahu tuliya jaya goracanda bale
Text 3 canda nace surya nace nace tara-gana
brahma nace bayu nace sahasra locanaSText 4 aruna baruna nace saba sura-gana
patale basuki nace nace naga-gana
Text 5 svarga nace martya nace nacaye patala
parama anande nace dasa dik-pala
Text 6 anande bhakata-gana karaye hunkara
e basu ghosera mane ananda apara


 Text 1 Hearing the wonderful news of Lord Gaura's abhiseka, the devotees run to Śrivasa's home.
 Text 2 Running, they dance in bliss. Raising their arms, they chant, "Jaya Gauracandra!"
 Text 3 The moon dances. The sun dances, The host of stars dance. Brahma dances. Vayu dances. Thousand-eyed Indra dances.
 Text 4 Aruna, Varuna, and all the demigods dance. In Patalaloka Vasuki dances. The Nagas dance.
 Text 5 In Svargaloka they dance. In Martyaloka they dance. In Patalaloka they dance. In great bliss the dik-palas, protectors of the ten directions, dance.
 Text 6 The devotees joyfully roar. Vasudeva Ghosa feels a great shoreless ocean of bliss fill his heart.


Song 20 (Baradi-raga)


Text 1 taila haridra ara kunkuma kasturi
gora ange lepana kare naba naba nari
Text 2 su-basita jala ani kalasi puriya
su-gandhi candana ani tahe misa-iya
Text 3 jaya jaya dhvani diya dhale gora-gaya
sri-anga muchaYa keha basana paraya
Text 4 sinana mandape dekha gora nata-raya
manera harise basudeba ghosa gaya


 Text 1 Small girls anoint Lord Gaura's limbs with oil, turmeric, kunkuma, and musk.
 Text 2 They fill great jugs with scented water. They bring fragrant sandal paste.
 Text 3 "Chanting, "Jaya! Jaya!", the devotees bathe Lord Gaura Raya. With a fine towel someone dries His glorious limbs.
 Text 4 With a joyful heart look at Lord Gaura Raya in the bathing pavilion! Vasudeva Ghosa sings this song.


Chanting Radha's Name

Song 21 (Jayajayanti-raga)


Text 1 are mora are mora gora dvija-mani
radha radha bali kande lothaya dharani
Text 2 radha-nama jape gora parama yatane
kata suradhuni bahe aruna nayane
Text 3 ksane ksane gora anga bhume gadi yaya
radha nama bali ksane ksane murachaya
Text 4 pulake purala tanu gadagada bola
basu kahe gora kena eta utarola

 Text 1 O my Gaura, my Gaura the king of the twice-born! Chanting "Radha! Radha!", He wept. He rolled on the ground.
 Text 2 Lord Gaura intently chanted Radha's name. How many celestial Gangas of tears streamed from His reddened eyes Text 3 Moment after moment Lord Gaura fell to the ground. Moment after moment He chanted Radha's name and then fell unconscious.
 Text 4 The hairs of his body stood erect. He spoke in a choked voice. Vasudeva Ghosa asks: Why is Lord Gaura so agitated

Lord Gaura's Glorious Form

Song 22 (Baradi-raga)


Text 1 ki kahiba sata sata tuya abatara
ekala gaurangacanda parana amara
Text 2 bisnu abatare tumi premera bikhari
siba suka narada la-iya jana cari
Text 3 sindhu bandha kaila tumi rama abatare
ebe se tomara yasa ghusibe samsare
Text 4 kali-yuge kirtana karila setubandha
sukhe para ha-uka yata pangu jada andha
Text 5 kiba gune purusa nace kiba gune nari
gora-gune matila bhubana dasa cari
Text 6 na janiye japa-tapa beda bicara
kahe basu gauranga more kara para


 Text 1 What shall I say? You have descended to this world hundreds and hundreds of times. O Lord Gauaracandra, You are more dear to me than life.
 Text 2 Although You are Lord Visnu Himself descended to this world, You have become a beggar, begging the people to accept the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. Siva, Suka, and Narada are all Your followers and devotees.
 Text 3 When You descended as Lord Ramacandra to this world You built a bridge across the ocean. Even now Your glories as Ramacandra resound in this world.
 Text 4 In the Kali-yuga You have also built a bridge. That bridge is sankirtana, the chanting of the holy names. Stepping onto that bridge of sankirtana even the fools, lame, and blind can cross to the farther shore of the ocean of birth and death.
 Text 5 Who then is a man? Who then is a woman? Everyone in the fourteen worlds has become wild with the bliss of chanting Lord Gaura's glories.
 Text 6 As for myself, I have never studied the Vedas. I do not know anything about japa (mantras) or tapa (austerities). Vasudeva Ghosa says: O Lord Gauranga, please carry me to the farther shore of this ocean of birth and death.


Song 23 (Baradi-raga)


Text 1 birale basiya ekesvare
hari-nama jape nirantare
Text 2 saba abatara-siromani
akincana janera cintamaniSText 3 su-gandhi candana makha gaya
(ebe) dhuli binu ana nahi bhaya
Text 4 manimaya ratana bhusana
svapane na kare parasana
Text 5 chadala lakhimi bilasa
kiba lagi tara-tale basa
Text 6 chodala mohana kare bamsi
ebe danda dhariya sannyasi
Text 7 bibhuti kariya prema-dhana
sange la-i saba akincana
Text 8 prema-jale kara-i sinana
kahe basu bidare parana


 Text 1 The supreme master of all now stays in a secluded place. Without stop He chants japa of Lord Krsn a's holy names.
 Text 2 He who is the crest jewel of all avataras has now become the cintamani jewel of the sannyasis.
 Text 3 Formerly His body was anointed with fragrant sandal paste. Now His body's only ointment is dust.
 Text 4 Even in dreams He does not touch jewel ornaments.
 Text 5 He has renounced His pastimes with Goddess Laksmi. Now He lives under a tree.
 Text 6 He renounced the charming flute He used to hold in His hand. Now His hand grasps a sannyasi's danda.
 Text 7 Now love of Krsn a is His only wealth. Now He satys amongst the sannyasis.
 Text 8 Now He is bathed by tears of love for Krsn a. As he speaks these words, Vasudeva Ghosa feels that his life's breath is breaking into pieces.


Song 24 Tirota-raga)


Text 1 jaya jaya jagannatha sacira nandana
tri-bhubana kare yagra caran a bandana
Text 2 nilacale sankha-cakra-gada-padma-dhara
nadiya-nagare danda-kamandalu-kara
Text 3 keha bale purabe rabana badhila
golokera bibhaba lila prakasa karila
Text 4 sri-radhara bhaba ebe gora abatara
hare krsna nama gaura karila pracara
Text 5 basudeba ghosa kahe karo joda hata
ye-i gaura se-i krsna se-i jagannatha


 Text 1 Glory, glory to Saci's son, who is Lord Jagannatha Himself! The three worlds bow down before His feet.
 Text 2 In Nilacala He is Jagannatha holding a conch, cakra, club, and lotus. In Nadiya's towns He holds a danda and kamandalu. 
 Text 3 Some wise souls say that in ancient times He killed Ravana. Some say in Gokola He enjoys glorious pastimes.
 Text 4 To taste the ecstasy that Radha feels in Her love for Him, He has now incarnated here in the form of Lord Gaura. As Lord Gaura He preaches the chanting of the holy names of the Hare Krsn a mantra.
 Text 5 Vasudeva Ghosa says: Folding my hands, I declare: Gaura ?Sis Krsn a. He is Jagannatha.


Song 25 (Baradi-raga)

 .
Text 1 birale basiya ekecwara
hari-nama jape nirantara
Text 2 saba-abatara-ciroman i
akiYcana-jana-cintaman i
Text 3 sugandhi candana matha gaya
dhuli binu ana nahi bhaya
Text 4 man imaya ratana bhusan a
swapane na kare paracana
Text 5 chadala lakhimi-bilasa
kiba lagi taru-tale basa
Text 6 chadala bana-mala bamci
ebe dan da dhariya sannyasi
Text 7 hasa abhilasa upekhi
kandiya phulaya duti agkhi
Text 8 bibhuti kariya prema-dhana
sagge laYa saba akiYcana jana
Text 9 prema-jale kara-i sinana
kahe basu bidare paran a
 .

 Text 1 Staying in a secluded place, the Supreme Personality of Godhead chants the holy names of Lord Krsn a without stop.
 Text 2 He is the crest jewel of all avataras. He is the cintaman i jewel of all sannyasis who have Krsn a as their only property. 
 Text 3 Fragrant sandal paste is nothing compared to the fragrance of His body. 
 Text 4 Even in their dreams, the most glorious jewel ornaments cannot touch the glory of His body.
 Text 5 He renounced His pastimes with Goddess Laksmi. Now He sits under a tree.
 Text 6 He put aside His flute and forest-garland. Grasping a dan da, now He is a sannyasi.
 Text 7 Turning aside from His pastimes of jests and laughter, now He weeps, tears streaming from the blossoming flowers of His eyes.
 Text 8 Now His only wealth is the treasure of pure spiritual love. Now He stays with penniless devotees, devotees who have Krsn a as their only treasure.
 Text 9 Now He makes a great shower of tears of spiritual love. Vasu says: My life-breath is now split into pieces.

Song 35 (Suha-i or Decaga-raga)

 .
Text 1 ki herinu ogo sa-i bidagadha-raja
bhakata-kalapataru nabadwipa majha
Text 2 biparitira cakha saba anuraga-pate
kusuma arati tahe jagata mohite 
Text 3 niramala prema-phala phale sarba-kala
eka phale naba rasa jharaye apara
Text 4 bhakata cataka pika cuka ali hamsa
nirabadhi bilasaye rasa paracamsa
Text 5 sthira cara sura nara yara chaya pose
basudeba baYcita apana karma-dose
 .

 Text 1 Ah! What did I see? In the town of Navadvipa I saw the king of the wise. I saw the kalpa-taru tree of the devotees.
 Text 2 That tree had branches of devotion, leaves of spiritual love, and flowers of bliss. It enchanted the entire world.
 Text 3 It bore fruits of pure ecstatic spiritual love. It bore ?Sthem at every moment. From those 
fruits flowed a shoreless ocean of ever-new sweet nectar.
 Text 4 The cranes, cuckoos, parrots, bees, and swans that are the devotees always glorify that tree.
 Text 5 The demigods, the human beings, and all the moving and unmoving beings stay in the shade of the tree and are nourished by its fruits. Only Vasudeva dasa, because of his past evil deeds, is cheated of tasting those fruits.


Song 36 (Dhanasri-raga)


Text 1 jambunada-caya rucira ganjana
 jhalamala kalebara kanti
candane carcita bahu-mandita
 gajendra sundaka bhati
Text 2 (Refrain) pekhalu gaura-kisora
nata nayara hera-ite ananda ora
bhabe bhora tanu antara gara gara
 kanthe gada gada bola
Text 3 nadiya pura bhari asesa kautuka hari
 nacata rasika su-jana
bidhira baidagadhi binoda paripati
 dina rajani nahi ana
Text 4 suradhuni puline taruna taru-mule
 baithe nija parakase
basudeba ghosa gaya pa-ola prema-dane
 sincila saba nija dase


 Text 1 His splendid limbs defeat the splendor of gold. His sandal-paste-anointed arms defeat the regal-elephant's trunk.
 Text 2 (Refrain) I saw youthful Lord Gaura, the best of dancers, a dancer tasting the sweetest bliss. His body waa filled with ecstasy after ecstasy. His heart melted with ecstaic spiritual love. Broken words appeared in His throat.
 Text 3 He flooded Nadiya with every bliss. The saintly rasikas danced. He was supremely wise. He enjoyed many blissful pastimes. Day and night were not different to Him. 
 Text 4 Sitting under a sapling by the Ganga's bank, He manifested His original form. Vasudeva Ghosa says: To others He gave the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. He showered all His servants with the nectar of that love.

Śri Gauracandrasya

*Text 1 ki herinu ogo sa-i bidagadha-raja
*Text 2 birale basiya ekecwara
Text 3 rasa-paripati nata kirtana lampata
*Text 4 gora hema-jalada-abatara
Text 5 arun a basane bibidha bhusan e
*Text 6 nita-i kebala patita janara bandhu
*Text 7 (Refrain) gauragga bihara-i parama anande


Text 3 rasa-paripati nata kirtana lampata
Text 5 arun a basane bibidha bhusan e


one
Song 1 Śri Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Suha-i Decaga-raga)

 .
Text 1 ki herinu ogo sa-i bidagadha-raja
bhakata-kalapataru nabadwipa majha
Text 2 biparitira cakha saba anuraga-pate
kusuma arati tahe jagata mohite 
Text 3 niramala prema-phala phale sarba-kala
eka phale naba rasa jharaye apara
Text 4 bhakata cataka pika cuka ali hamsa
nirabadhi bilasaye rasa paracamsa
Text 5 sthira cara sura nara yara chaya pose
basudeba baYcita apana karma-dose
 .

 Text 1 Ah! What did I see? In the town of Navadvipa I saw the king of the wise. I saw the kalpa-taru tree of the devotees.
 Text 2 That tree had branches of devotion, leaves of spiritual love, and flowers of bliss. It enchanted the entire world.
 Text 3 It bore fruits of pure ecstatic spiritual love. It bore them at every moment. From those fruits flowed a shoreless ocean of ever-new sweet nectar.
 Text 4 The cranes, cuckoos, parrots, bees, and swans that are the devotees always glorify that tree.
 Text 5 The demigods, the human beings, and all the moving and unmoving beings stay in the shade of the tree and are nourished by its fruits. Only Vasudeva dasa, because of his past evil deeds, is cheated of tasting those fruits.

two
Song 1 Śri Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Baradi-raga)

 .
Text 1 birale basiya ekecwara
hari-nama jape nirantara
Text 2 saba-abatara-ciroman i
akiYcana-jana-cintaman i
Text 3 sugandhi candana matha gaya
dhuli binu ana nahi bhaya
Text 4 man imaya ratana bhusan a
swapane na kare paracana
Text 5 chadala lakhimi-bilasa
kiba lagi taru-tale basa
Text 6 chadala bana-mala bamci
ebe dan da dhariya sannyasi
Text 7 hasa abhilasa upekhi
kandiya phulaya duti agkhi
Text 8 bibhuti kariya prema-dhana
sagge laYa saba akiYcana jana
Text 9 prema-jale kara-i sinana
kahe basu bidare paran a
 .
 Text 1 Staying in a secluded place, the Supreme Personality of Godhead chants the holy names of Lord Krsn a without stop.
 Text 2 He is the crest jewel of all avataras. He is the cintaman i jewel of all sannyasis who have Krsn a as their only property. 
 Text 3 Fragrant sandal paste is nothing compared to the fragrance of His body. 
 Text 4 Even in their dreams, the most glorious jewel ornaments cannot touch the glory of His body.
 Text 5 He renounced His pastimes with Goddess Laksmi. Now He sits under a tree.
 Text 6 He put aside His flute and forest-garland. Grasping a dan da, now He is a sannyasi.
 Text 7 Turning aside from His pastimes of jests and laughter, now He weeps, tears streaming from the blossoming flowers of His eyes.
 Text 8 Now His only wealth is the treasure of pure spiritual love. Now He stays with penniless devotees, devotees who have Krsn a as their only treasure.
 Text 9 Now He makes a great shower of tears of spiritual love. Vasu says: My life-breath is now split into pieces.

three
Song 1 Śri Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Pahida-raga)

 .
Text 1 rasa-paripati nata kirtana lampata
 kata kata raggi saggi saba sagge
yahara katakse lakhimi lakhe lakhe
 bilasa-i bilola-apagge
Text 2 cuni brndabana-gun a rase unamata mana
 du bahu tuliya bale hari
phire nace nata-raya kata dhara basudhaya
 du nayane premera gagari
Text 3 purusa prakrti para madana-manohara
 kebala laban ya-rasa-sima
rasera sagara gora bada-i gabhira dhira
 na rakhila nagari-garima
Text 4 tribhubana-sundara unnata-kandhara
 subalita bahu bicale
kugkuma candana mrgamada lepana
 kahe basu tachu pada-tale
 .

 Text 1 Intoxicated by tasting the nectar of ecstatic love, He wildly dances in kirtana. How many delighted devotees enjoy pastimes in His company? Aroused by restless glances from the corners of His eyes, millions and millions of goddesses of fortune playfully glance at Him from the corners of their eyes.
 Text 2 Hearing the nectar glories of Vrndavana, His heart becomes wild. Raising His two arms, He chants, "Hari!" He wildly dances. He is the king of dancers. How many flooding rivers of tears does He make flow on the earth? His eyes have become like two pitchers pouring tears of ecstatic love.
 Text 3 He is the master of purusa and prakrti. He is more charming than Kamadeva. He stands at the highest pinnacle of  glorious handsomeness. Lord 
Gaura is an ocean of the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. He is most deep and most wise. seeing Him, a wise woman cannot keep her peaceful composure.
 Text 4 He is the most handsome person in the three worlds. His shoulders are broad. his arms are graceful and long. He is anointed with kugkuma, sandal, and musk. Taking shelter of the soles of His feet, Vasu sings this song.

four
Song 1 Śri Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Suha-i-raga or Gandhara-raga)

 .
Text 1 gora hema-jalada-abatara
saghane barikhe jala-dhara
Text 2 nija gun e kariya badara
gabhira nade diga talamala
Text 3 karun a-bijuri dina rati
barikhaye arati-piriti
Text 4 sukha-pagka kari ksiti-tale
prema phala-ila nana phale
Text 5 eka phale naba rasa jhare
arati ke kahite pare
Text 6 nama gun a karma cintaman i
kahe basu adabhuta bani
 .

 Text 1 Lord Gaura is like a golden cloud showering torrents of tears.
 Text 2 His virtues are a monsoon shower. The thunder of His voice makes the directions tremble.
 Text 3 The lightning of His mercy shines day and night. Day and night He showers rains of ecstatic spiritual love.
 Text 4 He makes the surface of the earth muddy with bliss. From that mud grow trees bearing many different kinds of fruits of ecstatic spiritual love.
 Text 5 Each fruit is sweet with newer and newer nectar. Who has the power to describe the love they bear Text 6 His names, virtues, and actions are all cintaman i jewels. His voice filled with wonder, Vasu speaks these words.

five
Song 2 Śri Nityanandacandrasya (of Lord Nityanandacandra) (Bala-raga or Suha-i-raga)

 .
Text 1 arun a basane bibidha bhusan e
 cire paga nata-patiya
caudike heri bahu-yuga tuli
 nace hari bala baliya
Text 2 (Refrain) nita-i raggiya nace
arun a nayane o can da badane
 kata na madhuri ache
Text 3 calana sundara matta karibara
 nupura jhagkrta kariya
bhabe abaca nahi diga paca gaura bali hugkariya
Text 4 yateka bhakata dharan i luthata
 heri o canda-bayaniya
basudeba ghosa e rase baYcita
 maga prema-rasa daniya
 .

 Text 1 Wearing saffron garments, many ornaments, and a colorful turban, and glancing in the four directions, Lord Nityananda raises His arms, dances, and chants, "Haribol!"
 Text 2 (Refrain) Lord Nityananda gracefully dances. His eyes are reddish. His face is like the moon. Is He not filled with sweetness Text 3 He moves gracefully like a wild elephant. His anklets jangle. He is overcome with ecstasy. The four directions are not steady for Him. He makes a great roaring sound of “Gaura!"
 Text 4 He rolls on the ground. The devotees surround Him and gaze at His moonlike face. Cheating of being able to taste the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love, Vasudeva Ghosa begs: Please give me some of the nectar of pure spiritual love.

six
Song 2 Śri Nityanandacandrasya (of Lord Nityanandacandra) (Sindhuda-raga)

 .
Text 1 nita-i kebala patita janara bandhu
jiba-cira-pun ya-phale bidhi ani mila-ola
 ragka majhe ratanera sindhu
Text 2 diga nehariya yaya dake pahum gora-raya
 abani padaye murachiya
nija sahacara mile nita-i kariya kole
 siYce pahum canda mukha caYa
Text 3 naba-guYjarun a agkhi preme chala chala dekhi
 sumeru upare mandakini
megha-gabhira-nade puna bhaya bali dake
 pada-bhare kampita medini
Text 4 nita-i karun amaya jibe dila prema-caya
 ye prema bidhira abidita
nija gun a prema-dane bhasa-ila tri-bhubane
 basudeba ghosa se baYcita
 .

 Text 1 Lord Nitai is the fallen soul's only friend. After may past pious deeds a soul, by destiny, will meet Lord Nityananda. In the midst of poverty he finds an ocean of jewels.
 Text 2 Glancing in the four directions, Lord Nitai calls out, "Gaura Raya!", and falls unconscious to the ground. The Lord's companions surround Him. Lord Nitai embraces them. Gazing at them, the Lord sprinkles them with tears flowing from the moon of His face.
 Text 3 From the khaYjana birds of His reddish eyes flow streams of tears of spiritual love, streams of tears like a celestial Gagga flowing from golden Mount Sumeru. In a voice like a thundering cloud, again and again He calls for His brothers,the devotees. The weight of His footsteps makes the earth tremble.
 Text 4 To the fallen souls 
merciful Lord Nitai gave the gift of ecstatic spiritual love, a gift the demigod Brahma did not know even existed. By His own kindness Lord Nitai plunged the three worlds in the flooding nectar of that love. Everyone was plunged. Only Vasudeva Ghosa was not. Only he was cheated of that nectar.

seven
Song 1 Śri Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Kamoda-raga)

 .
Text 1 (Refrain) gauragga bihara-i parama anande
nityananda kari sagge gagga-pulina ragge
 hari hari bale nija-brnde
Text 2 kaYca kaYcana man i gora-rupa taha jini
 dagamagi prema-taragge
o naba-kusuma-dama  gale dole anupama
 helana narahari-agge
Text 3 priyatama gadadhara dhariya se bama kara
 nija gun a ga-oye gobinde
bhabe bharala tanu pulaka kadamba janu
 garajana yaichana simhe
Text 4 isata hasiya ksan e arun a-nayana-kon e
 royata kiba abhilase
sogari se saba khela brndabana-rasa-lila
 ki baliba basudeba ghose
 .

 Text 1 (Refrain) Filled with bliss, Lord Gauragga enjoys many pastimes. Accompanied by Nityananda and a host of devotees, on the Gagga's banks He chants, "Hari! Hari!" 
 Text 2 His fair form defeats the new topaz. Playing in waves of spiritual love, He dives and surfaces. A peerless garland of new flowers moves to and fro on His neck. He leans against Narahari's body.
 Text 3 Grasping dearmost Gadadhara's left hand, He sings His own glories, the glories of Lord Govinda. His body is overcome with ecstatic love. The hairs of his body stand erect. He roars like a lion.
 Text 4 Another moment He gently smiles. What desire glistens in the glance from the corner of His reddish eyes? He suddenly remembers all His pastimes in Vrndavana. Ah, what will Vasudeva Ghosa say now

(Tori-raga)

Text 1 cita-cora gaura mora
preme matta magana bhora
akincana jana kara-i kora
patita adhama bandhuya
Text 2 bhubana-tarana-karana nama
jiba lagiya tejala dhama
prakata ha-ila nadiya-nagare
yaiche sarada induya
Text 3 asima mahima ko karu ora
yubati-yaubana jibana cora
bidhi niramila ki diya gaura
bada-i rasera sindhuya
Text 4 dekhite dekhita lagaye sukha
harala sakala manera dukha
basu ghosa kahe kiba se rupa
nirakhi cita sananduya



Song 24 (Baradi-raga)


Text 1 abatara kaila bada bada
emana karuna kona yuge nahi ara
Text 2 prati ghare ghare suni premera kandana
kali-yuge hari-nama rahila ghosana
Text 3 sukha sayarera ghate diya premera bhara
bhala hata patiyacha premera pasara
Text 4 jaga-i madha-i tara chila du-i bha-i
hari-nama uddharila caitanya gosañi
Text 5 basudeba ghosa kahe na habe emana
kali-yuge dhanya nama caitanya-ratana


Part 41 Vijayānanda dāsa


Song 1 (Maṇgala-rāga)


Text 1 praphullita kanaka-kamala mukha-maṇḍala, nayana khaṇjana tāhe sāje
dīgha lalāṭa mājhe, śrī-hari-mandira sāje, karaṇga kaupīna kaṭi-mājhe
Text 2 (Refrain) jaya jaya gorācānda kalu/śa-bināśa
patita-pābana jaga-tāraṇa kāraṇa, saṇkīrtana parakāśa
Text 3 ā-jānu-lambita bhuja-daṇḍa birājita, gale dole mālatī dāma
bhubana-mano-hara dīrgha kalebara, pulaka kadamba anupāma
Text 4 prātara-aruṇa-ruci śrī-pada-pallaba abheda adwaits nityānanda
bijayānanda dāse, ānanda-sāyare bhāse, carana-kamala makaranda


     Text 1 The circle of His face is a blossoming golden lotus. His eyes are restless khaṇjana birds. His broad forehead is anointed with the tilaka that is Lord Hari's temple. He carries a waterpot. A kaupīna is tied about His waist.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Glory, glory to Lord Gauracandra, the destroyer of sins, the purifier of the fallen, the savior of the worlds, the Lord who revealed the saṇkīrtana movement of chanting the holy names!
     Text 3 His glorious arms reach to His knees. A mālatī garland swings to and fro from His neck. His tall form enchants the world's hearts. Like kadamba filaments, the hairs of His body stand erect in ecstasy.
     Text 4 The blossoming flowers of the soles of His feet are red like the rising sun. He is not different from Advaita and Nityānanda. The nectar at the lotus flowers of His feet makes Vijayānanda dāsa float in an ocean of bliss.


Part 42 Vṛndāvana dāsa


Song 1 (Śrī-rāga)


Text 1 pulake carita gāya         sukhe gaḍāgaḍi yāya
          dekha re caitanya abatāra
baiku/nṭha-nāyaka hari         dwija-rūpe abatāri
          sa/nkīrtane karena bihāra
Text 2 kanaka jiniyā kānti        śrī-bigraha śobhā bhānti
          ā-jānu-lambita bhuja sāje
sannyāsīra rūpa dhari         āpana rasa bihwala
          nā jāni kemana sukhe nāce
Text 3 jaya śrī-gaurasundara      karu/nāra sindhu-maya
          jaya bṛndābana-rāya re
nabadwīpe purandara      bṛndābana pāmare
          cara/na-kamale deha chāya re


     Text 1 Please gaze, O, at Caitanya-avatāra. As He sings, the hairs of His body stand erect. Overcome with ecstasy, He rolls on the ground. He is Lord Kṛṣṇa, the king of Vaiku/nṭha. To this world descending in the form of a brāhma/na, He enjoys pastimes of sa/nkīrtana.
     Text 2 His form is graceful and glorious. His complexion defeats gold. His long arms reach to His knees. Manifesting the form of a sannyāsī, He is overcome by tasting the nectar of love for a person who is actually Himself. How does He dance in such ecstasy? I do not know.
     Text 3 O Śrī Gaurasundara, O ocean of mercy, glory to You! O king of Vṛndāvana, glory to You! O king of Navadvīpa, please give the shade of Your lotus feet to this wicked Vṛndāvana dāsa.


Song 2 (Dhānaśī-rāga)


Text 1 gaura govinda-ga/na         śuna he rasika-jana
          biṣ/nu mahā-biṣ/nu para pahuṁ
yāṅra pada-nakha-dyuti        parama brahmera sthiti
          sura-muni prā/nera ga/na tuhuṁ
Text 2 antare bara/na bhinna       bāhire gaurā/nga cihna
          śrī-rādhāra a/nga-kānti rāje
śata-dala-kamala         hema-kar/nikāra mājhe
          bihara-i cāri dwāri sāje
Text 3 goloka baiku/nṭha āra       śwetadwīpa nāme sāra
          ānanda apāra eka nāma
bāsudeba sa/nkarṣa/ne      pradyumnāniruddha-sane
          cāri dike sāje cāri-dhāma
Text 4 kṣīroda-sāgara-jale        bhuja/nga-rājera kole
          yoga-nidrā abalambita līlā
tāhe saba abatari        śwetadwīpa adhikārī
          ananta nityānanda pela
Text 5 (Refrain) sahasra sahasra kā/ne       loliyā loliyā paḍe mukhe
sṛji du-i jihwāya        gauracandra gu/na gāya
          pada-padme mahā-lakṣmī buke
Text 6 daśa-śata phe/nī-ma/ni        mukuṭ/era sājani
          śweta an/ge dhare nānā jyoti
kata kata pāriṣada       sanaka sanātanānande
          deba ṛṣi-ga/ne kare stuti
Text 7 yāṅra eka loma-kūpe        kateka brahma-swarūpe
          nānā-mate sṛje saba prajā
rāma ādi abatāra         aṁśe parakāśa yāṅra
          se saba brahmā/nḍera yeṅho rāja
Text 8 e hena ananta-līlā         māyāra kata sṛjila
          śrī-rādhāra katākṣa-bā/na tū/ne
brahmā/nḍa upari dhāma         śrī-bṛndābana nāma
          gu/na-gāna kare bṛndābane


     Text 1 O devotees of Lord Gaura and Lord Govinda, O rasikas, please hear of the Supreme Lord who is Lord Viṣ/nu and Lord Mahā-Viṣ/nu. His toenails are the abode of the Brahman effulgence. He is the life's breath of the sages and demigods.
     Text 2 Externally His complexion is fair. In His heart His complexion is different. His external complexion glistens with the color of Śrī Rādhā's limbs. He enjoys pastimes on a thousand-petal lotus, a lotus with four gates.
     Text 3 His abodes are Goloka, Vaiku/nṭha, and Śvetadvīpa. Any single one of His names is a shoreless ocean of bliss. He is Vāsudeva, Sa/nkarṣa/na, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha, who have abodes in the four directions.
     Text 4 Reclining on the lap of a snake king floating on the ocean of milk, He enjoys pastimes of mystic sleep. That snake king is the origin of all avatāras. He is the master of Śvetadvīpa. He is Lord Ananta-Nityānanda.
     Text 5 (Refrain) With thousands and thousands of forked tongues moving in thousands of thousands of mouths, Lord Ananta-Nityānanda chants the glories of Lord Gauracandra. Goddess Mahā-Lakṣmī places Lord Viṣ/nu-Gauracandra's feet on her chest.
     Text 6 On each of Lord Ananta-Nityānanda's thousands of hoods rests a jewel crown. His white body glistens with many colors. How many associates has Lord Viṣ/nu-Gauracandra? Sanaka-kumāra, Sanat-kumāra, and a host of sages and demigods joyfully glorify Him with prayers.
     Text 7 How many Brahmās are born from each one of His body's pores? Each Brahmā begets a great variety of creatures. Rāmacandra and the other avatāras are all His plenary parts. They are the rulers of the universes.
     Text 8 In this way Lord Viṣ/nu-Gauracandra enjoys pastimes without end. How many worlds of māyā does He create? His eyes are quivers filled with sidelong-glance arrows aimed at Śrī Rādhā. Above the material world is His spiritual abode, which bears the name Śrī Vṛndāvana. Thus the devotee who bears the name Vṛndāvana dāsa sings His glories.


Song 3 (Bhāṭiyāri-rāga)


Text 1 abanīka mājhe dekha dona bhā-i
aparūpa rūpa gorācānda nitā-i
Text 2 hena padma jini duhuṁ mukha chaṭā
tāhe parakāśala prema-ghaṭā
Text 3 ghana candane duhuṁ a/nga bhari
bhuja-yuga tuli dohe bala hari
Text 4 nāma sa/nkīrtana karala prakāśa
gu/na gā-oye bṛndābana dāsa


     Text 1 Look at Lord Gauracandra and Lord Nitāi, the two brothers who have descended to this earth, two brothers whose forms are wonderful and glorious!
     Text 2 The glory of Their faces defeats the lotus flowers. They are effulgent with the glory of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 3 Their limbs are anointed with sandal paste. Raising Their arms, They chant, "Hari!"
     Text 4 In this way They manifest the nāma-sa/nkīrtana movement, the movement of chanting the holy names. Vṛndāvana dāsa thus sings Their glories.


Song 4 (Suha-i-rāga)


Text 1 madana-mohana tanu gaurā/nga sundara
lalāṭe tilaka śobho ūrdhwe manohara
Text 2 tri-kaccha basana śobhe kuṭila-kuntala
prākṛta nayana du-i parama ca/ncala
Text 3 śukla-yaj/na-sūtra śobhe beḍiyā śarīre
sūkṣma-rūpe ananta ye hena kalebara
Text 4 adhare tāmbūla hāse adhara cāpiyā
yāṅa bṛndābana dāsa se-rūpa nichiyā


     Text 1 Graceful Lord Gaurā/nga is more enchanting than Kāmadeva. Glistening Vaiṣ/nava tilaka adorns His forheead.
     Text 2 He wears glorious trikaccha garments. His hair is curly. His two eyes are naturally restless.
     Text 3 Manifesting a very slender form, Lord Ananta has become His white sacred-thread.
     Text 4 On His lips rest betelnuts and a smile. Vṛndāvana dāsa worships Him.



Part 43 Yadunatha dasa

Song 1 (Dhanasi-raga)

Text 1 aparupa canda         udaya nadiya-pure
timira na rahe tri-bhubane
abanite akhila      jibera soka nasala
nigama nigudha prema-dane
Text 2 (Refrain) are mora gauranga sundara raya
bhakata hrdaya kumuda parakasala akincana jibera upaya
Text 3 sesa sankara          narada caturanana
nirabadhi yaṅra guna gaya
so pahum nirupama        nija guna suna-ite
anande dharani lotaya
Text 4 aruna-nayane          baruna-alaya
bahahe prema-sudha-jala
yadunatha-dasa bale      jibera karama-phale
pasabe so mukutara phala

Text 1 A wonderful moon has rise in the towns of Nadiya. The  great darkness cannot stay in the three worlds. On receiving the  gift of ecstatic spiritual love, a gift hidden even from the  Vedas, every soul on this earth finds that all his troubles are  now destroyed.
     Text 2 (Refrain) O my Gaurangasundara Raya! He is the  blossoming lotus in the devotees' hearts. He has the solution to  every poor soul's problems.
     Text 3 Sesa, Siva, Narada, and Brahma sing His glories  without stop. Hearing His own glories, peerless Lord Gauranga  rolls in ecstasy on the ground.
     Text 4 Oceans of nectar tears of love stream from His reddened  eyes. Yadunatha dasa says: The fruits of the fallens souls'  past deeds have now become transformed into hosts of pearls.

Song 2 (Kedara-raga)

Text 1 gaura gadadhara duhum tanu
aparupa prema-bithara
duhum duhum harase       parase yaba bilasaye
ami\Ya barakhe anibara
Text 2 (Refrain) dekha dekha aparupa duhum jana leha
ko achu bhaba       premamaya caturali
majiya pa-oba seha
Text 3 kare kare nayane      yo-i madhuri
so saba ki bujhaba hama
aparupa rupa heri        tanu camaka-ita
akhila bhubane anupama
Text 4 ami\Ya putali kiye       rasamaya murati
kiye duhum prema akara
hera-ite jaga-jana       tanu mana bhulaya
yadu kiye pa-oba para


