Folio Archives
Song 0 Maṅgalācaraṇa

Text 1 advaita-prakaṭī-kṛto narahari-preṣṭhaḥ svarūpa-priyo
     nityānanda-sakhaḥ sanātana-gatiḥ śrī-rūpa-hṛt-ketanaḥ
lakṣmī-prāṇa-patir gadādhara-rasollāsī jagannātha-bhūḥ
     sāṅgopāṅga-sa-pārṣadaḥ sa dayatāṁ devaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ

Text 2 ājānu-lambita-bhujau kanakāvadātau
     saṅkirtanaika-pitarau kamalāyatākṣau
viśvambharau dvija-varau yuga-dharma-pālau
     vande jagat-priyakarau karuṇāvatārau

Text 3 heloddhūlita-khedayā visadayā pronmīla-dāmodayā
     samyac-chāstra-vivadayā rasadayā cittārpitonmādayā
śaśvad-bhakti-vinodayā samadayā mādhurya-maryādayā
     śrī-caitanya dayā-nidhe tava dayā bhūyād amandodayā


     Text 1 May Śacī's son, whom Advaita Acārya brought to this world, who is most dear to Narahari Ṭhākura, who is dear to Svarūpa Dāmodara, who is Lord Nityānanda's friend, who is ther goal of Sanātana Gosvāmī's life, who makes His home in Rūpa Gosvāmī's heart, who is the goal of Lakṣmīpriya's every breath, who is the nectar that delights Gadādhara Paṇḍita, who was born from Jagannātha Miśra, who is surrounded by His many associates, and who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, be merciful to us.
     Text 2 I offer my respectful obeisances to the two fathers of the saṅkīrtana movement, whose long arms reach to Their knees, who are splendid like gold, whose large eyes are lotus flowers, who are the maintainers of the worlds, the best of the brahmanas, and the protectors of the yuga-dharma (the religion of the age), and who bring happiness to the people of the world, and who have come to this place because They are very merciful.
     Text 3 O ocean of mercy, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu! Let there be an awakening of Your auspicious mercy, which easily drives away all kinds of material lamentation. By Your mercy, everything is madepure and blissful. It awakens transcendental bliss and covers all gross material pleasures. By Your auspicious mercy, quarrels and disagreements arising from different scriptures are vanquished. Your auspicious mercy causes the heart to jubilate by pouring forth transcendental mellows. Your mercy always stimulates devotional service, which is full of joy. You are always glorifying the conjugal love of God. May transcendental bliss be awakened in my heart by Your causeless mercy.*


Song 1  Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Kedāra-rāga)

Text 1 (Refrain) dekha dekha soi mūratimaya leha
kāñcana-kānti       sudhā jini madhurima
          nayana caṣaka bhari leha
Text 2 śyāmala varaṇa          madhura-rasa auṣadhi
          pūraba yo gokula māha
upajala jagata      yuvati umatāola
          yo saurabha parabāha
Text 3 yo rasa baraja-       gaurī-kuca-maṇḍala-
          maṇḍana-bara kari rākhi
te bhela gaura      gauḍa aba āola
          prakaṭa prema-suraśākhī
Text 4 sakala-bhubana-sukha       kīrtana-sampada
          matta rahala dina-rāti
bhaba-daba kon      kon kali-kalmaṣa
          yāṇhā hari-vallabha bhāti


     Text 1 (Refrain) Look! Look at His glorious form! Filling the cups of your eyes, drink the sweetness of the nectar of This form effulgent like gold!
     Text 2 In ancient times He was like a glorious moon shining in the land of Gokula. He had a dark complexion. He was filled with the nectar of sweetness. All the universes were born from Him. He was the passionate lover of the teenage gopīs. He was like a swiftly flowing stream of the sweetest fragrance.
     Text 3 In ancient times He was like an ornament on the fair vraja-gopīs' breasts. That is why He now has a fair complexion. Descending to the land of West Bengal, He has become a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree of spiritual love.
     Text 4 He fills all the worlds with bliss. He is rich with the wealth of saṅkīrtana. Day and night He is wild with ecstasy. Where is the blazing forest fire of birth and death now? Where are the sins of Kali-yuga now? Now He stands before Hari-vallabha (Viśvanātha Cakravartī).


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandasya (of Lord Nityānanda) (Kedāra-rāga, Gandhāra-rāga)

Text 1 (Refrain) āre mora nitāi se nāyara
saṁsāra-tāpita      jībera jībana
          nitāi mora sukhera sāyara
Text 2 abanī-maṇḍale      āila nitāi
          dhari abadhūta-beśa
padmābatī-nandana      basu jāhnabāra jībana
          caitanya-līlāya biśeṣa
Text 3 rāma abatāre        anuja āchila
          lakṣmāna baliya nāma
kṛṣṇa abatāre       gokula-bihāre
          jyeṣṭha bhāi balarāma
Text 4 gaura abatāre        nadīyā-bihāre
          nitāi baliyā nāma
kali-andha-kūpe         paḍiyā bipāke
          ḍāke dvija gaṅga-rāma


     Text 1 (Refrain) Ah! Lord Nitāi is my master. He is the life of the souls tormented by this world of birth and death. My Lord Nitāi is an ocean of bliss.
     Text 2 Accepting the garments of an avadhuta, Lord Nitai came to this earth. He became the delight of Padmāvatī and the life of Vasu Jāhnava. He enjoyed glorious pastimes with Lord Caitanya.
     Text 3 When Lord Rāmacandra descended to this world, Nitāi became His younger brother, then His name was Laksmana. When Lord Kṛṣṇa descended to this world and enjoyed pastimes in Gokula, Nitāi became His elder brother Balarāma.
     Text 4 When Lord Gaura descended to this world and enjoyed pastimes in Nadīyā, Nitāi was known by the name Nitāi. Dvija Gaṅgā-rāma, who has fallen into the blind well of Kali-yuga and who suffers greatly, now calls out to Lord Nitāi.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Caitanya) (Deśāga-rāga)

Text 1 kundana kanayā kalebara-kānti
prati aṅge abirala pulakako pānti
Text 2 prema-bhare ḍhara ḍhara locana cāya
katahuṁ mandākinī tanhi bahi yāya
Text 3 dekha dekha gaura guṇa-maṇi
karuṇāya ko bihi milāyala āni
Text 4 japi japāye madhura nija nāma
gā-i gāoyaye āpana guṇa-gāma
Text 5 nāci nācāoye badhira jaḍa andha
katihuṁ nā pekhoṁ aichana parabandha
Text 6 āpahiṁ bhori bhubana karu bhora
nija para nāhi sabāre de-i kora
Text 7 bhāsala preme akhila nara-nārī
gobinda dāsa kahe yāṅa balihāri


     Text 1 His body is effulgent like gold. On His every limb the hairs stand erect in ecstasy.
     Text 2 A celestial Gaṅgā of tears of ecstatic love flows from His eyes.
     Text 3 Look! Look at Lord Gaura! Who gave Him transcendental compassion? Who placed on Him the jewel ornaments of all virtues?
     Text 4 He sweetly chants His own holy names. He makes others chant also. He sings songs describing His own glories. He makes others sing those songs also.
     Text 5 He dances. He makes the deaf, dumb, and blind dance also. I do not see any way these activities may be explained.
     Text 6 He is overwhelmed with bliss. He makes all the worlds also become overwhelmed with bliss. Overwhelmed, no one knows who he is or who other persons are.
     Text 7 The men and women of this world now swim and float in an ocean of divine love. Govinda dāsa says: I surrender my self and my everything to Lord Gaura.


Song 2 Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānanda) (Dhanaśī-rāga)

Text 1 cale nitāi prema-bhare         diga ṭhalamala kare
          pada-bhare abani dolaya
ādha ādha kathā kaya       mukhera bāhira naya
          nija pāriṣade guṇa gāya
Text 2 (Refrain) dekha bhā-i abanī-maṇḍale nityānanda
bhāiyāra mukha heri bāḍhaye ānanda
Text 3 paridhāna nīla dhaṭhī       āṇṭhani nā rahe kaṭi
          antarbhābe bāhya nāhi jāne
a\ṅga heli duli cale         gaura gauira sadā bale
          niśī niśī āba nāhi jāne
Text 4 yuge yuge rāma       sujana-pratipālaka
          pāṣaṇḍīra karite bināśa
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanyacandra      ṭhākura śrī-nityānanda
          guṇa gāya bṛndābana dāsa


     Text 1 Overcome with ecstatic love, Lord Nitāi walks. The weight of His footsteps makes the ground sway to and fro. The directions tremble. Half-spoken words come from His mouth. His associates sing His glories.
     Text 2 (Refrain) O my brother, look at Lord Nityānanda as He walks in the circle of the earth. Gazing at His brother's faces, He becomes filled with bliss.
     Text 3 He wears blue garments. The sash is no longer wrapped about His waist. Overcome with ecstatic love, He knows nothing of the external world. His body has fallen into the dust. “Gaura! Gaura!", He calls out again and again. He does not know whether it is day or night.
     Text 4 Yuga after yuga He is Balarāma. He protects the saintly devotees and destroys the blasphemers. Vṛndāvana dāsa thus sings the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanyacandra and Ṭhākura Śrī Nityānanda.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Varāḍī-rāga)

Text 1 ābeśe abaśa aṅga dhīre dhīre cale
bhāba-bhare gara gara āṅkhi nāhi mele
Text 2 pūrata carita yata biparīti-kāhinī
śuni pahuṁ mūrachita loṭāya dharaṇī
Text 3 patita heriyā kānde nāhi bāndhe thira
kata śata dhārā bahe nayanera nīra
Text 4 nāce pahuṁ rasika sujāna
yāra guṇe darabaye dāru pāṣāṇa
Text 5 pulake maṇḍita śrī-bhuja-yuga tuli
loliyā loliyā paḍe hari hari bali
Text 6 kulabatī jhure mane jhure duṭi āṅkhi
jhuriyā jhuriyā kānde banera paśu pākhī
Text 7 yāra bhābe gṛha-bāsī chāḍe gṛha-sukha
balarāma dāsa sabe e rase bimukha


     Text 1 His limbs overcome with ecstasy, He slowly slowly walked. Overcome with ecstasy, His eyes did not open.
     Text 2 Hearing the wonderful narrations of the pastimes He enjoyed in ancient times, the Lord rolled on the ground and fell unconscious. 
     Text 3 Seeing the fallen conditioned souls, He wept. He would not be still. How many hundreds of flooding rivers of tears flowed from His eyes?
     Text 4 Tasting the nectar of ecstatic love, He danced. His glories made stones and wood melt with ecstasy.
     Text 5 He raised His garceful arms, arms decorated with pores bearing hairs erect in ecstasy. He chanted "Hari! Hari!" He fell and rolled on the ground.
     Text 6 In their hearts the saintly ladies wept. Tears fell from their eyes. Even the forest birds and beasts wept and wept.
     Text 7 Even though He was a householder living at home, He had turned away from ordinary household happiness. Balarāma dāsa also has turned his face away from the so-called nectar of any kind of material happiness.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Dhanaśī-rāga)

Text 1 preme matta mahā-balī         cale nitā-i diga dali
          dharaṇī dharite nāre bhārā
aṅga-=bhaṅgī sundara       gati ati manthara
          ki chāra kuñjara mātoyārā
Text 2 preme pulakita tanu       kanayā-kadamba janu
          prema-dhārā bahe duṭi āṅkhe
nāce gāya gorā-guṇe       pūraba paḍeche mane
          bhā-iyā bhā-iyā bali ḍāke
Text 3 huhuṅkāra mālasāṭe         keśari-garaba ṭuṭe
          śuni buka phāṭi mare pāṣaṇḍī jana
naguḍa nāhika sāthe        aruṇa kuñja hāte
          haladhara mahā-bīra bānā
Text 4 kebala patita-bandhu       raṅkera-ratana sindhu
          andhera locana parakāśa
patitera abaśeṣe      rahi gela gupta dāse
          puna pahu nā kaila talāsa


     Text 1 Wild with ecstatic love, the powerful Lord walks from one place to another. The earth has no power to bear the weight of His steps. His bending limbs are graceful. He walks very slowly. The graceful motions of a drunken elephant are worthless like ashes compared to His gracefulness.
     Text 2 The hairs of His body standing erect in ecstasy, He has become like a golden kadamba tree. Flooding rivers of tears flow from His two eyes. Singing of Lord Gaura's glories, He dances. He calls out, "O brothers! O brothers!" 
     Text 3 Slapping His arms, He makes a great sound. His roar rips apart the lions' pride. Hearing His roar, the blasphemers feel their hearts break. A staff is at His side. A red lotus is in His hand. He bears all the marks the the great hero Balarāma.
     Text 4 For the fallen He the only friend. For the poor and destitute He is an ocean of jewels. For the blind He is the eyes' power to see. Not looking for any other master, most fallen Gupta dāsa follows Him.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Kedāra-rāga)

Text 1 biśvambhara-mūrti yena madana-samāna
dibya gandha-mālya dibya bāsa paridhāna
Text 2 ki chāra kanaka-jyoti se dehera āge
se badana dekhite cāndera sādha lāge
Text 3 se danta dekhite kothā mukutāra dāma
se keśa-bandhana dekhi nā rahe geyāna
Text 4 dekhite āyata du-i aruṇa nayana
āra ki kamala āche hena haya jñāna 
Text 5 se ājānu bhuja dui hṛdaya su-pīna
taṅhi śobhe śubhra yajña-sūtra ati kṣīṇa
Text 6 lalāṭe bicitra ūrdhva tilaka sundara
abaraṇa bine sarba aṅga manohara
Text 7 kiba haya koṭi maṇi se nakha cāhite
se hāsa dekhite kibā karaye amṛte
Text 8 śrī kṛṣṇa-caitanya nityānandacānda jāna
vṛndāvana dāsa tachu pada-yuge gāna


     Text 1 Viśvambhara's form is splendid like Kāmadeva's. His fragrant flower-garland is splendid. His garments are splendid.
     Text 2 Compared to the splendor of His form, the splendor of gold is worthless like a pile of ashes. Even the moon is ashamed to gaze on His face.
     Text 3 How can the garland of flower buds have tha audacity to gaze on His glorious teeth? Seeing His glorious hair, they cannot remain conscious.
     Text 4 Gazing at His reddish eyes, how can the lotus flowers remain conscious?
     Text 5 His two arms reach to His knees. His chest is broad. His very slender sacred-thread is glorious.
     Text 6 On His forehead is wonderful graceful Vaiṣṇava tilakas. Even without ornaments His handsome limbs charm every heart.
     Text 7 Millions of jewels gaze at His fingernails and toenails. Nectar personified gazes at His smile.
     Text 8 Vṛndāvana dāsa thus sings the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya and Śrī Nityānandacandra.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (the same rāga)

Text 1 nitā-i mora jībana-dhana nitā-i mora jāti
nitā-i bihane mora āra nāhi gati
Text 2 saṁsāra-mukhera sukhe diyā mene chā-i
nagare māgiyā khāba gā-iba nitā-i
Text 3 ye deśe nitā-i nā-i se deśe na yāba
nitā-i bimukha janāra mukha nā heriba
Text 4 gaṅgā yāra pada-jala hara śire dhare
hena nitā-i nā bhajiyā dukha pāñā more
Text 5 locana bale āmāra nitā-i yebā nāhi māne
anala jvāliyā diyā tāra mājha mukha khāne


     Text 1 Lord Nitāi is the treasure of my life. Nitāi is my family. In my life I have no goal but Nitāi. 
     Text 2 To my heart the best of material pleasures is worthless like a pile of ashes. I will beg alms in the town. That is how I will eat. I will sing the name of Lord Nitāi. 
     Text 3 I will not go to any country where Lord Nitāi does not stay. I will not look at the face of a person averse to Lord Nitāi.
     Text 4 A person may so saintly the water that has washed his feet becomes like the holy Gaṅgā Lord Śiva places on his own head. But if he does not worship Lord Nitāi, that person only suffers and perishes at the end.
     Text 5 Locana dāsa says: No one is like my Nitāi. This I know. Even if I burn in flames I pray that Lord Nitāi's holy name shall remain always in my mouth.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Suha-i Deśāga-rāga)

Text 1 ki herinu ogo sa-i bidagadha-rāja
bhakata-kalapataru nabadwīpa mājha
Text 2 biparītira śākhā saba anurāga-pāte
kusuma ārati tāhe jagata mohite 
Text 3 niramala prema-phala phale sarba-kāla
eka phale naba rasa jharaye apāra
Text 4 bhakata cātaka pika śuka ali haṁsa
nirabadhi bilasaye rasa paraśaṁsa
Text 5 sthira cara sura nara yāra chāyā poṣe
bāsudeba bañcita āpana karma-doṣe


     Text 1 Ah! What did I see? In the town of Navadvīpa I saw the king of the wise. I saw the kalpa-taru tree of the devotees.
     Text 2 That tree had branches of devotion, leaves of spiritual love, and flowers of bliss. It enchanted the entire world.
     Text 3 It bore fruits of pure ecstatic spiritual love. It bore them at every moment. From those fruits flowed a shoreless ocean of ever-new sweet nectar.
     Text 4 The cranes, cuckoos, parrots, bees, and swans that are the devotees always glorify that tree.
     Text 5 The demigods, the human beings, and all the moving and unmoving beings stay in the shade of the tree and are nourished by its fruits. Only Vāsudeva dāsa, because of his past evil deeds, is cheated of tasting those fruits.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Kāmoda-rāga)

Text 1 bhakati-ratana-khani       ughāḍiyā prema-maṇi
          nija guṇa soṇāya muḍiyā
uttama adhama nā-i           yāre dekhe tāra tāṅ-i
          dāna kare jagata juḍiyā
Text 2 śuniyā nitāira guṇa        kemana karaye mana
          tāhā ki kahite pāri bhā-i
lākhe lākhe haya mukha           tabe se manera sukha
          nitāi-candera guṇa gāya
Text 3 emana dayāra ṭhāṅ-i          kothā-o śuniyā nā-i
          āchuka dekhāra kāja dūre
(yāra) nāme-i ānandamaya          sakala bhubana haya
          tāra lāgi kebā nāhi jhure

Text 4 pāṣāṇa samāna hiya        seho yāya milā-iyā
          yāra guṇa gā-ite śunite
kahe ghanaśyāma dāsa       yāra nāhi biśoyāsa
          se-i se pāṣaṇḍī abanīta


     Text 1 He opened the mine bearing the jewels of devotional service. He gathered the jewels of ecstatic spiritual love. He added the gold of His own spiritual virtues. He did not see that one person was higher an another was lower. He gave these jewels and gold to every person. He filled the world with cooling bliss.
     Text 2 What does my heart feel now that I have heard of Lord Nitāi's glories? O my brother, how can I describe it? I pray that I may have millions and millions of mouths. Then my heart will be happy. Then I be able to sing the glories of Lord Nitāicandra.
     Text 3 I have heard that Lord Nitāi has given His mercy to everyone. Someone I have not yet attained it. It stays far away from me. By chanting Lored Nitāi's holy names the whole world is now filled with bliss. Why, then, do tears of bliss not stream from my eyes?
     Text 4 Even though I have met Lord Nitāi, and even though I hear and chant His glories, my heart remains like stone. Ghanaśyāma says: It must be that i have no faith in Lord Nitāi. I am the greatest offender on the earth.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Paṭha-mañjarī-rāga)

Text 1 gobindera aṅge pahuṁ nija aṅga diyā
gāna bṛndābana-guṇa ānandita haiyā
Text 2 ananta anaṅga jini dehera balani
mukha-cānda ki kahiba kahite nā jāni
Text 3 nācena gaurāṅgacānda gadādhara-rase
gadādhara nāce pahuṁ gaurāṅga-bilāse
Text 4 tri-bhubana darabita dampati-rase
murāri bañcita bhela nija māyā-doṣe


     Text 1 The Lord leans on Govinda dāsa's body. Filled with bliss, He sings the glories of Vṛndāvana.
     Text 2 The Lord's body defeats numberless Kāmadevas. How can I describe the moon of His face? I do not know what to say.
     Text 3 As Gadādhara enjoys nectar pastimes, Lord Gaurāṅgacandra dances. As Lord Gaurāṅga enjoys nectar pastimes, Gadādhara dances. 
     Text 4 The three worlds melt in the nectar of ecstatic love for the divine couple. Only Murāri does not melt. He is cheated because he is caught in the illusions of māyā.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānanda) (Gāndhāra-rāga)

Text 1 emana nitā-i kothā-o dekhi nā-i
abadhūta-beśa dhari         jībe dila nāma hari
          hāse kānde nāce āre bhā-i
Text 2 adwaitera saṅge raṅga         dharaṇa nā yāya aṅga
          gorā-preme gaḍā tanu khāni
ḍaliyā ḍaliyā cale        bāhu tuli hari bale
          du nayane bahe nitā-ira pāni
Text 3 kapāle tilaka śobhe      kuṭila kuntala lole
          guñjāra āṇṭhuni cūḍā tāya
keśari jiniyā kaṭi         kaṭi-taṭe nīla dhaṭī
          bājana nūpura rāṅgā pāya
Text 4 ke kaha nitā-ira guṇa         jība dekhi sa-karuṇa
          hari-nāme jagata tārila
madana-madete andha      biṣaye harala bandha
          hena nitā-i bhajite nā pā-ila


     Text 1 I have never seen anyone like Nitāi.  Wearing the garments of an avadhūta, He gives to the people the holy names of Lord Kṛṣṇa. O my brothers, He laughs, weeps, and dances.
     Text 2 He enjoys pastimes with Advaita Acārya. Peacefulness is no longer present in His body. His body is overcome with ecstatic love for Lord Gaura. Staggering and staggering, He walks. Raising His arms, He calls out, "Hari!" Tears flow from Lord Nitāi's eyes.
     Text 3 Tilaka gracefully adorns His forehead. His curly hair moves to and fro. He wears a crown of guñjā. His waist defeats the lion's waist. Blue garments are tied about His waist. On His reddish feet anklets jangle.
     Text 4 Who can describe the glories of Lord Nitāi? When He sees the conditioned souls, He becomes filled with compassion. Giving them the holy names of Lord Hari, He has delivered all the worlds. Only persons bound by the ropes of material sense pleasures and blinded by lusty desires have no power to worship Lord Nitāi.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Suha-i-rāga)

Text 1 sahaja-i kāñcana gorā
madana-manohara bayasa kiśorā
Text 2 tāhe dharu naṭa-bara-beśa
prati aṅge taraṅgita rasera ābeśa
Text 3 nācata nabadwīpa-cānda
jaga-jana nimagana prema-ānanda
Text 4 bipula pulaka abalambe
bikaśita bhela kiye bhāba-kadambe
Text 5 nayane galaye ghana lora
kṣaṇe hāse kṣaṇe kānde bhābe bibhora 
Text 6 rasa-bhare gada gada bola
caraṇa-paraśe kṣiti ānanda-hilola
Text 7 pūrala jaga-jana-āśa
kebala bañcita gobinda dāsa


     Text 1 He is glorious like gold. Youthful and more charming than Kāmadeva, He wears a dancer's garments. His every limb is plunged in great waves of nectar.
     Text 2 He who is the moon of Navadvīpa dances. He plunges the people of the world into the bliss of spiritual love.
     Text 3 The hairs of His body stand erect. Has He noe become like a blooming kadamba tree?
     Text 4 Tears stream from His eyes. One moment He laughs and the next moment He weeps. He is overcome with spiritual love.
     Text 5 Overcome by tasting nectar, He speaks broken syllables in a choked voice. The touch of His feet makes the world tremble in waves of bliss.
     Text 6 He fulfills the desires of every person in the world. Only Govinda dāsa is cheated. His desire is not fulfilled.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Beloyāra-rāga)

Text 1 (Refrain) jaya jaga-tāraṇa kāraṇa-dhāma
ānanda-kānda nityānanda nāma
Text 2 ḍagamaga-locana      kamala ḍhula-ota
          sahaja athira gati jini mātoyāra
bhāyā abhirāma bali        ghana ghana phukara-i
          gaura-prema-bhare cala-i nā pāra
Text 3 gada gada madhura      madhura bacanāmṛta
          lahu lahu hāsa bikaśita gaṇḍa
pāṣaṇḍa-khaṇḍana       śrī-bhuja maṇḍana
          kanaka-khacita abalambana-daṇḍa
Text 4 kali-yuga-kāla       bhujaṅgama-saṅgama
          dagadhala sthābara jaṅgama dekhi
jaga bhari prema-        sudhā-rasa barikhata
          gobinda dāsako kāhe upekhi


     Text 1 (Refrain) Glory, glory to the deliverer of the worlds, tha cause of all causes, the root of all bliss, the master who bears the name Nityānanda!
     Text 2 His tear-filled eyes close sleepily. His movements are agitated. It is as if He is intoxicated. Again and again He calls out, "Friend Abhirāma!" Overcome with love for Lord Gaura, He now has no power even to move.
     Text 3 In a choked voice He speaks sweet broken syllables. His words are sweet like nectar. His cheeks blossom in sweet sweet smiles and laughter. He breaks the blasphemers into pieces. He graceful arms are decorated with golden ornaments. He holds a staff.
     Text 4 Seeing the moving moving and unmoving beings burning in the grip of the snake of Kali-yuga, He showers the nectar of spiritual love on all the worlds. Govinda dāsa asks: Whom should I spurn and whom should I accept?


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Śrī-rāga)

Text 1 aparūpa hema-maṇi bhāsa
akhila bhubana parakāśa
Text 2 caudike pāriṣada-tārā
dūra karu kali-āndhiyāra
Text 3 (Refrain) abhinaba gorā dwija-rāja
uyala nabadwīpa mājha
Text 4 pulakita sthira-cara-jāti
prema-amiyā-rase māti
Text 5 keha bidhu-ma.ni sama kānde
keha hāse kumudinī chānde
Text 6 gobinda dāsa cakora
ruci-laba lāgi bibhora


     Text 1 He shines like a wonderful topaz. He lights up all the worlds.
     Text 2 In the four directions are the glistening stars of His personal associates. He throws far awaye the blinding darkness of Kali-yuga.
     Text 3 (Refrain) Lord Gaura, the eternally young king of the brāhmaṇas, is manifest in Navadvīpa.
     Text 4 The moving and unmoving beings are all in ecstasy, the hairs of their bodies now standing erect. They have become wild, intoxicated by tasting the sweet nectar of pure spiritual love.
     Text 5 Some weep like candrakānta jewels. Some laugh like blossoming lotus flowers.
     Text 6 Govinda dāsa has become like a cakora bird. Tasting a single ray of the effulgent glories of these pastimes, he is overcome.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Deśāga-rāga)

Text 1 sahaje nitāicāndera rīta
dekhi unamata jagata-cita
Text 2 abanī kampita nitāi-bhare
bhāyā bhāyā bale gambhīra-sware
Text 3 gaura balite śaura-hīna
kānde bhā-iyāra bhābe rajanī dina
Text 4 nitāi-caraṇe ye kare āśa
bṛndābana tāra dāsera dāsa


     Text 1 Seeing Lord Nitāicandra's pastimes, the people of the world feel their hearts become wild with bliss.
     Text 2 The earth trembles from the weight of Nitāi's footsteps. "Brother! Brother!", Nitāi calls in a deep voice.
     Text 3 "Gaura!" He calls out. Overcome by feelings of separation from Lord Kṛṣṇa, Nitāi weeps day and night.
     Text 4 Vṛndāvana dāsa is the servant of the servant of anyone who yearns to attain Lord Nitāi's feet.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Bālā-rāga)

Text 1 śyāmara gaura-baraṇa eka deha
pāmara jana ithe karaye sandeha
Text 2 saurabha āgora mūrati rasa-sāra
pākala bhela yaiche phala sahakāra
Text 3 gopa-janama puna dwija abatāra
nigama nā pā-o-i nigūḍha bihāra
Text 4 prakaṭa karala hari-nāma-bākhāna
nārī-purukha-mukhe nā śuniye āna
Text 5 tripura caraṇa-kamala-madhu pāna
sarasa saṅgīta kabi-rañjana jāna


     Text 1 A dark form and a fair form are now manifest in one body. The fools and sinners are now filled with doubt.
     Text 2 That form is filled with a sweet fragrance. It is fragrant like a tree bearing ripe mangoes.
     Text 3 In His previous birth He was a gopa. Now He descends to this world as a brāhmaṇa. Even the scriptures cannot touch His secret pastimes.
     Text 4 He openly preaches the glories of chanting Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. Now these holy names alone and nothing else is heard from the mouths of the men and women of this world.
     Text 5 The three worlds now taste the nectar at this person's lotus feet. Kavirañjana sings this sweet song.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Śrī-rāga)

Text 1 pūrabe gobardhana         dharala anuja yāra
          jaga-jane bale balarāma
ebe se caitanya-saṅge        ā-ila kīrtana raṅge
          ānande nityānanda nāma
Text 2 parama udāra         karuṇāmaya bigraha
          bhūbana-maṅgala guṇa-dhāma
gaura-pirīti-rase       kaṭira basana khase
          abatāra ati anupāma
Text 3 nācata gā-ota       hari hari bolata
          abirata gaura-gopāla
hāsa prakāśa          milita madhurādhare
          bolata parama rasāla
Text 4 rāma dāsera pahuṁ       sundara bigraha
          gaurī-dāsa āna nāhi jāne
akhila loka yata         iha rase unamata
          jñāna dāse nitā-i-guṇa gāne


     Text 1 He who in ancient times the world called by the name Balarāma, and whose younger brother lifted Govardhana Hill, has now come to taste the bliss of saṅkīrtana with Lord Caitanya. Now His name is Nityānanda.
     Text 2 He is supremely generous. His body is filled with mercy. He brings auspiciousness to all the worlds. He is the abode of all virtues. He is filled with the nectar of love for Lord Gaura. A splendid garment rests upon His waist. Among the avatāras He has no equal.
     Text 3 He sings and dances. He calls out, "Hari! Hari!" At every moment He is rapt in thinking of Lord Gaura and Lord Gopāla. A smile rests upon His sweet lips. He speaks words that are sublimely sweet.
     Text 4 He is the master of Rāma dāsa. Gaurī dāsa meditates on His glorious form and nothing else. He has made all the worlds wild with the taste of nectar. Jñāna dāsa thus sings the glories of Lord Nitāi.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Dhānaśī-rāga)

Text 1 bhābe tarala tanu         anupama hema re
          aha-niśi nija rase bhora
nayana-yugala       prema-rase ḍhara ḍhara re
          bhuja tuli hari hari bola
Text 2 nācata gaura-        kiśora mora pahuṁ re
          abhinaba nabadwīpa-cānda
bhāba-bhare helana          bhāba-bhare dolana
          prati aṅga manamatha phānda
Text 3 jitala nīpa phula         pulaka mukula re
          prati aṅge aṅge bithāri
rasa-bhare gara gara          cala-i khala-i re
          gobinda dāsa balihāri


     Text 1 He is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. His form is more glorious than gold. Day and night He is overcome by tasting the nectar of love for a person who is actually His own Self. Nectar tears of love flow from His eyes. Raising His arms, He chants, "Hari! Hari!"
     Text 2 The fair youth dances. He is the moon of Navadvīpa. He is my master. He is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. He trembles with ecstatic love. His every limb is a trap set by Kāmadeva. 
     Text 3 The hairs standing erect on His every limb defeat the blossoming nīpa flowers. He is overcome by tasting the sweet nectar of spiritual love. Govinda dāsa sings this song of His glories.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Śrī-rāga)

Text 1 āre āre mora nitā-i-cānda
ghare ghare dila premera phānda
Text 2 tāpita akhila sakala jane
siñcila nitā-i nayana-koṇe
Text 3 apāra karuṇā gauḍa deśe
nāciyā bulena premera ābeśe
Text 4 ḍhulite ḍhulite kata nā bhāti
kamala caraṇe karaye gati
Text 5 kahe gada gada bhāyāra kathā
pūrala jale nayana rātā
Text 6 ārakata gaurasundara-tanu
pulaka kadamba-keśara janu
Text 7 bibidha bhūṣaṇa bhūṣita aṅge
bhakata mili gāya parama raṅge
Text 8 pade prema māge kānu dāsa
śuniyā karuṇā bāḍhala āśe


     Text 1 O! O, my Lord Nitāicānda! Going from house to house, Nitāicānda caught the people in the trap of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 2 From the corners of His eyes Lord Nitāi showered cooling glances on the people burning in the fires of material sufferings.
     Text 3 He made a shoreless ocean of mercy flood the land of Gauḍa. Overcome with ecstatic love, He wildly danced.
     Text 4 How many times did He not stumble and stumble as He walked with lotus feet?
     Text 5 He spoke broken words in a choked voice. Flooding rivers of tears flowed from His eyes.
     Text 6 The hairs on His fair body stood erect, hairs like kadamba filaments.
     Text 7 Many different ornaments adorned His limbs. Meeting with the devotees, He sang with great joy.
     Text 8 Hearing that He is very merciful, Kṛṣṇa dāsa falls at His feet and begs for some of His mercy.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Dhānaśī-rāga)

Text 1 bimala hema jini      tanu anupama re
          tāhe śobhe nānā phula-dāma
kadamba-keśara jini          ekaṭī pulaka re
          tāre mājhe bindu bindu ghāma 
Text 2 jini mada-māta hātī          gamana manthara ati
          bhābābeśe ḍhuli ḍhuli yāya
aruṇa-basana-chabi      jini prabhātera rabi
          gorā-aṅge laharī khelāya
Text 3 calite na pāre gorā-          cānda gosāñi re
          balite nā pāre ādha bola
bhābete ābeśa haiyā          hari hari bolā-iyā
          ā-canḍāle dhari de-i kola
Text 4 e sukha-sampada-kāle      gorā na bhajinu hele
          hena pade nā karinu āśa
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanyacandra      ṭhākura śrī-nityānanda
          guṇa gāya bṛndābana dāsa


     Text 1 His peerless form defeats the purest gold. His form is decorated with a garland of many kinds of flowers. His form is covered with hairs standing erect, hairs that defeat the filaments of kadamba flowers. His form is covered with drop after drop of perspirations.
     Text 2 His slow walking defeats the walking of intoxicated elephants. Overcome with ecstatic love, He staggers and staggers as He walks. His saffron garments defeat the rising sun. His fair limbs play in the waves of spiritual pastimes.
     Text 3 Overcome, Lord Gauracandra has no power to walk. Now He has no power to speak. Half words are all He speaks. Overcome with ecstatic love, He chants, "Hari! Hari!" Everyone, even the lowest caṇḍāla, He embraces in His arms.
     Text 4 Alas! At that blissful fortunate time I did not worship Lord Gaura. I did not yearn to attain His feet. In this way Vṛndāvana dāsa sings the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanyacandra and Ṭhākura Śrī Nityānanda.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Kāmoda-rāga)

Text 1 preme matta nityānanda         sahaje ānanda-kanda
          ḍhuliyā ḍhuliyā cali yāya
bhāyāra bhābete matta           jānena sakala tattwa
          hari bali abanī loṭāya
Text 2 (Refrain) nitā-ira gorā-preme gaḍā anukhāni
bhā-iyāra mukha heri        luliyā luliyā paḍe
          dhārā bahe siñcaye dharaṇī
Text 3 adwaita ānanda-kanda      heri nitā-ira mukha-canda
          huṅkāra pulaka śobhe tāya
hari hari bola bale      puna gaura gaura bale
          priya pāriṣade guṇa gāya
Text 4 golokera prema-banyā      abanī karala dhanyā
          atula apāra rasa-sindhu
mātila jagata bhari          nitā-i caitanya kari
          rāya ananta māge bindu


     Text 1 Lord Nityānanda is the root of bliss. Wild with the bliss of spiritual love, He staggers as He walks. He knows everything. He makes His brother-devotees wild with ecstatic love, He chants "Hari!", and rolls on the ground.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Lord Nitāi's form is filled with ecstatic love for Lord Gaura. Seeing the faces of His brother-devotees, He staggers and falls. The rivers of His tears flood the earth.
     Text 3 Lord advaita is the root of spiritual bliss. Seeing the moon of Lored Nitāi's face, Lord Advaita shouts in ecstasy. The hairs of His body stand erect. Again and again he chants, “Hari! Haribol!" Again and again he chants, "Gaura! Gaura!" He sings the glories of the dear devotees who are His personal associates.
     Text 4 To the earth He brought a flood of love from the spiritual world of Goloka. He brought a peerless, shoreless ocean of the nectar of spiritual love. Lord Nityānanda and Lord Caitanya made the whole universe wild with the ecstasy of spiritual love. Ananta Rāya begs for a drop of that ecstatic love.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Barāḍī-rāga)

Text 1 birale basiyā ekeśwara
hari-nāma jape nirantara
Text 2 saba-abatāra-śiromaṇi
akiñcana-jana-cintāmaṇi
Text 3 sugandhi candana māthā gāya
dhūli binu āna nāhi bhāya
Text 4 maṇimaya ratana bhūṣaṇa
swapane nā kare paraśana
Text 5 chāḍala lakhimī-bilāsa
kibā lāgi taru-tale bāsa
Text 6 chādala bana-mālā baṁśī
ebe daṇḍa dhariyā sannyāsī
Text 7 hāsa abhilāsa upekhi
kāndiyā phūlāya duṭī āṅkhi
Text 8 bibhūti kariyā prema-dhana
saṅge lañā saba akiñcana jana
Text 9 prema-jale kara-i sināna
kahe bāsu bidare parāṇa


     Text 1 Staying in a secluded place, the Supreme Personality of Godhead chants the holy names of Lord Kṛṣṇa without stop.
     Text 2 He is the crest jewel of all avatāras. He is the cintāmaṇi jewel of all sannyāsīs who have Kṛṣṇa as their only property. 
     Text 3 Fragrant sandal paste is nothing compared to the fragrance of His body. 
     Text 4 Even in their dreams, the most glorious jewel ornaments cannot touch the glory of His body.
     Text 5 He renounced His pastimes with Goddess Lakṣmī. Now He sits under a tree.
     Text 6 He put aside His flute and forest-garland. Grasping a daṇḍa, now He is a sannyāsī.
     Text 7 Turning aside from His pastimes of jests and laughter, now He weeps, tears streaming from the blossoming flowers of His eyes.
     Text 8 Now His only wealth is the treasure of pure spiritual love. Now He stays with penniless devotees, devotees who have Kṛṣṇa as their only treasure.
     Text 9 Now He makes a great shower of tears of spiritual love. Vāsu says: My life-breath is now split into pieces.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Pāhiḍā Gāndhāra-rāga)

Text 1 rūpe guṇe anupamā        lakṣmī-koṭi-manoramā
          braja-badhū ayuta ayuta
rāsa-keli-rasa-raṅge        bihare yāhāra saṅge
          so pahuṁ ki lāgi abadhūta
Text 2 e dukha kahiba kāra āge
sakala-nāgara-guru      rasera kalapa-taru
          kena nitā-i phirena bairāge
Text 3 saṅkarṣaṇa śeṣa yāya         aṁśa-kalā-abatāra
          anukṣaṇa goloke birāje
śiba-bihi-agocara       āgama nigama para
          kena nitā-i saṅkīrtana mājhe
Text 4 kṛṣṇera agraja nāma       mahā-prabhu balarāma
          kali-yuge śrī-nityānanda
gaura-rase nimagana      karā-ila jaga-jana
          dūre rahu balarāma manda


     Text 1 His handsomeness and virtues are without peer. He enchants the hearts of millions of goddesses of fortune. He enjoys nectar rāsa-dance pastimes with millions and millions of gopīs in Vraja. Why is this Lord now an avadhūta?
     Text 2 What shall I say first of my sad bewilderment? He is the guru of all playful heroes. He is a kalpa-taru tree of nectar. Why did Lord Nitāi accept sannyāsa? 
     Text 3 Śeṣa and Saṅkarṣaṇa are His aṁśa and kalā avatāras. At every moment he is gloriously manifest in the spiritual world of Goloka. Śiva and Brahmā cannot attain Him. Hew is beyond the touch of the Vedas. Why is Lord Nitāi now rapt in pastimes of saṅkīrtana?
     Text 4 He is Lord Kṛṣṇa's elder brother. His name is the great Lord Balarāma. But in Kali-yuga His name is Śrī Nityānanda. He has plunged all the people of the world in the nectar of ecstatic love for Lord Gaura. Only the fool Balarāma dāsa He has not plunged. Only Balarāma dāsa is left behind.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Suha-i-rāga)

Text 1 madana-mohana-rūpa gaurāṅga-sundara
lalāṭe tilaka śobhe ūrdhwa manohara
Text 2 tri-kaccha basana śobhe kuṭila kuntala
prakṛte nayana du-i parama cañcala
Text 3 śubhra yajña-sūtra śobhe beḍiyā śarīra
sūkṣma-rūpa ananta ye hana kalebare
Text 4 adhare tāmbūla hāse śrī-bhuja tuliyā
yāṅa bṛndābana dāsa se rūpa nichiyā


     Text 1 Lord Gaurāṅgasundara is fair and handsome. His form is more enchanting than the forms of hosts of Kāmadevas. Charming Vaiṣṇava tilaka graces His forehead.
     Text 2 He wears glorious garments. His hair is curly. His two eyes are very restless.
     Text 3 A glorious brāhmaṇa-thread encircles His form. That slender thread is like the body of Lord Ananta Himself. 
     Text 4 Betelnuts adorn His lips. He smiles. He raises His arms. His glorious form Vṛndāvana dāsa describes in this way.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Suha-i-rāga or Śrī-rāga)

Text 1 dekhare bhā-i prabala malla-rūpa dhārī
nāma nitā-i       bhāyā bali royata
          līlā bujha-i nā paṛi
Text 2 bhābe bighūrṇita        locana ḍhara ḍhara
          diga bidiga nāhi jāna
matta siṁha yena        garaje ghane ghana
          jaga māha kāhu nā māna
Text 3 līlā-rasa-maya      sundara bigraha
          ānande naṭana bilāsa
kali-mada-dalana         dolana gati manthara
          kīrtana karala prakāśa
Text 4 kaṭi-taṭe bibidha        baraṇa paṭa pahiraṇa
          malayaja lepana aṅge
jñāna dāsa kahe       bidhi āni milā-ola
          kali māha aichana raṅge


     Text 1 O my brother, please look! His form is that of a powerful wrestler. His name is Nitāi. He calls out to His brother-devtoees. I have no power to understand His pastimes.
     Text 2 He is overcome with ecstatic love. Tears stream from His rolling eyes. He does not know one direction from another. He roars like a lion. He thunders like a cloud. He is oblivious, not aware of anyone in the whole world. 
     Text 3 His pastimes are nectar. His form is handsome. He enjoys pastimes of joyful dancing. He rips into shreds the folly og Kali-yuga. He sways to and fro as He walks. He is rapt in pastimes of saṅkīrtana.
     Text 4 On His waist He wears garments of many colors. His limbs are anointed with sandal paste. Jñāna dāsa says: Destiny brought Him to the Kali-yuga. That is why this kind of ecstatic bliss is now present in Kali-yuga.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Dhānaśī-rāga)

Text 1 gorā dayāra abadhi guṇa-nidhi
suradhunī-tīre         nadīyā nagare
          biharaye nirabadhi
Text 2 bhuja-yuja āropiyā bhakatera kāndhe
cali yā-ite nā         pāre gorācānda
          hari hari bole kānde
Text 3 preme chala chala          nayana-yugala
          kata nadī bahe dhāre
pulake pūrala             gorā-kalebara
          dharaṇī dharite nāre
Text 4 saṅga pāriṣada         phire nirantara
          hari hari bola bale
sakhāya kāndhete        bhuja-yuga diyā
          helite dulite cale
Text 5 bhubana bhabiyā      prema ubhārala
          patita-pābana nāma
śuniyā bharasā        paramānandera
          manete nā laya āna


     Text 1 Lord Gaura possesses the highest summit of compassion. He is a great treasure-house of all virtues. In the towns of Nadīyā and on the Gaṅgā's banks He enjoys pastimes without stop.
     Text 2 His two arms He rests on a devotee's shoulders. He has no power to walk. Chanting "Hari! Hari!", He weeps.
     Text 3 How many flooding rivers of tears of love flow from His eyes? The earth has no power to hold up Lord Gaura's body now covered witâ hairs standing erect in ecstasy. 
     Text 4 Again and again going from one place to another with His associates, He chants, "Hari! Hari!" Resting His arms on a friend's shoulders, He trembles in ecstasy.
     Text 5 He fills the worlds with the sweet fragrance of ecstatic spiritual love. He is named Patita-pāvana (deliverer of the fallen). Hearing all this, Paramānanda places His trust and faith only in Lord Gaura and in in no one else.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Śrī rāga)

Text 1 āre bhā-i nitā-i āmāra dayāra abadhi
jībera karuṇā kari         deśe deśe phiri phiri
          prema-dhana yāce nirabadhi
Text 2 adwaitera saṅge raṅga         dharaṇe nā yāya aṅga
          gorā-preme gaḍhā tanu-khāni
ḍhuliyā ḍhuliyā cale           bahu tili hari bale
          du'-nayane bahe nitā-ira pāṇi 
Text 3 kapāle tilaka śobhe      kuṭila kuntala lole
          guñjāra āṇṭunī cūḍā tāya
keśarī jiniyā kaṭi        kaṭi-taṭe nīla dhaṭi
          bājana nūpura rāṅgā pāya
Text 4 bhubana mohana beśa       majā-ila saba deśa
          rasābeśe aṭṭa aṭṭa hāsa
prabhu mora nityānanda       kebala ānanda-kanda
          guṇa gāya bṛndābana dāsa


     Text 1 O my brothers, In my Lord Nitāi rests the highest limit of mercy. Compassionate on the fallen souls, He wandered from place to place, always begging the people to accept the great treasure of spiritual love.
     Text 2 In Lord Advaita's company He was so overcoem with ecstatic love for Lord Gaura, He could not even stand up. Staggering and falling as He walked, He raised His arms and chanted "Hari!" Tears streamed from His eyes.
     Text 3 Glorious tilaka decorated His forehead. His locks of curly hair swayed to and fro. He wore a crown of guñjā. A blue garment was wrapped about His waist, a waist that defeated the lion's slender waist. Anklets jangled on His reddish feet. 
     Text 4 His glorious appearance enchants all the worlds. He plunges all the worlds in the nectar of spiritual love. Overcome with ecstatic love, He loudly, loudly laughs. Lord Nityānanda is my master. He is the root of spiritual bliss. Vṛndāvana dāsa thus sings of His glories.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Dākṣiṇātya-rāga or Śrī-rāga)

Text 1 campaka-śoṇa-       kusuma kanakācala
          jitala gaura-tanu-lābaṇi re
unnata gīma        sīma nāhi anubhaba
          jaga-jana-mohana bhāṅani re
Text 2 (Refrain) jaya śaci-nandana tribhubana-bandana
kali-yuga-kāla-bhujaga-bhaya-khaṇḍana
Text 3 bipula-pulaka-kula-        ākula kalebara
          gara gara antara prema-bhare
lahu lahu hāsani         gada gada bhāṣaṇi
          kata mandākinī nayane jhare
Text 4 nija rase nācata          nayana ḍhulā-ota
          gā-ota kata kata bhakata meli
yo rase bhāsi      abaśa mahī-maṇḍala
          gobinda dāsa tahiṁ paraśa nā bheli


     Text 1 Lord Gaura's fair and handsome form defeats the campaka flowers and golden Mount Meru. His neck is long. His glories have no end. He enchants every heart in this world.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Glory to Śacī's son! The three worlds bow down before Him. He breaks into pieces the fear of black snake of Kali-yuga.
     Text 3 The hairs of His body stand erect in ecstasy. His heart is overcome with ecstatic love. Sweetly, sweetly He smiles. With a choked voice He speaks broken words. How many heavenly Gaṅgās of tears flow from His eyes?
     Text 4 Overcome by tasting the nectar of love for a person that is actually His own Self, He dances. His eyes are half-closed in ecstasy. How many singing devotees gather around Him? He floats in the nectar of spiritual love. He has made the circle of this world overcome with the ecstasy of spiritual love. Only Govinda dāsa has no power to touch that ecstasy of love.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Gāndhāra-rāga)

Text 1 nitā-i sundara       abanī ujora
          caraṇe nūpura bāje
gaura-aṁnga heri        pūraba soṅari
          yena bṛndābana mājhe
Text 2 (Refrain) nitā-ira nichani la-iyā mari
chāḍi bṛndābana        nikuñja-bhabana
          ati-durācāra-tārī
Text 3 basudhā jāhnabā         saṅgete la-iyā
          śītala caraṇa rāje
helāya tarila      e gīta-gobinda
          e tina lokera mājhe


     Text 1 The anklets on glorious Lord Nitāi's feet jangle as He walks on the earth. Seeing Lord Gaura's fair limbs, Lord Nitāi remembers the pastimes They two enjoyed in ancient times in the land of Vṛndāvana.
     Text 2 (Refrain) I pray that I may touch the dust of Lord Nitāi's feet when I die. Leaving the forest groves of Vṛndāvana, Lord Nitāi came to this place to save the sinners.
     Text 3 Standing with Vasudhā and Jāhnavā, with the touch of His glorious cooling feet He delivered this Gīta-govinda dāsa and all the three worlds.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Dhānaśī-rāga)

Text 1 tapata-kāñcana-          kānti kalebara
          unnata bhāṅara-bhaṅgī
karibara-kara jini            bāhura subalani
          bihi gaḍhala bahu raṅgī
Text 2 gorā-rūpa jaga-manohārī
āpana baidagadhi        bidhātā prakāśala
          badhite kulabatī nārī
Text 3 ā-pāda-mastaka      pulake pūrṇita
          preme chala chala āṅkhi
āpana guṇa śuni       āpahiṁ royata
          heri kāndaye paśu pākhī
Text 4 cānda-candrikā      kumuda mallikā
          jiniyā mṛdu manda hāsa
madhura bacane      amiyā-siñcane
          nichani ananta dāsa


     Text 1 His fair form is like molten gold. His dancing is like great waves in a whirlpool. His words defeat the sweetest words of the poets. His arms are graceful. Seeing Him, the creator Brahmā is filled with bliss.
     Text 2 Lord Gaura's fair form enchants every heart in this world. With His own power He created the creator Brahmā. Saintly women He makes stunned with spiritual bliss.
     Text 3 From His head to His feet the hairs of His body stand erect in ecstasy. Tears of loveflow from His eyes. Hearing His own glories, He is overwhelmed with love. Seeing Him, the birds and beasts weep with love.
     Text 4 His sweet and gentle smile defeats the moonlight, the jasmines, and the lotus flowers. His sweet words are a shower of nectar. Ananta dāsa describes His glories.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Kāmoda-rāga)

Text 1 khañjana-gañjana         calana manorama
          gati ati lalita suṭhāma
calata khalata puna      puna uṭhi garajata
          cāhani baṅka nayāna
Text 2 gaura gaura bali      ghana de-i karatāli
          kañja-nayane bahe lora
premet abaśa haiya      patitera nirakhiyā
          ā-isa ā-isa bali de-i kora
Text 3 hu-huṅkāra garajana        mālasāṭa puna puna
          kata kata bhāba-bithāra
pulake pūrala tanu      kadamba-keśara janu
          bhāyāra bhābete mātoyāra
Text 4 āgama-nigama-para         beda-bidhi-agocara
          tāhā kaila patitera dāna
kahe ātmārāma dāse        nā pā-ila kṛpā leśe
          rahi gela pāṣāṇa samāna


     Text 1 His graceful motions rebuke the graceful khañjana birds. Again and again He falls. Again and again He stands up. He makes a great roaring sound. He gazes with crooked eyes.
     Text 2 He chants "Gaura! Gaura!" in a voice like thunder. With karatālas He makes a great sound. Tears stream from His lotus eyes. His is overcome with spiritual love. When He sees the fallen sinners, He calls to them: "Come! Please come!" and He hugs them.
     Text 3 He loudly roars. He slaps His arms. How many, how many symptoms of ecstasy does He manifest? His body is flooded with hairs standing erect in ecstasy, hairs standing like kadamba filaments. He is wild with the ecstasy of love for the devotees, Ṝis brothers. 
     Text 4 He is beyond the touch of the Agamas and Nigamas. He is beyond the sight of the Vedas' rules. He gives a great gift to the fallen souls. Atmārāma dāsa says: I am hard like a rock. Only I have not attained even a small fragment of Lord Nitāi's mercy. 


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Deśāga-rāga)

Text 1 bhāba-bhare gara gara cita
kṣaṇe uṭhe kṣaṇe baise nā pāya sambita
Text 2 ati rase nāhi bāndhe theha
soṅari soṅari kānde pūraba seneha
Text 3 nāce pahuṁ gorā naṭa-rāja
i lāgi gokula-pati saṅkīrtana mājha
Text 4 priya-gadādhara-kare dhari
marama-kathāṭi kahe phukari phukari
Text 5 uga maga ānanda-hilole
luliyā luliyā paḍe paṇḍitera kole
Text 6 gorā-rase saba rasamaya
nā darabe balarāma-pāṣāṇa-hṛdaya


     Text 1 His heart is overcome with spiritual love. One moment He stands. The next moment He sits. Then He is no longer conscious.
     Text 2 He is overcome with the nectar of love. He is not peaceful. Remembering and remembering the persons He loved before, He weeps.
     Text 3 Lord Gaura dances. He is the king of dancers. Why has the king of Gokula entered this festival of saṅkīrtana?
     Text 4 Holding dear Gadādhara's hand, and weeping and weeping, He tells what is in His heart.
     Text 5 In waves of bliss He rises and plunges. Restlessly moving to and fro, He finally falls into Gadādhara Paṇḍita's arms.
     Text 6 The nectar of Lord Gaura is the sweetest of all nectar. Even so, the stone that is Balarāma dāsa's heart still does not melt with spiritual love.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Śrī-rāga)

Text 1 nitā-i guṇa-maṇi āmāra nitā-i guṇa-maṇi
āniyā premera banyā bhāsā-ila abanī
Text 2 premera banyā la-iyā nitā-i ā-ila gauḍa-deśe
ḍubila bhakata saba dīna hīna bhāse
Text 3 dīna hīna patita pāmara nāhi bāche
brahmāra durlabha prema yāre tāre yāce
Text 4 ābāndha-karuṇā nitā-i kāṭiyā mohana
ghare ghare bule prema-amiyāra bāna
Text 5 locana bale āmāra nitā-i yebā nāhi māne
ānala bhejā-i tāra mājha mukha-khāne


     Text 1 My Lord Nitāi, the jewel of virtues, Nitāi, the jewel of virtues, flooded this world with the ocean of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 2 Taking with Him the ocean of spiritual love, He came to Gauḍa-deśa. Every devotee drowned in that ocean of love. Only the fallen sinners remained floating.
     Text 3 The poor, worthless, fallen, insignificant persons did not wish to accept that love. Still Lord Nitāi begged everyone to accept the rare spiritual love even Brahmā cannot attain.
     Text 4 That ocean of mercy had been sealed. But Lord Nitāi dug a canal to bring that nectar ocean of love from one house to the next.
     Text 5 Locana dāsa says: Anyone who will not say, "Lord Nitāi is my master", sets a fire in his mouth.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Sindhuḍā-rāga)

Text 1 (Refrain) gaurāṅga karuṇā-sindhu abatāra
nije guṇe gānthiyā         nāma-cintāmaṇi
          jagate parā-ola hāra
Text 2 kali-timirākula           akhila loka dekhi
          badana-cānda parakāśa
locana-prema-       sudhā-rasa-bariṣaṇe
          jaga-jana-tāpa-bināśa
Text 3 bhakata-kalapa-taru        antare antaru
          ropala ṭhāmahiṁ ṭhāma
yachu pada-tala          alambana panthika
          pūrala nija nija kāma 
Text 4 bhāba-gajendra       caḍhāyala akiñcane
          aichana pahuṅko bilāsa
saṁsāra-kāla-         kūṭa-biṣe dagadhala
          ekali gobinda dāsa 


     Text 1 (Refrain) Lord Gaurāṅga is an ocean of kindness. Descending to this world, on the string of His own virtues He tied the cintāmaṇi jewels of His holy names. That necklace He gave to the people of the world.
     Text 2 Seeing that everyone stood in the darkness of Kali-yuga, He made the moon of His face shine with pleasing light. With His glances He made a great shower of the nectar of love. In this way He destroyed the burning sufferings of the world's people.
     Text 3 In heart after heart He planted the kalpa-taru tree of devotional service. Offering shelter at the soles of His feet, He fulfilled the desires of the souls wandering in this world.
     Text 4 He made the elephant of ecstatic spiritual love pick the devotees up from this world. In this way the Lord enjoyed pastimes. Only Govinda dāsa was left behind. He alone now burns in the poison-flames of repeated birth and death.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Śrī-rāga)

Text 1 nitā-i karuṇāmaya abatāra
dekhiyā dīna-hīna          karaye prema-dāna
          āgama nigamera sāra
Text 2 sahaje ḍhala ḍhala       sakala niramala
          kamala jiniyā āṅkhi-śobhā
badana-maṇḍala         koṭi-śaśadhara
          jiniyā jaga-mana-lobhā
Text 3 aṅga sucikkaṇa      madana-mohana
          kaṇṭhe śobhe maṇi-hāra
bacana-racana       śraba.ne dūre gela
          pātakī-mana-āndhiyāra
Text 4 nabīna kari-kara          jiniyā bhuja-bara
          tāhe śobhe hema-daṇḍa
heriyā saba loka        pāsare dukha-śoka
          khaṇḍaye hṛdaya pāṣaṇḍa
Text 5 nitā-ira karuṇāya       abanī bhāsala
          pūrala jaga-mana-āśa
e prema laba leśa       paraśa nā pā-iyā
          kāndaye harirāma dāsa


     Text 1 Merciful Lord Nitāi has descended to this world. Seeing tyhe poor and fallen people, He gave them the great treasure of spiritual love, a treasure that is the best thing in all the Agama and Nigama scriptures.
     Text 2 Tears stream fropm His glorious eyes, eyes that defeat the lotus flowers. The circle of His face defats many millions of moons. The hearts of this world yearn to attain Him.
     Text 3 His glorious limbs charm even Kāmadeva. A glorious jewel necklace rests on His neck. He keeps the blinding darkness of sinful gossip far away from His ears.
     Text 4 In His glorious arms, arms that defeat the young elephant's trunk, He holds a golden staff. When the people see Him, they forget all their pains and troubles. Their stone hearts break into pieces.
     Text 5 Merciful Lord Nitāi plunged the entire world in the flood of spiritual love. In this way He fulfilled the desires felt in every heart in this world. Unable to touch even a single drop of that flood of spiritual love, Harināma dāsa weeps.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Suha-i-rāga)

Text 1 patita heriyā kānde      thira nāhika baṇdhe
          karuṇā nayane cāya
nirupama hema janu       ujora gaura-tanu
          abanī ghana gaḍi yāya
Text 2 (Refrain) gorā pahuṁ re nichani la-iyā mari
o rūpa-mādhurī        pirīti-cāturī
          tile pāsarite nāri
Text 3 baraṇa āśrama      kiñcana akiñcana
          kāro kona doṣa nāhi māne
kamalā-śiba-bihi-      durlabha prema-dhana
          dāna karala jaga-jane
Text 4 aichana sadaya-       hṛdaya premamaya
          gaura bhela parakāśa
prema-dhane dhanī       karala abanī
          bañcita gobinda dāsa


     Text 1 Seeing the fallen souls, He wept. He was not peaceful. He looked at them with eyes of compassion. His fair form is splendid like peerless gold. Overcome with ecstasy, He rolled on the ground.
     Text 2 (Refrain) I am overcome by Lord Gaura's glory. I cannot forget the sweetness of His form or His ecstatic spiritual love. I cannot forget even a single sesame seed of them.
     Text 3 In His heart He saw no fault with any person, wealthy or poor, from any varṇa or āśrama. The great treasure of pure spiritual love, a treasure even Lakṣmī, Śiva, and Brahmā cannot attain, He freely gave as a gift to the people of the world.
     Text 4 Lord Gaura is full of love. He is kind in this way. He made the whole world rich with the treasure of spiritual love. Govinda dāsa alone was cheated of that treasure.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Śrī-rāga)

Text 1 mari yā-i emana nitā-i kena nā bhajinu
hari hari dhik āre      ki buddhi lāgila more
          hāte nidhi pāñā hārā-inu
Text 2 kamala jiniyā āṅkhi          śobhā kare mukha-śaśī
          sakaruṇa saba pāne cāya
bāhu pāsariyā bale         ā-isa jība kari kole
          prema-dhana sabāre bilāya
Text 3 kāchani kaṭira beśa          śobhiche cāñcara keśa
          baṇdhe cūḍā ati manohare
nāṭuyā ṭhamake cale       buja bāhi paḍe lore
          tribidha jībera tāpa hare 
Text 4 hari bala bola bale        ḍāhine bāme aṅga dole
          rāma gaurī-dāsera galā dhari
mukhe mākhā hāsya-cānda        nitā-ira prema-phānda
          bhāba-sindhu uchala laharī
Text 5 nitā-i karuṇā-sindhu         patitera eka bandhu
          karuṇāya jagata ḍubila
madana meadete andha          biṣaye rahala bandha
          hena nitā-i bhajite nā pa-ila


     Text 1 It is better that I die. I did not worship Lord Nitāi. Alas! Alas! I am worthless! What was I thinking? I had a priceless treasure in my hand, and then I lost it.
     Text 2 In the moon of His face glisten eyes that defeat lotus flowers, eyes that mercifully gaze at every living being. Spreading His arms, and calling out, "Please come!", He hugs the fallen souls. To everyone He gives the treasure of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 3 A garment is gracefully wrapped about his waist. His glistening hair is curly. He wears a graceful turban that charms the heart. He walks like a graceful dancer. Tears stream down His chest. He removes the three-fold sufferings the conditioned souls feel.
     Text 4 "Haribol!" He calls out. His body sways to the right and left. His arms rest on the shoulders of Rāmāi and Gaurīdāsa. The moon of a smile anoints His face. Lord Nitāi has set a trap of spiritual love. He is tossed to and fro by the rising waves of ecstatic love.
     Text 5 Lord Nitāi is an ocean of mercy. He is the fallen soul's only friend. He has plunged the whole universe into the ocean of His mercy. Only persons blinded by lust, persons tightly bound by the ropes of material desires, will not worship Lord Nitāi.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Tuḍī-rāga)

Text 1 nāce gorā      preme bhorā
          kṣaṇe bale hari
kṣaṇe bṛndābana       karaye smaraṇa
          kṣaṇe kṣaṇe prāṇeśwarī
Text 2 yābaka baraṇa       kaṭira basana
          śobhā kare gorā-gāya
kakhana kakhana          yamunā baliyā
          suradhunī-tīre dhāya
Text 3 tā tha-i tā tha-i        mṛdaṅga bāja-i
          jhana jhana karatāla
nayana-ambuje       bahe sura-nadī
          gale dole bana-mālā
Text 4 ānanda-kanda         gauracandra
          akiñcane baḍa dayā
kṛṣṇa-dāsa         karata āśa
          o pada-paṅkaja-chāyā


     Text 1 Overcome with ecstatic love, Lord Gaura dances. One moment He chants, "Hari!" The next moment He is rapt in thinking of Vṛndāvana. Moment after moment He accepts the mood of Śrī Rādhā, the queen of Lord Kṛṣṇa's life.
     Text 2 A garment the color of yāvaka is splendidly wrapped about His waist. Sometimes He runs to the Gaṅgā, declaring, "The Yamunā!"
     Text 3 "Thā tha-i! Tā tha-i!", the mṛdaṅgas declare. "Jhana jhana!", the karatālas say. A Gaṅgā of tears flows from Lord Gaura's lotus eyes. A forest-garland swings to and fro on His neck.
     Text 4 Lord Gauracandra is the root of all bliss. He is very kind to the devotees, who have no wealth but Him. Kṛṣṇa dāsa yearns to attain the shade of His lotus feet.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Pāhiḍā-rāga)

Text 1 nāce nityānanda          bhubana ānanda
          bṛndābana-guṇa śuniyā
bāhu-yuga tuli          ghane bale hari
          calata mohana bhātiyā
Text 2 kibā se mādhurī         bacana-cāturī
          raha gadādhara heriyā
mādhaba gaurī-dāsa         mukunda śrīnibāsa
          gā-ota samaya bujhiyā
Text 3 (Refrain) nāce nityānandacānda re
preme gada gada          cale ādha pada
          dhari gadādhara hāta re
Text 4 o cānda-badane       hāsa ghane ghane
          aruṇa-locana bhaṅgiyā
kusuma-hāra        hṛdi dolata
          sughaḍa sahacara raṅgiyā
Text 5 rātula caraṇe       mañjīra bājata
          raṅgera nāhika ora
manera ānande      śrīnibāsa-suta
          e gīta-gobinda bhora


     Text 1 Lord Nityānanda, the bliss of the worlds, dances. Hearing the glories of Vṛndāvana, He raises His arms. “Hari!", He thunders like a raincloud. His graceful movements are charming.
     Text 2 His words are graceful and sweet. Seeing Gadādhara, Mādhava, Garīdāsa, Mukunda and Śrīvāsa, and aware that a good opportunity has now come, He begins to sing.
     Text 3 (Refrain) Lord Nityānandacandra dances. Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, He speaks broken words in a choked voice. Grasping Gadādhara's hand, He walks with half steps. 
     Text 4 His face is like the moon. Again and again He laughs. His eyes are graceful and reddish. A flower garland swings to and fro on His chest. His companions are filled with bliss.
     Text 5 Anklets jangle at His reddish feet. His bliss has no end. Śrīnivāsa's son, Gīta-govinda dāsa, is now overcome with bliss in his heart.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Pāhiḍā-rāga)

Text 1 rasa-paripāṭī naṭa          kīrtana lampaṭa
          kata kata raṅgī saṅgī saba saṅge
yāhāra kaṭākṣe          lakhimī lākhe lākhe
          bilasa-i bilola-apāṅge
Text 2 śuni bṛndābana-guṇa        rase unamata mana
          du bāhu tuliyā bale hari
phire nāce naṭa-rāya       kata dhārā basudhāya
          du nayane premera gāgarī
Text 3 puruṣa prakṛti para          madana-manohara
          kebala lābaṇya-rasa-sīmā
rasera sāgara gorā       baḍa-i gabhīra dhīra
          nā rākhila nāgarī-garimā
Text 4 tribhubana-sundara       unnata-kandhara
          subalita bāhu biśāle
kuṅkuma candana         mṛgamada lepana
          kahe bāsu tachu pada-tale


     Text 1 Intoxicated by tasting the nectar of ecstatic love, He wildly dances in kīrtana. How many delighted devotees enjoy pastimes in His company? Aroused by restless glances from the corners of His eyes, millions and millions of goddesses of fortune playfully glance at Him from the corners of their eyes.
     Text 2 Hearing the nectar glories of Vṛndāvana, His heart becomes wild. Raising His two arms, He chants, "Hari!" He wildly dances. He is the king of dancers. How many flooding rivers of tears does He make flow on the earth? His eyes have become like two pitchers pouring tears of ecstatic love.
     Text 3 He is the master of puruṣa and prakṛti. He is more charming than Kāmadeva. He stands at the highest pinnacle of glorious handsomeness. Lord Gaura is an ocean of the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. He is most deep and most wise. Seeing Him, a wise woman cannot keep her peaceful composure.
     Text 4 He is the most handsome person in the three worlds. His shoulders are broad. his arms are graceful and long. He is anointed with kuṅkuma, sandal, and musk. Taking shelter of the soles of His feet, Vāsu sings this song.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Barāḍī-rāga)

Text 1 nitā-i raṅgiyā mora nitā-i raṅgiyā 
pūraba bilāsī raṅgī saṅge saba saṅgiyā
Text 2 kuñja-nayane bahe suradhunī-dhārā
nāhi jāne dibā niśī preme mātoyārā
Text 3 candana-caracite aṅga ujora
rūpa nirakhite bhela jaga-mana bhora
Text 4 ā-jānu-lambita bhuja karibara-śuṇḍe
kanaka-khacita daṇḍa dalana pāṣaṇḍe
Text 5 śira pada pāgaḍī bāndhe naṭa-paṭiyā
kaṭi āṇṭi paripāṭi pare nīla dhaṭiyā
Text 6 dayāra ṭhākura nitā-i abanī prakāśa
śuniyā ānande nāce parasāda dāsa


     Text 1 Playful, glorious Nitāi is my master. Glorious Nitāi is my master. He is surrounded by His associates, the same associates He knew in His previous pastimes.
     Text 2 A flooding celestial Gaṅgā of tears flows from His lotus eyes. Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, He does not know if it is day or night.
     Text 3 His body glistens with sandal paste. Gazing at His form, the hearts of this world are now overcome with bliss.
     Text 4 Like great elephants' trunks, His arms reach to His knees. With a golden cluâ He strikes the blasphemers.
     Text 5 A colorful turban graces His head. Blue garments are tied about His waist.
     Text 6 Hearing that Lord Nitāi is distributing His mercy to the people of the world, Prasāda dāsa dances in bliss.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Kedāra-rāga)

Text 1 aparūpa gorā naṭa-rāja
prakaṭa prema-          binoda naba nāgara
          bihare nabadwīpa mājha
Text 2 kuṭila kuntala       gandha parimala
          candana tilaka lalāṭa
heri kulabatī      lāja-mandira-
          duyāre de-o-i kapāṭa
Text 3 karibara-kara jini         bāhura subalani
          dosari gaja-mati-hārā
sumeru-śikhare          yaichana jhāmpiyā
          baha-i suradhunī-dhārā
Text 4 rātula atula         caraṇa yugala
          nakha-maṇi bidhu ujora
bhakata bhramarā         saurabhe ākula
          bāsudeba datta rahu bhora


     Text 1 Wonderful Lord Gaura is the king of dancers. He, the hero of ecstatic spiritual love, enjoys pastimes in Navadvīpa.
     Text 2 His hair is curly. He is gloriously fragrant. Sandal tilaka adorns His forehead. Seeing Him, saintly women close the door on the palace of shyness.
     Text 3 His words defeat the words of the best of poets. His arms are graceful. His movements defeat the graceful elephants. With His steps He seems to jump over the summit of Mount Sumeru. His tears are like a flooding celestial Gaṅgā.
     Text 4 His reddish feet have no peer. His fingernails and toenails are like jewels or like glistening moons. His sweet fragrance attracts the buzzing bees of the devotees. Vāsudeva Datta is entranced by Him.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Dhānaśī-rāga)

Text 1 āre mora āre mora nityānanda rāya
āpe nāve āpe gāya caitanya balāya
Text 2 lamphe lamphe yāya nitā-i gaurāṅga-ābeśe
pāpiyā pāṣaṇda-mati nā rākhila deśe
Text 3 pāṭa-basana pare nitā-i mukuṭa śrabaṇe
jhalamala jhalamala nānā abharaṇe
Text 4 saṅge saṅge yāya nitā-ira rāmā-i sundara
gaurī-dāsa ādi kari yata sahacara
Text 5 caudike hari-dāsa hari-bola balāya
jñāna dāsa niśi diśi nitā-ira guṇa gāya


     Text 1 Ah! Lord Nityānanda is my master. Lord Nityānanda is my master. By Lord Caitanya's order sometimes He dances and sometimes He sings.
     Text 2 Overcome with ecstatic love for Lord Gaurāṅga, He leaps and leaps. Because of Him no sinners or blasphemers remain in the country.
     Text 3 Lord Nitāi wears silk garments and pearl earrings. His many ornaments glisten and glisten. 
     Text 4 Lord Nitāi stays with His companions, with Rāmāi, Gaurīdāsa, and a host of others.
     Text 5 In the four directions the devotees sing, “Haribol!" Night after night Jñāna dāsa sings the glories of Lord Nitāi.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Barāḍī-rāga)

Text 1 birale vasiyā ekeśwara
hari-nāma jape nirantara
Text 2 saba-abatāra-śiromaṇi
akiñcana-jana-cintāmaṇi
Text 3 sugandhi candana mākhā gāya
dhūli binu āna nāhi bhāya
Text 4 maṇimaya ratana bhūṣaṇa
swapane nā kare paraśana
Text 5 chāḍala lakhimī-bilāsa
ebe bhela taru-tale bāsa
Text 6 chāḍala bana-mālā baṁśī
ebe daṇḍa dhariyā sannyāsī
Text 7 hāsa-bilāsa upekhi
kāndiyā phulāya duṭī aṅkhi
Text 8 bibhūti kariyā prema-dhana
saṅge lañā saba akiñcana
Text 9 prema-jale kara-i sināna
kahe bāsu bidare parāṇa


     Text 1 Sitting in a secluded place, without stop the Supreme Personality of Godhead chants the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa.
     Text 2 He is the crest jewel of all avatāras. He is the cintāmaṇi jewel of all sannyāsīs.
     Text 3 Fragrant sandal paste anoints His forehead. No stain touches Him.
     Text 4 Even in dreams jewel ornaments do not touch Him. 
     Text 5 He has turned away from pastimes with Goddess Lakṣmī. Now He sits undera tree.
     Text 6 He has put down His flute and forest-garland. Now He grasps a sannyāsī's daṇḍa.
     Text 7 He has turned away from pastimes of joking and laughter. Now tears stream from the blossoming flowers of His eyes.
     Text 8 Now His only wealth is the treasure of pure spiritual love. He stays amongst the deevotees, who count that as their only wealth.
     Text 9 Now He showers monsoons of tears from His eyes. Vāsu says: Now my life's breath is breaking into pieces.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Gāndhāra-rāga)

Text 1 rūpe guṇe anupamā       lakṣmī-koṭi-manoramā
          braja-badhū ayuta ayuta
rāsa-keli-rasa-raṅge        bihare yāhāra saṅge
          so pahuṁ ki lāgi abadhūta
Text 2 e dukha kahiba kāra āge
sakala-nāgara-guru      rasera kalapa-taru
          kena nitā-i phirena bairāge
Text 3 saṅkarṣaṇa śeṣa yāra         aṁśa-kalā-abatāra
          anukṣaṇa gokole birāje
śiba-bihi-agocara            āgama nigama para
          kena nitā-i saṅkīrtana mājhe
Text 4 kṛṣṇera agraja nāma       mahāprabhu balarāma
          kali-yuge śrī-nityānanda
gaura-rase nimagana      karā-ila jaga-jana
          dūre rahu balarāma manda


     Text 1 His handsomeness and virtues are without peer. He enchants the hearts of millions of goddesses of fortune. He enjoys nectar rāsa-dance pastimes with millions and millions of gopīs in Vraja. Why is this Lord now an avadhūta?
     Text 2 What shall I say first of my sad bewilderment? He is the guru of all playful heroes. He is a kalpa-taru tree of nectar. Why did Lord Nitāi accept sannyāsa? 
     Text 3 Śeṣa and Saṅkarṣaṇa are His aṁśa and kalā avatāras. At every moment he is gloriously manifest in the spiritual world of Goloka. Śiva and Brahmā cannot attain Him. Hew is beyond the touch of the Vedas. Why is Lord Nitāi now rapt in pastimes of saṅkīrtana?
     Text 4 He is Lord Kṛṣṇa's elder brother. His name is the great Lord Balarāma. But in Kali-yuga His name is Śrī Nityānanda. He has plunged all the people of the world in the nectar of ecstatic love for Lord Gaura. Only the fool Balarāma dāsa He has not plunged. Only Balarāma dāsa is left behind.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Beloyāra-rāga)

Text 1 dekha dekha sundara śacī-nandanā
ā-jānu-lambita bhuja bāhu subalanā
Text 2 mayamatta hātī bhāti gati calanā
kiye mālatī-mālā gorā-aṅge dolanā
Text 3 śarada-cānda jina sundara-bayanā
prema-ānanda-bāri-pūrita-nayanā
Text 4 sahacara la-i saṅge anukhaṇa khelanā
nabadwīpa mājhe gorā hari hari balanā
Text 5 abaya caraṇārabinde makaranda-lobhanā
kahaye śaṅkara ghoṣa akhila-loka-tāraṇā


     Text 1 Look! Look at Śacī's handsome son! His graceful arms reach to His knees.
     Text 2 He walks like a maddened elephants. A jasmine-garland swings to and fro on His fair body.
     Text 3 His handsome face defeats the autumn moon. Tears of spiritual love fill His eyes.
     Text 4 At every moment He enjoys pastimes with His companions. In the town of Navadvīpa He chants, "Hari! Hari!"
     Text 5 He yearns to taste the nectar at the Lord's lotus feet, feet that grant fearlessness. Śaṅkara Ghoṣa says: He is the deliverer of all the worlds.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Deśāga-rāga)

Text 1 dekha dekha dekha nityānanda
bhubana-mohana-rūpa prema-ānanda
Text 2 prema-dātā mora nitā-i-cānda
jaga-jane de-i premera phānda
Text 3 nitā-ira baraṇa kanaka-cāmpā
bidhi diyāche rūpa añjali māpā
Text 4 dekhite nitā-i sabā-i dhāya
dhariyā kola dite sabāre bolāya
Text 5 nitā-i bale sabe mili bala gaura-hari
hari bali dhā-ola ūrdhwa-bāhu kari
Text 6 nācata nitā-i gaura-rase
bañcita rahala rādhāballabha dāse


     Text 1 Look! Look! Look at Lord Nityānanda! His handsome form charms all the worlds. He is filled with the bliss of spiritual love.
     Text 2 My Lord Nitāicānda is the giver of spiritual love. He has prepared a trap of spiritual love, a trap to catch the people of this world.
     Text 3 Lord Nitāi is glorious like a golden campaka flower. The demigod Brahmā approaches Him with folded hands.
     Text 4 Seeing the people, Lord Nitāi runs to them. He embraces them. To each person He speaks.
     Text 5 Lord Nitāi says: "Everyone should gather together and chant, `Gaurahari!' Calling out, "Hari!", with arms raised, Lord Nitāi ran to the people.
     Text 6 Tasting the nectar of love for Lord Gaura, Lord Nitāi would dance. Only Rādhā-vallabha dāsa has been cheated of that taste of nectar.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Suha-i-rāga or Gāndhāra-rāga)

Text 1 gorā hema-jalada-abatāra
saghane barikhe jala-dhāra
Text 2 nija guṇe kariyā bādara
gabhīra nāde diga ṭalamala
Text 3 karuṇā-bijurī dina rāti
barikhaye ārati-pirīti
Text 4 sukha-paṅka kari kṣiti-tale
prema phalā-ila nānā phale
Text 5 eka phale naba rasa jhare
ārati ke kahite pāre
Text 6 nāma guṇa karma cintāmaṇi
kahe bāsu adabhuta bānī


     Text 1 Lord Gaura is like a golden cloud showering torrents of tears.
     Text 2 His virtues are a monsoon shower. The thunder of His voice makes the directions tremble.
     Text 3 The lightning of His mercy shines day and night. Day and night He showers rains of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 4 He makes the surface of the earth muddy with bliss. From that mud grow trees bearing many different kinds of fruits of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 5 Each fruit is sweet with newer and newer nectar. Who has the power to describe the love they bear?
     Text 6 His names, virtues, and actions are all cintāmaṇi jewels. His voice filled with wonder, Vāsu speaks these words.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Dhānaśī-rāga)

Text 1 (Refrain) āre mora āre mora nityānanda rāya
mathiyā sakala tantra        hari-nama-mahāmantra
          kare dhari jībere bujhāya
Text 2 acyuta-agraja-nāma        mahāprabhu balarāma
          suradhunī-tīre kaila thānā
hāṭa kari parabandha        rājā hailā nityānanda
          pāṣaṇḍa-dalana bīrabānā
Text 3 pasārī śrī-biśwambhara          saṅge laye gadādhara
          ācārya cature bike kine
gaurī-dāsa hāsi hāsi      rājāra nikaṭe basi
          hāṭera mahimā kichu śune
Text 4 pātra rāmā-i lañā        rāja-ājñā phirā-iyā
          koṭāla ha-ila hari-dāsa
kṛṣṇa-dāsa ha-ila dāḍya         keha yā-ite nāre bhāṇḍyā
          likhaye paḍhaye śrīnibāsa 
Text 5 balarāma dāse bale       abatāra kali-kāle
          jagā-i mādhā-i hāṭe āsi
bhāṇḍa hāte dhanañjaya        bhikṣā māgiyā laya
          hāṭe hāṭe phiraye tapasi


     Text 1 (Refrain) Ah! Lord Nityānanda Rāya is my master, my master! Churning all the scriptures, He extracted the butter of the mahā-mantra. With this mahā-mantra He enlightened the conditioned souls.
     Text 2 Lord Kṛṣṇa elder brother, who bears the name Mahāprabhu Balarāma, now stays on the Gaṅgā's bank. There He is known as King Nityānanda. There He has set up a martketplace. Very powerful and heroic, He crushes the atheists and blasphemers.
     Text 3 In that marketplace Lord Caitanya has opened a market-stall. Gadādhara stays at His side. In that stall cunning Advaita Acārya buys and sells His goods. Smiling and smiling, Gaurīdāsa stays near King Nityānanda. He has heard something of the glories of this marketplace. 
     Text 4 Rāmāi is the superintendent of that marketplace. On King Nityānanda's command, he comes and goes. Haridāsa is the policeman who guards that marketplace. Kṛṣṇadāsa is the watchman. Śrīnivāsa is the accountant. Carefully he writes all the records. 
     Text 5 Balarāma dāsa says: In the Kali-yuga Lord Nityānanda descended to this world. He lured Jagāi and Mādhāi to His martketplace. In that marketplace I wander from market-stall to market-stall. Holding out my hand, I beg some alms.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Barāḍī-rāga)

Text 1 keśera beśe        bhulila deśe
          tāhe rasamaya hāsi
nayana-taraṅge          byākula karile
          biśeṣe nadīyā-bāsī
Text 2 (Refrain) gaurāṅgasundara nāce
nigama-nigūḍha         prema-bhakati
          yāra tāre pahuṁ yāce
Text 3 chala chala chala          nayana-yugala
          kata nadī bahe dhāre
pulaka pūrila      gorā-kalebara
          dharaṇī dharite nāre
Text 4 caraṇa kamala        ati sucañcala
          athira tāhāra rīta
badana-kamale         gada gada sware
          gāya rasa-keli gīta
Text 5 tāhā kari kari      bhuja-yuga tuli
          bale hari hari bola
rādhā rādhā bali          ḍāke ucca kari
          de-i gadādhara kola


     Text 1 His hair in disarray, His smile like nectar, and His restless eyes tossed with waves of glances, He lives in Nadīyā.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Lord Gaurasundara dances. He prays to attain pure devotion, devotion hidden even from the Vedas.
     Text 3 He weeps and weeps. How many flooding rivers of tears flow from His eyes? The hairs of His body stand erect. The earth has no power to support Him.
     Text 4 His lotus feet are very restless. His way is unsteady. With His lotus mouth He sings songs in a choked and unsteady voice, songs of Lord Kṛṣṇa's nectar pastimes.
     Text 5 Calling out, "Haha!", He raises His arms. He chants, "Hari! Hari!" "Rādhā! Rādhā!", He loudly calls, and holds Gadādhara to His chest.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Bālā-rāga or Suha-i-rāga)

Text 1 aruṇa basane         bibidha bhūṣaṇe
          śire pāga naṭa-paṭiyā
caudike heri        bāhu-yuga tuli
          nāce hari bala baliyā
Text 2 (Refrain) nitā-i raṅgiyā nāce
aruṇa nayane       o caṇda badane
          kata nā mādhurī āche
Text 3 calana sundara        matta karibara
          nūpura jhaṅkṛta kariyā
bhābe abaśa       nāhi diga pāśa
          gaura bali huṅkāriyā
Text 4 yateka bhakata        dharaṇī luṭhata
          heri o cānda-bayāniyā
bāsudeba ghoṣa        e rase bañcita
          māga prema-rasa dāniyā


     Text 1 Wearing saffron garments, many ornaments, and a colorful turban, and glancing in the four directions, Lord Nityānanda raises His arms, dances, and chants, "Haribol!"
     Text 2 (Refrain) Lord Nityānanda gracefully dances. His eyes are reddish. His face is like the moon. Is He not filled with sweetness?
     Text 3 He moves gracefully like a wild elephant. His anklets jangle. He is overcome with ecstasy. The four directions are not steady for Him. He makes a great roaring sound of “Gaura!"
     Text 4 He rolls on the ground. The devotees surround Him and gaze at His moonlike face. Cheating of being able to taste the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love, Vāsudeva Ghoṣa begs: Please give me some of the nectar of pure spiritual love.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Mallāra-rāga)

Text 1 gaurāṅga ṭhekila pake
bhābera ābeśe rādhā rādhā bali ḍāke
Text 2 suradhunī heri gorā yamunā bhāṇe
phula-bana dekhi bṛndābana paḍe mane
Text 3 bhābera bharame gorā tribhaṅgima rahe
pīta basana āra muralī cāhe
Text 4 priya gadādhara kariyā kole
kothā chila kothā chila gada gada bole
Text 5 bhāba bujhi paṇḍita rahe bāma pāśe
nā bujhaye e-i raṅga narahari dāse


     Text 1 Lord Gaurāṅga dances in a circle. Overcome with ecstasy, He calls out, "Rādhā! Rādhā!"
     Text 2 Seeing the Gaṅgā, He affirms it is the Yamunā. Seeing a forest of blossoming flowers, in His heart He thinks of Vṛndāvana.
     Text 3 Overcome with ecstatic love, Lord Gaura sees a three-fold-bending form dressed in yellow garments and holding a flute.
     Text 4 He holds dear Gadādhara to His chest. "Where were You? Where were You?", He asks in a choked and broken voice.
     Text 5 Understanding the Lord's moon, Gadādhara Paṇḍita stays at His side. Alas! Narahari dāsa did not directly see these blissful pastimes.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Sindhuḍā-rāga)

Text 1 nitā-i kebala patita janāra bandhu
jība-cira-puṇya-phale       bidhi āni milā-ola
          raṅka mājhe ratanera sindhu
Text 2 diga nehāriyā yāya       ḍāke pahuṁ gorā-rāya
          abanī paḍaye mūrachiyā
nija sahacara mile       nitā-i kariyā kole
          siñce pahuṁ cānda mukha cāñā
Text 3 naba-guñjāruṇa āṅkhi       preme chala chala dekhi
          sumeru upāre mandākinī
megha-gabhīra-nāde          puna bhāyā bali ḍāke
          pada-bhare kampita medinī
Text 4 nitā-i karuṇāmaya       jībe dila prema-caya
          ye prema bidhira abidita
nija guṇa prema-dāne        bhāsā-ila tri-bhubane
          bāsudeba ghoṣa se bañcita


     Text 1 Lord Nitāi is the fallen soul's only friend. After may past pious deeds a soul, by destiny, will meet Lord Nityānanda. In the midst of poverty he finds an ocean of jewels.
     Text 2 Glancing in the four directions, Lord Nitāi calls out, "Gaura Rāya!", and falls unconscious to the ground. The Lord's companions surround Him. Lord Nitāi embraces them. Gazing at them, the Lord sprinkles them with tears flowing from the moon of His face.
     Text 3 From the khañjana birds of His reddish eyes flow streams of tears of spiritual love, streams of tears like a celestial Gaṅgā flowing from golden Mount Sumeru. In a voice like a thundering cloud, again and again He calls for His brothers,the devotees. The weight of His footsteps makes the earth tremble.
     Text 4 To the fallen souls merciful Lord Nitāi gave the gift of ecstatic spiritual love, a gift the demigod Brahmā did not know even existed. By His own kindness Lord Nitāi plunged the three worlds in the flooding nectar of that love. Everyone was plunged. Only Vāsudeva Ghoṣa was not. Only he was cheated of that nectar.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Kāmoda-rāga)

Text 1 (Refrain) gaurāṅga bihara-i parama ānande
nityānanda kari saṅge       gaṅgā-pulina raṅge
          hari hari bale nija-bṛnde
Text 2 kāñcā kāñcana maṇi        gorā-rūpa tāhā jini
          ḍagamagi prema-taraṅge
o naba-kusuma-dāma           gale dole anupāma
          helana narahari-aṅge
Text 3 priyatama gadādhara       dhariyā se bāma kara
          nija guṇa gā-oye gobinde
bhābe bharala tanu      pulaka kadamba janu
          garajana yaichana siṁhe
Text 4 īṣata hāsiyā kṣaṇe      aruṇa-nayana-koṇe
          royata kibā abhilāṣe
soṅari se saba khelā         bṛndābana-rasa-līlā
          ki baliba bāsudeba ghoṣe


     Text 1 (Refrain) Filled with bliss, Lord Gaurāṅga enjoys many pastimes. Accompanied by Nityānanda and a host of devotees, on the Gaṅgā's banks He chants, "Hari! Hari!" 
     Text 2 His fair form defeats the new topaz. Playing in waves of spiritual love, He dives and surfaces. A peerless garland of new flowers moves to and fro on His neck. He leans against Narahari's body.
     Text 3 Grasping dearmost Gadādhara's left hand, He sings His own glories, the glories of Lord Govinda. His body is overcome with ecstatic love. The hairs of his body stand erect. He roars like a lion.
     Text 4 Another moment He gently smiles. What desire glistens in the glance from the corner of His reddish eyes? He suddenly remembers all His pastimes in Vṛndāvana. Ah, what will Vāsudeva Ghoṣa say now?


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Śrī-rāga)

Text 1 nitā-i caitanya duṭī bhā-i dayāra abadhi
śiba brahmāra durlabha prema yāce nirabadhi
Text 2 cāri bede anveṣaye ye prema pā-ite
hena prema duṭī bhā-i yāce abirate
Text 3 patita durgata yata kali-hata yārā
nitāi caitanya bali nāce gāya tārā
Text 4 bhubana-maṅgala bhela saṅkīrtana-rase
rāya ananta kānde nā pā-iyā śeṣe 


     Text 1 The two brothers Lord Caitanya and Lord Nitāi stand at the summit of kindness. Again and again They freely gave away the rare spiritual love even Brahmā and Śiva find difficult to attain.
     Text 2 The pure spiritual love the Vedas seek these two brothers again and again give away as a free gift.
     Text 3 The fallen misguided souls devastated by Kali-yuga now chant "Nitāi-Caitanya!" and dance.
     Text 4 Tasting the nectar of saṅkīrtana, now all the worlds have become auspicious. Ananta Rāya weeps. Only he was not able to taste any of that nectar.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Maṅgala-rāga)

Text 1 caudike gobinda-dhwani śuni pahuṁ hāse
kampita adhare gorā gada gada bhāṣe
Text 2 bhāli re gaurāṅga nāce saṅge nityānanda
abanī bhāsala preme gāya rāmānanda
Text 3 mukunbda murāri bāsu hera ā-isa bali
tomā sabāra guṇe kānde parāṇa-putalī 
Text 4 āra yata bhakta-bṛnda ānande bibhora
bāsu rāmānanda tāhe lubadha cakora


     Text 1 Hearing the sound "Govinda!" come from the four directions, Lord Gaura smiles. His lips tremble. He speaks in a choked voice.
     Text 2 Ah! Ah! Lord Gauraāṅga dances with Lord Nityānanda as Rāmānanda sings. Now the earth is plunged in the nectar of ecstatic love.
     Text 3 Mukunda, Murāri, and Vāsu say to Lord Gaurāṅga, “Look! Hearing Your own glories, the dancing puppet of Your life-breath now weeps."
     Text 4 The devotees are now overcome with ecstatic bliss. The thristy cakora bird named Vasu Rāmānanda watches these pastimes.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Barāḍī-rāga)

Text 1 maṇḍalī raciyā sahacare
tāra mājhe gorā naṭa-bare
Text 2 nāce biśwambhara         saṅge gadādhara
          nāce nityānanda rāya
pūraba kautuka          bhuñje prema-sukha
          swabhābe bujhiyā pāya


     Text 1 The devotees form a circle. In the middle is Lord Gaura, the best of dancers.
     Text 2 Accompanied by Gadādhara, Lored Viśvambhara dances. Lord Nityānanda Rāya also dances. The devotees taste the same wonderful nectar They tasted in the Lord's previous pastimes. Now everyone remembers his original spiritual identity.


Song 1 Śrī Gauracandrasya (of Lord Gauracandra) (Kedāra-rāga)

Text 1 jaya re jaya re gorā      śrī-śacī-nandana
          maṅgala naṭana suṭhāna
kīrtana-ānande         śrībāsa rāmānande
          mukunda bāsu guṇa gāna
Text 2 drāṁ drimiki drimi       mādala bājata
          madhura mandīra rasāla
śaṅkha karatāla       ghaṇṭa-bara bhela
          milala padatala-tāla
Text 3 ko de-i gorā-aṅge        sugandhi candana
          ko de-i mālatī-māla
pirīti phula-śare           marama bhedala
          bhābe sahacara bhora
Text 4 ko-i kahata gorā          jānakī-ballabha
          rādhāra priya pāñcabāṇa
nayanānandera mane      āna nāhika jāne
          āmāra gadādharera prāṇa


     Text 1 Glory, glory to Lord Gaura! He is Śacī's son. In the bliss of kīrtana, where Śrīvāsa, Rāmānanda, Mukunda, and Vāsu sing songs of His glories, He is the abode of auspicious dancing. 
     Text 2 "Drāṁ dramiki drimi!", the mādala drum sounds. The mandira cymbals sweetly sound. The conchshells, karatālas, and bells all meet in the rhythm called padatala.
     Text 3 Who anointed lord Gaura's fair limbs with fragrant sandal paste? Who gave Him a jasmine garland? Their hearts pierced by flower-arrows, His companions are now overcome with ecstatic love.
     Text 4 Someone says Lord Gaura is Rāma, Jānakī's beloved. Another says He is Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā's beloved. Nayanānanda thinks: Lord Gaura is the life's breath of my Gadādhara. I do not know anything more than that.


Song 2 Śrī Nityānandacandrasya (of Lord Nityānandacandra) (Maṅgala-rāga)

Text 1 śrībāsa-aṅgane         binoda bandhāne
          nāce nityānanda rāya
manuja daibata      puruṣa yoṣita
          sabā-i dekhite dhāya
Text 2 bhakata-maṇḍala          gā-ota maṅgala
          bāje khola karatāla
mājhe unamata      nitā-i nācata
          bhā-iyāra bhābe mātoyāra
Text 3 hema-stambha-jini          bāhu subalani
          siṁha jini kaṭi-deśa
candra badana            kamala-nayana
          madana-mohana beśa
Text 4 garaje puna puna           lampha ghana ghana
          malla-beśa dhari nāca-i
aruṇa-locane            prema-barikhaṇe
          abanī-maṇḍala siñca-i
Text 5 dharaṇī-maṇḍale        premera bādara
          karala abadhūta-cānda
nā jāne nara-nārī         bhubana daśa-cāri
          rūpa heri heri kānda
Text 6 śāntipura-nātha         garaje abirata
          dekhiyā premera bikāra
dhariyā śrī-caraṇa        karaye rodana
          paṇḍita śrībāsa udāra
Text 7 mukunda kutūhalī         kāndaye phuli phuli
          dhariyā gadādhara kora
nayane bahe prema        ṭhākura abhirāma
          saghane hari hari bola
Text 8 nājāne dibā-niśi       prema-rase bhāsi
          sakala sahacara bṛnde
śaṅkara ghoṣa dāsa       karata prati-āśa
          nitā-i-caraṇārabinde


     Text 1 In Śrīvāsa's delightful courtyard Lord Nityānanda Rāya dances. Humans and demigods, men and women, everyone runs to see Him.
     Text 2 The circle of devotees sings auspicious songs. The karatālas and kholas sound. In the midst of it all wild Lord Nitāi dances. He is wild with ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 3 His graceful arms defeat the golden pillars. His slender waist defeats the lion's waist. His face is the moon. His eyes are lotus flowers. His features enchant even Kāmadeva. 
     Text 4 Again and again he roars. He leaps and leaps. He dances like a wrestler, like an athlete. From His reddish eyes tears rain on the circle of the earth.
     Text 5 Lord Nitāi, the moon of avadhūtas, showers tears of love on the circle of the earth. The men and women of the fourteen worlds do not understand Him. Gazing and gazing at His wonderful handsome form, they weep. 
     Text 6 Seeing Lord Nitāi's spiritual ecstasy, Lord Advaita, the master of Śāntipura, roars again and again. Noble Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita grasps Lord Nitāi's feet and weeps.
     Text 7 Mukunda weeps for joy. Overcome, he embraces Gadādhara. Tears of spiritual love flow from Abhirāma Ṭhākura's eyes. He calls out, "Hari! Hari!"
     Text 8 Everyone floats in the nectar of ecstatic love. No one knows if it is day or night. Śaṅkara Ghoṣa yearns to attain Lord Nitāi's lotus feet.

