Part 1: Standard Prayers
Standard Prayers
Song 1: Śrī Guru Praṇāma
Śrī Guru Praṇāma
Text 1
oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā
cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ

oṁ—address; ajñāna-(of) ignorance; timira-(by) the darkness; andhasya—of one who was blinded; jñāna-añjana—(by) the ointment of spiritual knowledge; śalākayā—by a medical instrument called a śalākā, which is used to apply medical ointment to eyes afflicted with cataracts; cakṣuḥ—eyes; unmī1itam—were opened; yena—by whom; tasmai—unto him; śrī-gurave—unto my spiritual master; namaḥ—obeisances.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance, with the torchlight of knowledge.
Song 1: Śrī Rūpa Praṇāma
Śrī Rūpa Praṇāma
Text 1
śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale
svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam

śrī-caitanya—(of) Lord Caitanya; manaḥ—(within) the mind; abhīṣṭam—what is desired; sthāpitam—established; yena—by whom; bhū-tale—on the surface of the globe; svayam—himself; rūpaḥ-Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; kadā—when; mahyam—unto me; dadāti—will give; sva—his own; pada—lotus feet; antikam—proximity to.

When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?
Song 1: Maṅgalācaraṇa
Maṅgalācaraṇa
Text 1
vande 'haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurun vaiṣṇavāṁś ca
śrī-rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁ taṁ sa jīvam
sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devaṁ
śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā- śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś ca

vande—offer my respectful obeisances; aham-I; śrī-guroḥ—of my initiating spiritual master or instructing spiritual master; śrī-yuta-pada-kamalam—unto the opulent lotus feet; śrī-gurūn—unto the spiritual masters in the paramparā system, beginning from Mādhavendra Purī down to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda; vaiṣṇavān—unto all the Vaiṣṇavas, beginning from Lord Brahmā and others coming from the very start of the creation; ca—and; śrī-rūpam—unto Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; sa-agra-jātam—with his elder brother, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī; sahagaṇa-raghunātha-anvitam—with Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and his associates; tam—unto him; sa-jīvam—with Jīva Gosvāmī; sa-advaitam—with Advaita Ācārya; sa-avadhūtam—with Nityānanda Prabhu; parijana-sahitam—and with Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura and all the other devotees; kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devam—unto Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān—unto the lotus feet of the all-opulent Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārānī; saha-gaṇa—with associates; lalitā-śrī-viśākhā-anvitān—accompanied by Lalita and Śrī Visakhā; ca—also.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master and of all the other preceptors on the path of devotional service. I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaiṣṇavas and unto the six Gosvāmīs, including Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī, and their associates. I offer my respectful obeisances unto Advaita Ācārya Prabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and all His devotees, headed by Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura. I then offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhārānī, and all the gopīs, headed by Lalitā and Viśākhā.
Song 1: Śrīla Prabhupāda Praṇati
Śrīla Prabhupāda Praṇati
Text 1
nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale
śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāminn iti nāmine

namaḥ—obeisances; oṁ—address; viṣṇu-pādāya—unto him who is at the feet of Lord Viṣṇu; kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya—who is very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhu-tale—on the earth; śrīmate—all-beautiful; bhaktivedanta-svāmin—A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami; iti—thus; nāmine—who is named.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, who is very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa on this earth, having taken shelter at His lotus feet.
Text 2
namas te sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe
nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe

namaḥ—obeisances; te—unto you; sārasvate deve—servant of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī; gaura-vāṇī—the message of Lord Caitanya; pracāriṇe—who are preaching, nirviśeṣa—(from) impersonalism; śūnya-vādi—(from) voidism; pāścātya—Western; deśa—countries; tāriṇe—who are delivering.

Our respectful obeisances are unto you, O spiritual master, servant of Sarasvatī Gosvāmī. You are kindly preaching the message of Lord Caitanyadeva and delivering the Western countries, which are filled with impersonalism and voidism.
Song 1: Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Praṇati
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Praṇati
Text 1
nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale
śrīmate bhaktisiddhānta-sarasvatīti nāmine

I offer my respectful obeisances unto His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, who is very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa, having taken shelter at His lotus feet.
Text 2
śrī-vārṣabhānavī-devī-dayitāya kṛpābdhaye
kṛṣṇa-sambandha-vijñāna-dāyine prabhave namaḥ

śrī-vārṣabhānavī-devī-dayitāya—unto Śrī Vārṣabhānavī-devī-dayita dāsa, the servant of the lover of Śrīmatī Rādhārānī; kṛpā-abdhaye—who is an ocean of mercy; kṛṣṇa-sambandha—(of) the relationship with Kṛṣṇa; vijñāna—(of) the science; dāyine—who is the deliverer; prabhave—unto the master; namaḥ—obeisances.

I offer my respectful obeisances to Śrī Vārṣabhānavī-devī-dayita dāsa [another name of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī], who is favored by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and who is the ocean of transcendental mercy and the deliverer of the science of Kṛṣṇa.
Text 3
mādhuryojjvala-premāḍhya-śrī-rūpānuga-bhaktida
śrī-gaura-karuṇā-śakti-vigrahāya namo 'stu te

mādhurya—conjugal; ujjvala—brilliant; prema—love; āḍhya enriched with; śrī-rūpa-anuga—following Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; bhakti-da—delivering devotional service; śrī-gaura—(of) Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu; karuṇā—(of) the mercy; śakti—energy; vigrahāya—unto the personified; namaḥ—obeisances; astu—let there be; te—unto you.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto you, the personified energy of Śrī Caitanya's mercy, who deliver devotional service which is enriched with conjugal love of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, coming exactly in the line of revelation of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.
Text 4
namas te gaura-vāṇī-śrī-mūrtaye dīna-tāriṇe
rūpānuga-viruddhāpasiddhānta-dhvānta-hāriṇe

namaḥ—obeisances; te—unto you; gaura-vāṇī—teachings of Lord Caitanya; śrī-mūrtaye—unto the personified; dīna—(of) the fallen; tāriṇe—unto the deliverer; rūpa-anuga—the philosophy which follows the teachings of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; viruddha—against; apasiddhānta—(of) unauthorized statements; dhvānta—the darkness; hāriṇe—unto you who are removing.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto you, who are the personified teachings of Lord Caitanya. You are the deliverer of the fallen souls. You do not tolerate any statement which is against the teachings of devotional service enunciated by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.
Song 1: Śrīla Gaurakiśora Praṇati
Śrīla Gaurakiśora Praṇati
Text 1
namo gaura-kiśorāya sākṣād-vairāgya-mūrtaye
vipralambha-rasāmbhode pādāmbujāya te namaḥ

namah—obeisances; gaura-kiśorāya—unto Gaurakisora dāsa Babājī sāksāt—directly; vairāgya—renunciation; mūrtaye—unto the personified; vipralambha-(of) separation (from Kṛṣṇa); rasa- (of) the mellow; ambhodhe—O ocean; pāda-ambujāya—unto the lotus feet; te—your; namaḥ—obeisances.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja [the spiritual master of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī], who is renunciation personified. He is always merged in a feeling of separation and intense love of Kṛṣṇa.
Song 1: Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Praṇati
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Praṇati
Text 1
namo bhaktivinodāya sac-cid-ānanda-nāmine
gaura-śakti-svarūpāya rūpānuga-varāya te

namaḥ—obeisances; bhaktivinodāya—unto Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura; sat-cit-ānanda-nāmine—known as Saccidānanda; gaura—(of) Lord Caitanya; śakti—energy; svarūpāya—unto the personified; rūpa-anuga-varāya—who is a revered follower of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; te—unto you.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda, who is transcendental energy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is a strict follower of the Gosvāmīs, headed by Śrīla Rūpa.
Song 1: Śrīla Jagannātha Praṇati
Śrīla Jagannātha Praṇati
Text 1
gaurāvirbhāva-bhūmes tvaṁ nirdeṣṭā saj-jana-priyaḥ
vaiṣṇava-sārvabhaumaḥ ṣrī-jagannāthāya te namaḥ

gaura—(of) Lord Caitanya; āvirbhāva—(of) the appearance; bhūmeḥ—of the place; tvam—you; nirdeṣṭā—the indicator; sat-jana—(to) all saintly persons; priyaḥ—dear; vaiṣṇava—(of) the Vaiṣṇavas; sārvabhaumaḥ—chief; śrī-jagannāthāya—unto Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī; te—unto you; namaḥ—obeisances.

I offer my respectful obeisances to Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī, who is respected by the entire Vaiṣṇava community and who discovered the place where Lord Caitanya appeared.
Song 1: Śrī Vaiṣṇava Praṇāma
Śrī Vaiṣṇava Praṇāma
Text 1
vāñchā-kalpatarubhyaś ca kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca
patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ

vāñchā-kalpa-tarubhyaḥ—who are desire trees; ca—and; kṛpā—(of) mercy; sindhubhyaḥ—who are oceans; eva—certainly; ca—and; patitānām—of the fallen souls; pāvanebhyaḥ—who are the purifiers; vaiṣṇavebhyaḥ—unto the Vaiṣṇavas; namaḥ namaḥ—repeated obeisances.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaiṣṇava devotees of the Lord. They are just like desire trees who can fulfill the desires of everyone, and they are full of compassion for the fallen conditioned souls.
Song 1: Śrī Gaurāṅga Praṇāma
Śrī Gaurāṅga Praṇāma
Text 1
namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te
kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne gaura-tviṣe namaḥ

namaḥ—obeisances; mahā-vadānyāya—who is most munificent and charitably disposed; kṛṣṇa-prema—love of Kṛṣṇa; pradāya—who can give; te—unto You; kṛṣṇāya—the original Personality of Godhead; kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne—under the name Kṛṣṇa Caitanya; gaura-tviṣe—whose complexion is the golden complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; namaḥ—obeisances.

O most munificent incarnation! You are Kṛṣṇa Himself appearing as Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu. You have assumed the golden color of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and You are widely distributing pure love of Kṛṣṇa. We offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
Song 1: Śrī Pañca-tattva Praṇāma
Śrī Pañca-tattva Praṇāma
Text 1
pañca-tattvātmakaṁ kṛṣṇaṁ bhakta-rūpa-svarūpakam
bhaktāvatāraṁ bhaktākhyaṁ namāmi bhakta-śaktikam

pañca—tattva-ātmakam—comprehending the five transcendental subject matters; kṛṣṇam—unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhakta-rūpa—in the form of a devotee; sva-rūpakam—in the expansion of a devotee; bhakta-avatāram—in the incarnation of a devotee; bhakta-ākhyam—known as a devotee; namāmi—I offer my obeisances; bhakta-śaktikam—the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who supplies energy to the devotee.

I offer my obeisances unto the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, who is nondifferent from His features as a devotee, devotional incarnation, devotional manifestation, pure devotee, and devotional energy.
Song 1: Śrī Kṛṣṇa Praṇāma
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Praṇāma
Text 1
he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho
dīna-bandho jagat-pate
gopeśa gopikā-kānta
rādhā-kānta namo 'stu te

he—O; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; karuṇā-sindho—O ocean of mercy; dīna—(of) the distressed; bandho—O friend; jagat—(of) the universe; pate—O Lord; gopa-īśa—O master of the cowherd men, gopikā-kānta—O lover of the gopīs; rādhā-kānta—O lover of Radhārāṇī; namaḥ—obeisances; astu—let there be; te—unto You.

O my dear Kṛṣṇa, ocean of mercy, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of creation. You are the master of the cowherd men and the lover of the gopīs, especially Rādhārāṇī. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
Song 1: Sambandhādhideva Praṇāma
Sambandhādhideva Praṇāma
Text 1
jayatāṁ suratau paṅgor mama manda-mater gatī
mat-sarvasva-padāmbhojau rādhā-madana-mohanau

jayatām—all glory to; su-ratau—most merciful, or attached in conjugal love; paṅgoḥ—of one who is lame; mama—of me; manda-mateḥ—foolish; gatī—refuge; mat—my; sarva-sva—everything; pada-ambhojau—whose lotus feet; rādhā-madana-mohanau—Rādharāṇī and Madana-mohana.

Glory to the all-merciful Rādhā and Madana-mohana! I am lame and ill advised, yet They are my directors, and Their lotus feet are everything to me.
Song 1: Abhidheyādhideva Praṇāma
 Abhidheyādhideva Praṇāma
Text 1 
dīvyad-vṛndāraṇya-kalpa-drumādhaḥ
śrīmad-ratnāgāra-siṁhāsana-sthau
śrīmad-rādhā-śrīla-govinda-devau
preṣṭhālībhiḥ sevyamānau smarāmi

dīvyat—shining; vṛndā-araṇya—(in) the forest of Vṛndāvana; kalpa-druma—desire tree; adhaḥ—beneath; śrīmat—most beautiful; ratna-āgāra—(in) a temple of jewels; siṁha-āsana-sthau—sitting on a throne; śrīmat—very beautiful; rādhā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; śrīla-govinda-devau—and Śrī Govindadeva; preṣṭha-ālībhiḥ—by most confidential associates; sevyamānau—being served; smarāmi—I remember.

In a temple of jewels in Vṛndāvana, underneath a desire tree, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, served by Their most confidential associates, sit upon an effulgent throne. I offer my most humble obeisances unto Them.
Song 1: Prayojanādhideva Praṇāma
Prayojanādhideva Praṇāma
Text 1
śrīmān rāsa-rasārambhī vaṁśī-vaṭa-taṭa-sthitaḥ
karṣan veṇu-svanair gopīr gopīnāthaḥ śriye 'stu naḥ

śrīmān—most beautiful; rāsa—(of) the rāsa dance; rasa—(of) the mellow; ārambhī—the initiator; vaṁśī-vaṭa—(of) the name Vaṁśīvata; taṭa—on the shore; sthitaḥ—standing; karṣan—attracting; veṇu—(of) the flute; svanaiḥ—by the sounds; gopīḥ—the cowherd girls; gopī-nāthaḥ—Śrī Gopīnātha; śriye—benediction; astu—let there be; naḥ—our.

Śrī Śrīla Gopīnātha, who originated the transcendental mellow of the rāsa dance, stands on the shore in Vaṁśīvaṭa and attracts the attention of the cowherd damsels with the sound of His celebrated flute. May they all confer upon us their benediction.
Song 1: Śrī Rādhā Praṇāma
Śrī Rādhā Praṇāma
Text 1
tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari
vṛṣabhānu-sute devī praṇamāmi hari-priye

tapta—molten; kāñcana—(like) gold; gaura—fair complexion; aṅgi—O one whose body; rādhe—O Rādhārānī; vṛndāvana-īśvari- O Queen of Vṛndāvana; vṛṣabhānu-sute—O daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu; devi—O goddess; praṇamāmi—I offer my respects; hari-priye—O one who is very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa.

I offer my respects to Rādhārāṇī, whose bodily complexion is like molten gold and who is the Queen of Vṛndāvana. You are the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, and You are very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa.
Song 1: Pañca-tattva Mahā-mantra
Pañca-tattva Mahā-mantra
Text 1
(jaya) śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu nityānanda
śrī-advaita gadādhara śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda
Song 1: Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahā-mantra
Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahā-mantra
Text 1
HARE KṚṢṆA HARE KṚṢṆA KṚṢṆA KṚṢṆA HARE HARE
HARE RĀMA HARE RĀMA RĀMA RĀMA HARE HARE

Song 1: Śrī Śrī Gurv-aṣṭaka (saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka)
Śrī Śrī Gurv-aṣṭaka
Eight Prayers to the Guru
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, who appeared in the middle of the seventeenth century, is a great spiritual master in the Kṛṣṇa conscious chain of gurus and disciples. He says, "One who, with great care and attention, loudly recites this beautiful prayer to the spiritual master during the brāhma-muhūrta obtains direct service to Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of Vṛndāvana, at the time of his death."
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka-
trāṇāya kāruṇya-ghanāghanatvam
prāptasya kalyāṇa-guṇārṇavasya
vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

saṁsāra—(of) material existence; dāvā-anala—(by) the forest fire; līḍha—afflicted; loka—the people; trāṇāya—to deliver; kāruṇya—of mercy; ghanāghana-tvam—the quality of a cloud; prāptasya—who has obtained; kalyāṇa—auspicious; guṇa—(of) qualities; arṇavasya—who is an ocean; vande—I offer obeisances; guroḥ—of my spiritual master; śrī—auspicious; caraṇa-aravindam—unto the lotus feet.

The spiritual master is receiving benediction from the ocean of mercy. Just as a cloud pours water on a forest fire to extinguish it, so the spiritual master delivers the materially afflicted world by extinguishing the blazing fire of material existence. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master, who is an ocean of auspicious qualities.
Text 2
mahāprabhoḥ kīrtana-nṛtya-gīta-
vāditra-mādyan-manaso rasena
romāñca-kampāśru-taraṅga-bhājo
vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

mahāprabhoḥ—of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu; kīrtana—(by) chanting; nṛtya—dancing; gīta—singing; vāditra—playing musical instruments; mādyat—gladdened; manasaḥ—whose mind; rasena—due to the mellows of pure devotion; roma-añca—standing of the hair; kampa—quivering of the body, aśru-taraṅga—torrents of tears; bhājaḥ—who feels; vande—I offer obeisances; guroḥ—of my spiritual master; śrī—auspicious; caraṇa-aravindam—unto the lotus feet.

Chanting the holy name, dancing in ecstasy, singing, and playing musical instruments, the spiritual master is always gladdened by the saṅkīrtana movement of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Because he is relishing the mellows of pure devotion within his mind, sometimes his hair stands on end, he feels quivering in his body, and tears flow from his eyes like waves. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master.
Text 3
śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā-
śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau
yuktasya bhaktāṁś ca niyuñjato 'pi
vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

śrī-vigraha—(of) the arcā-vigraha (Deities), ārādhana—the worship; nitya—daily; nānā-(with) various; śṛṅgāra—clothing and ornaments; tat—of the Lord; mandira—(of) the temple; mārjana-ādau—in the cleaning, etc.; yuktasya—who is engaged; bhaktān—his disciples; ca—and; niyuñjataḥ—who engages; api—also; vande—I offer obeisances; guroḥ—of my spiritual master; śrī—auspicious; caraṇa-aravindam—unto the lotus feet.

The spiritual master is always engaged in the temple worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He also engages his disciples in such worship. They dress the Deities in beautiful clothes and ornaments, clean Their temple, and perform other similar worship of the Lord. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master.
Text 4
catur-vidha-śrī-bhagavat-prasāda-
svādv-anna-tṛptān hari-bhakta-saṅghān
kṛtvaiva tṛptiṁ bhajataḥ sadaiva
vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

catuḥ—four; vidha—kinds; śrī—holy, bhagavat-prasāda—which have been offered to Kṛṣṇa; svādu—palatable; anna—(by) foods; tṛptān—spiritually satisfied; hari—(of) Kṛṣṇa; bhakta-saṅghān—the devotees; kṛtvā—having made; eva—thus; tṛptim—satisfaction; bhajataḥ—who feels; sada—always; eva—certainly; vande—I offer obeisances; guroḥ—of my spiritual master; śrī—auspicious; caraṇa-aravindam—unto the lotus feet.

The spiritual master is always offering Kṛṣṇa four kinds of delicious food [analyzed as that which is licked, chewed, drunk, and sucked]. When the spiritual master sees that the devotees are satisfied by eating bhagavat-prasāda, he is satisfied. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master.
Text 5
śrī-rādhikā-mādhavayor apāra-
mādhurya-līlā guṇa-rūpa-nāmnām
prati-kṣaṇāsvādana-lolupasya
vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

śrī-rādhikā—(of) Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; mādhavayoḥ—of Lord Mādhava (Kṛṣṇa); apāra—unlimited; mādhurya—conjugal; līlā—pastimes; guṇa—qualities; rūpa—forms; nāmnām—of the holy names; prati-kṣaṇa—at every moment; āsvādana—relishing; lolupasya—who aspires after; vande—I offer obeisances; guroḥ—of my spiritual master; śrī—auspicious; caraṇa-aravindam—unto the lotus feet.

The spiritual master is always eager to hear and chant about the unlimited conjugal pastimes of Rādhikā and Mādhava, and Their qualities, names, and forms. The spiritual master aspires to relish these at every moment. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master.
Text 6
nikuñja-yūno rati-keli-siddhyai
yā yālibhir yuktir apekṣaṇīyā
tatrāti-dākṣyād ati-vallabhasya
vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

nikuñja-yūnaḥ—of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; rati—(of) conjugal love; keli—(of) pastimes; siddhyai—for the perfection; yā yā- whatever; ālibhiḥ—by the gopīs; yuktiḥ—arrangements; apekṣaṇīyā—desirable; tatra—in that connection; ati-dākṣyāt—because of being very expert; ati-vallabhasya—who is very dear; vande—I offer obeisances; guroḥ—of my spiritual master; śrī—auspicious; caraṇa-aravindam—unto the lotus feet.

The spiritual master is very dear, because he is expert in assisting the gopīs, who at different times make different tasteful arrangements for the perfection of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's conjugal loving affairs within the groves of Vṛndāvana. I offer my most humble obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master.
Text 7
sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair
uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ
kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya
vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

sākṣāt—directly; hari-tvena—with the quality of Hari; samasta- all; śāstraiḥ—by scriptures; uktaḥ—acknowledged; tathā—thus bhāvyate—is considered; eva—also; sadbhiḥ—by great saintly persons; kintu—however; prabhoḥ—to the Lord; yaḥ—who; priyaḥ—dear; eva—certainly; tasya—of him (the guru); vande—I offer obeisances; guroḥ—of my spiritual master; śrī—auspicious; caraṇa-aravindam—unto the lotus feet.

The spiritual master is to be honored as much as the Supreme Lord, because he is the most confidential servitor of the Lord. This is acknowledged in all revealed scriptures and followed by all authorities. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master, who is a bona fide representative of Śrī Hari [Kṛṣṇa].
Text 8
yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo
yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi
dhyāyan stuvaṁs tasya yaśas tri-sandhyaṁ
vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

yasya—of whom (the spiritual master); prasādāt—by the grace; bhagavat—(of) Kṛṣṇa; prasādaḥ—the mercy; yasya—of whom; aprasādāt—without the grace; na—not; gatiḥ—means of advancement; kutaḥ api—anywhere; dhyāyan—meditating upon; stuvan—praising; tasya—of him (the spiritual master); yaśaḥ—the glory; tri-sandhyam—three times a day (sunrise, noon, and sunset); vande—I offer obeisances; guroḥ—of my spiritual master; śrī—auspicious; caraṇa-aravindam—unto the lotus feet.

By the mercy of the spiritual master one receives the benediction of Kṛṣṇa. Without the grace of the spiritual master, one cannot make any advancement. Therefore, I should always remember and praise the spiritual master. At least three times a day I should offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master.
Song 1: Śrī Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭaka (kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau)
Śrī Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭaka
Eight Prayers to the Six Gosvamis
by Śrīnivāsa Ācārya
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau premāmṛtāmbho-nidhī
dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau priya-karau nirmatsarau pūjitau
śrī-caitanya-kṛpā-bharau bhuvi bhuvo bhārāvahantārakau
vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

kṛṣṇa–of Kṛṣṇa; utkīrtana–loud chanting; gāna–singing; nartana–dancing; parau–they who are absorbed; prema-amṛta–the nectar of love of God; ambhaḥ-nidhī–like oceans; dhīra-adhīra-jana–to the gentle and the ruffians; priyau–they who are dear; priya-karau–they who are all-pleasing; nirmatsarau–they who are non-envious; pūjitau–they who are all-worshipable; śrī-caitanya–of Śrī Caitanya; kṛpā-bharau–they who are bearing the mercy; bhuvi–in the world; bhuvaḥ–of the world; bhāra–the burden; avahantārakau–they who dispel; vande–I offer my respectful obeisances; rūpa–to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī; sanātanau–and to Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī; raghu-yugau–to the two Raghus : Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī and Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī; śrī-jīva–to Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī; gopālakau–and to Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Six Gosvāmīs, namely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who are always engaged in chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa and dancing. They are just like the ocean of love of God, and they are popular both with the gentle and with the ruffians, because they are not envious of anyone. Whatever they do, they are all-pleasing to everyone, and they are fully blessed by Lord Caitanya. Thus they are engaged in missionary activities meant to deliver all the conditioned souls in the material universe.
Text 2
nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau
lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau tri-bhuvane mānyau śaraṇyākarau
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-padāravinda-bhajanānandena mattālikau
vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

nānā-śāstra–various scriptures; vicāraṇa–in scrutinizingly studying; eka-nipuṇau–they who are uniquely expert; sat-dharma–eternal religious principles; saṁsthāpakau–they who are the establishers; lokānām–of all human beings; hita-kārinau–they who are the performers of beneficial activities; tri-bhuvane–throughout the three worlds; manyau–they who are worthy of honor; śaraṇyākarau–they who are worth taking shelter of; rādhā-kṛṣṇa–of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; pada-aravinda–at the lotus feet; bhajana-ānandena–in the bliss of worship; matta-ālikau–they who are intoxicated with the mood of the gopīs...

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvāmīs, namely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who are very expert in scrutinizingly studying all the revealed scriptures with the aim of establishing eternal religious principles for the benefit of all human beings. Thus they are honored all over the three worlds and they are worth taking shelter of because they are absorbed in the mood of the gopīs and are engaged in the transcendental loving service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Text 3
śrī-gaurāṅga-guṇānuvarṇana-vidhau śraddhā-samṛddhy-anvitau
pāpottāpa-nikṛntanau tanu-bhṛtāṁ govinda-gānāmṛtaiḥ
ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaika-nipuṇau kaivalya-nistārakau
vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

śrī-gaurāṅga–of Lord Caitanya; guṇa–the qualities; anuvarṇana–in narrating; vidhau–in the process; śraddhā–of faith; samṛddhi–with an abundance; anvitau–they who are endowed; pāpa-uttāpa–the distress of sinful reactions; nikṛntanau–they who remove; tanu-bhṛtām–of those souls who are embodied; govinda–about Lord Govinda; gāna-amṛtaiḥ–by the nectarean songs; ānanda-ambudhi–the ocean of transcendental bliss; vardhana–increasing; eka-nipuṇau–they who are totally expert; kaivalya-nistārakau–they who are the saviors from impersonal liberation...

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvāmīs, namely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who are very much enriched in understanding of Lord Caitanya and who are thus expert in narrating His transcendental qualities. They can purify all conditioned souls from the reactions of their sinful activities by pouring upon them transcendental songs about Govinda. As such, they are very expert in increasing the limits of the ocean of transcendental bliss, and they are the saviors of the living entities from the devouring mouth of liberation.
Text 4
tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat
bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau
gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau muhur
vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

tyaktvā–having given up; tūrṇam–quickly (after being summoned by Lord Caitanya); aśeṣa–all; maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīm–the aristocracy of upper-class society; sadā–always; tuccha-vat–as insignificant; bhūtvā–having become; dīna-gaṇa–of the poor people; īśakau–they who are the protectors; karuṇayā–out of mercy; kaupīna–loincloths; kanthā–and tattered quilts; āśritau–they who have accepted; gopī-bhāva–the mood of the gopīs; rasa-amṛta-abdhi–the ocean of nectar-mellows; laharī-kallola–in the ripples and waves; magnau–they who are absorbed; muhuḥ–always and repeatedly...

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvāmīs, namely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who kicked off all association of aristocracy as insignificant. In order to deliver the poor conditioned souls, they accepted loincloths, treating themselves as mendicants, but they are always merged in the ecstatic ocean of the gopīs' love for Kṛṣṇa and bathe always and repeatedly in the waves of that ocean.
Text 5
kūjat-kokila-haṁsa-sārasa-gaṇākīrṇe mayūrākule
nānā-ratna-nibaddha-mūla-viṭapa-śrī-yukta-vṛndāvane
rādhā-kṛṣṇam ahar-niśaṁ prabhajatau jīvārthadau yau mudā
vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

kūjat–cooing; kokila–of cuckoos; haṁsa–of swans; sārasa–and of cranes; gaṇa–flocks; ākīrṇe–crowded; mayūra–with peacocks; ākule–in the constantly agitated motion; nānā-ratna–with various jewels; nibaddha-mūla–bound around their bases; viṭapa–the trees; śrī-yukta–endowed with splendor; vṛndāvane–in the forest of Vṛndāvana; rādhā-kṛṣṇam–of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; ahaḥ-niśam–day and night; prabhajatau–they who are engaged in enthusiastic worship; jīva–upon the living entities; arthadau–they who bestow the ultimate goal of life; yau–they who; mudā–with great delight...

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvāmīs, namely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who were always engaged in worshiping Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the transcendental land of Vṛndāvana where there are beautiful trees full of fruits and flowers which have under their roots all valuable jewels. The Gosvāmīs are perfectly competent to bestow upon the living entities the greatest boon of the goal of life.
Text 6
saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ kālāvasānī-kṛtau
nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-smṛter madhurimānandena sammohitau
vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

saṅkhyā-pūrvaka–in a scheduled measurement; nāma-gāna–singing the holy name; naṭibhiḥ–and by bowing down; kāla-avasānī-kṛtau–they who passed their time in doing such; nidra-āhāra–sleeping and eating; vihāraka-ādi–recreation and so forth; vijitau–they who have conquered; ca–and; atyanta-dīnau–they who are extremely meek and humble; ca–and; yau–they who; rādhā-kṛṣṇa–of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; guṇa-smṛteḥ–in remembrance of the qualities; madhurimā–of the sweetness; ānandena–by the bliss; sammohitau–they who are fully enchanted...

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvāmīs, namely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who were engaged in chanting the holy names of the Lord and bowing down in a scheduled measurement. In this way they utilized their valuable lives and in executing these devotional activities they conquered over eating and sleeping and were always meek and humble enchanted by remembering the transcendental qualities of the Lord.
Text 7
rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭe kalinda-tanayā-tīre ca vaṁśīvaṭe
premonmāda-vaśād aśeṣa-daśayā grastau pramattau sadā
gāyantau ca kadā harer guṇa-varaṁ bhāvābhibhūtau mudā
vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

rādhā-kuṇḍa–of the lake Rādhā-kuṇḍa; taṭe–on the bank; kalinda-tanayā–of the daughter of Mt. Kalinda (the Yamunā river); tīre–on the bank; ca–also; vaṁśī-vaṭe–at the banyan tree called Vaṁśī-vaṭa; prema-unmāda–the madness of love of God; vaśāt–by the force; aśeṣa-daśayā–by limitless ecstatic symptoms; grastau–they who are seized; pramattau–they who are madmen; sadā–always; gāyantau–they who sing; ca–and; kadā–sometimes; hareḥ–of Lord Hari; guṇa-varam–the excellent qualities; bhāva–in ecstasy; abhibhūtau–they who are overwhelmed; mudā–with great delight...

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvāmīs, namely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who were sometimes on the bank of the Rādhā-kunda lake or the shores of the Yamuna and sometimes at Vaṁśīvaṭa. There they appeared just like madmen in the full ecstasy of love for Kṛṣṇa, exhibiting different transcendental symptoms in their bodies, and they were merged in the ecstasy of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
Text 8
he rādhe vraja-devike ca lalite he nanda-sūno kutaḥ
śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pādapa-tale kālindī-vane kutaḥ
ghoṣantāv iti sarvato vraja-pure khedair mahā-vihvalau
vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

he rādhe–O Rādhā!; vraja-devike–O Queen of Vraja!; ca–and; lalite–O Lalitā Sakhī!; he nanda-sūno–O son of Nanda Mahārāja!; kutaḥ–where are you?; śrī-govardhana–on beautiful Govardhana Hill; kalpa-pādapa-tale–at the base of the desire-trees; kālindī-vanye–in the forest on the bank of the Yamunā river; kutaḥ–where are you?; ghoṣantau–they who are shouting; iti–thus; sarvataḥ–everywhere; vraja-pure–in the realm of Vraja; khedaiḥ–by distress; mahā-vihvalau–they who are greatly agitated...

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvāmīs, namely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who were chanting very loudly everywhere in Vṛndāvana, shouting, "Queen of Vṛndāvana, Rādhārāṇī! O Lalita! O son of Nanda Mahārāja! Where are you all now? Are you just on the hill of Govardhana, or are you under the trees on the bank of the Yamunā? Where are you?" These were their moods in executing Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
Song 1: Śrī Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka (ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ)
Śrī Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka
Eight Instructions
Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
Audio

 Audio Download 
Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed His disciples to write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa, a task which His followers have continued to carry out down to the present day. The elaborations and expositions on the philosophy taught by Lord Caitanya are, in fact, the most voluminous, exacting, and consistent, due to the unbreakable system of disciplic succession of any religious culture in the world. Yet Lord Caitanya in His youth widely renowned as a scholar, in fact, left us only eight verses, called Śikṣāṣṭaka.
These eight verses clearly reveal His mission and precepts. These supremely valuable prayers are translated herein.
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ
śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam
ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ
sarvātma-snapanaṁ paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṇkīrtanam

cetaḥ-darpaṇa–the mirror of the heart; mārjanam–cleansing; bhava–of material existence; mahā-dāva-agni–the greatly blazing forest fire; nirvāpaṇam–extinguishing; śreyaḥ-kairava–the white lotus of good fortune; candrikā-vitaraṇam–spreading the moonbeams; vidyā-vadhū–the wife of all education; jīvanam–the life; ānanda-ambudhi–the ocean of bliss; vardhanam–increasing; prati-padam–at every step; pūrṇa-amṛta–the full nectar; āsvādanam–giving a relishable taste; sarva-ātma-snapanam–bathing all souls; param–transcendental; vijayate–let there be victory; śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam–for the congregational chanting of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa.

Glory to the śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana, which cleanses the heart of all the dust accumulated for years and extinguishes the fire of conditional life, of repeated birth and death. This saṅkīrtana movement is the prime benediction for humanity at large because it spreads the rays of the benediction moon. It is the life of all transcendental knowledge. It increases the ocean of transcendental bliss, and it enables us to fully taste the nectar for which we are always anxious.
Text 2
nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis
tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ
etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi
durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ

nāmnām–of the holy names of the Lord; akāri–manifested; bahudhā–various kinds; nija-sarva-śaktiḥ–all types of personal potency; tatra–in that; arpitā–bestowed; niyamitaḥ–restricted; smaraṇe–in remembering; na–not; kālaḥ–consideration of time; etādṛśī–so much; tava kṛpā–Your mercy; bhagavan–O Lord!; mama–my; api–although; durdaivam–misfortune; īdṛśam–such; iha–in this (the holy name); ajani–was born; na anurāgaḥ–no attachment.

O my Lord, Your holy name alone can render all benediction to living beings, and thus You have hundreds and millions of names, like Kṛṣṇa and Govinda. In these transcendental names You have invested all Your transcendental energies. There are not even hard and fast rules for chanting these names. O my Lord, out of kindness You enable us to easily approach You by Your holy names, but I am so unfortunate that I have no attraction for them.
Text 3
tṛṇād api sunīcena
taror api sahiṣṇunā
amāninā mānadena
kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

tṛṇāt api–than even downtrodden grass; su-nīcena–by feeling oneself much lower; taroḥ api–than a tree; sahiṣṇunā–with more tolerance; amāninā–by not accepting respect; mānadena–by giving respect to all others; kīrtanīyaḥ–should be chanted; sadā–always; hariḥ–the holy name of Hari.

One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind, thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige, and should be ready to offer all respect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly.
Text 4
na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ
kavitāṁ vā jagad-īśa kāmaye
mama janmani janmanīśvare
bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi

na dhanam–not wealth; na janam–not followers; na sundarīm–not beautiful women; kavitām–fruitive activities described in flowery language; vā–or; jagat-īśa–O Lord of the universe!; kāmaye–I desire; mama–my; janmani janmani–in birth after birth; īśvare–unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhavatāt–let there be; bhaktiḥ–devotional service; ahaitukī–unmotivated; tvayi–unto You.

O almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor do I desire beautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers. I only want Your causeless devotional service, birth after birth.
Text 5
ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ
patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau
kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-
sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya

ayi nanda-tanuja–O son of Nanda Mahārāja!; kiṅkaram–Your servant; patitam–fallen; mām–me; viṣame–horrible; bhava-ambudhau–in the ocean of nescience; kṛpayā–by causeless mercy; tava–Your; pāda-paṅkaja–lotus feet; sthita–situated at; dhūlī–the dust; sadṛśam–just like; vicintaya–please consider.

O son of Mahārāja Nanda [Kṛṣṇa], I am Your eternal servitor, yet somehow or other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick me up from this ocean of death and place me as one of the atoms at Your lotus feet.
Text 6
nayanaṁ galad-aśru-dhārayā
vadanaṁ gadgada-ruddhayā girā
pulakair nicitaṁ vapuḥ kadā
tava-nāma-grahaṇe bhaviṣyati

nayanam–my eyes; galat-aśru-dhārayā–by streams of tears running down; vadanam–my mouth; gadgada–faltering; ruddhayā–by being choked up; girā–my words; pulakaiḥ–by thrilled hairs standing erect; nicitam–covered; vapuḥ–my body; kadā–when?; tava–Your; nāma-grahaṇe–in chanting the holy name; bhaviṣyati–will be.

O my Lord, when will my eyes be decorated with tears of love flowing constantly when I chant Your holy name? When will my voice choke up, and when will the hairs of my body stand on end at the recitation of Your name?
Text 7
yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa
cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam
śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ
govinda-viraheṇa me

yugāyitam–makes like a great millennium; nimeṣeṇa–by a moment; cakṣuṣā–from my eyes; prāvṛṣāyitam–makes tears fall like torrents of rain; śūnyāyitam–makes void; jagat sarvam–the entire world; govinda-viraheṇa–by the separation from Govinda; me–my.

O Govinda! Feeling Your separation, I am considering a moment to be like twelve years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain, and I am feeling all vacant in the world in Your absence.
Text 8
āśliṣya vā pāda-ratāṁ pinaṣṭu mām
adarśanān marma-hatāṁ karotu vā
yathā tathā vā vidadhātu lampaṭo
mat-prāṇa-nāthas tu sa eva nāparaḥ

āśliṣya–tightly embracing; vā–or; pāda-ratām–who is fallen at the lotus feet; pinaṣṭu–let Him trample; mām–me; adarśanāt–by not being visible; marma-hatām–broken-hearted; karotu–let Him make; vā–or; yathā tathā–as He likes, so He does; vā–or; vidadhātu–let Him do; lampaṭaḥ–the debauchee; mat-prāṇa-nāthaḥ–the Lord of my life; tu–but; saḥ eva–only Him; na aparaḥ–no one else.

I know no one but Kṛṣṇa as my Lord, and He shall remain so even if He handles me roughly by His embrace or makes me brokenhearted by not being present before me. He is completely free to do anything and everything, for He is always my worshipable Lord, unconditionally.
Song 1: Prayer unto the Lotus Feet of Krsna (kṛṣṇa taba puṇya habe bhāi)
Prayer unto the Lotus Feet of Krsna
by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda
on board the ship Jaladuta, September 13, 1965
Audio
 Audio Download 
   (refrain)
Text 1
kṛṣṇa tava puṇya habe bhāi
e-puṇya koribe yabe rādhārāṇī khuśī habe
dhruva ati bali tomā tāi

kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; tava—Your; puṇya—piety; habe—will be; bhāi—O brother; e puṇya—this pious act; karibe—You perform; yabe—when; rādhārāṇī—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; khuśī habe—will be pleased; dhruva—surely; ati—emphatically; bali—I say; tomā—to You; tāi—just so.

O brother, Kṛṣṇa, I emphatically say to You that when You perform this pious act Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī will surely be pleased with You and You will achieve great piety. i*
Text 2
śrī-siddhānta saraswatī śacī-suta priya ati
kṛṣṇa-sebāya jāra tula nāi
sei se mohānta-guru jagater madhe uru
kṛṣṇa-bhakti dey ṭhāi ṭhāi

śrī-siddhānta sarasvatī—Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura; śacī-suta—to the son of Mother Śacī; priya ati—very dear; kṛṣṇa-sevāya—in Kṛṣṇa’s service; yāra—whose; tula—comparison; nāi—there is not; sei se—that person; mahānta-guru—great spiritual master; jagatera madhye—within the universe; uru—intense; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—devotional service to Kṛṣṇa; deya—gives; ṭhāi ṭhāi—in this place and that place.

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who is very dear to Lord Gaurāṅga, the son of Mother Śacī, is unparalleled in his service to the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He is that great saintly spiritual master who bestows intense devotion to Kṛṣṇa at different places throughout the world.
Text 3
tāra icchā balavān pāścātyete ṭhān ṭhān
hoy jāte gaurāṅger nām
pṛthivīte nagarādi āsamudra nada nadī
sakalei loy kṛṣṇa nām

tāra—his; icchā—desire; balavān—powerful; pāścātyete—to the Western world; ṭhān ṭhān—everywhere; haya—is; yāte—in which; gaurāṅgera nāma—the name of Gaurāṅga; pṛthivīte—on the earth; nagara-ādi—towns and so forth; ā-samudra—extending out to the ocean; nada-nadī—rivers and streams; sakale-i—verily all; laya—taking (chanting); kṛṣṇa nāma—the holy name of Kṛṣṇa.

By his strong desire, the holy name of Lord Gaurāṅga will spread throughout all the countries of the Western world. In all the cities, towns, and villages on the earth, from all the oceans, seas, rivers, and streams, everyone will chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa.
Text 4
tāhale ānanda hoy tabe hoy digvijay
caitanyer kṛpā atiśay
māyā duṣṭa jata duḥkhī jagate sabāi sukhī
vaiṣṇaver icchā pūrṇa hoy

tāhale—upon that; ānanda haya—there is bliss; tabe—then; haya—there is; dik-vijaya—conquering all directions; caitanyera kṛpā—the mercy of Lord Caitanya; atiśaya—excessive; māyā duṣṭa—corrupted by illusion (sinful); yata—whichever; duḥkhī—miserable souls; jagate—in the universe; sabāi—everyone; sukhī—happy people; vaiṣṇavera icchā—the desire of the devotees; pūrṇa haya—is fulfilled.

As the vast mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu conquers all directions, a flood of transcendental ecstasy will certainly cover the land. When all the sinful, miserable living entities become happy, the Vaiṣṇavas' desire is then fulfilled.
   
Text 5
se kārja je koribāre ājñā jadi dilo more
jogya nahi an dīna hīna
tāi se tomāra kṛpā māgitechi anurūpā
āji tumi sabār pravīṇa

se kārya—that task; ye—which; karibāre—to do; ājñā—command; yadi—if; dile—gave; more—to me; yogya nahi—not worthy; ati dīna—very fallen; hīna—destitute; tāi—just so; se—that; tomāra—Your; kṛpā—mercy; jāgiteche—it is awakening; anurūpā—accordingly; āji—today; tumi—You; sabāra—of everyone; pravīṇa—wise.

Although my Guru Mahārāja ordered me to accomplish this mission, I am not worthy or fit to do it. I am very fallen and insignificant. Therefore, O Lord, now I am begging for Your mercy so that I may become worthy, for You are the wisest and most experienced of all.
   
Text 6
tomāra se śakti pele guru-sebāya bastu mile
jībana sārthak jadi hoy
sei se sevā pāile tāhale sukhī hale
taba saṅga bhāgyate miloy

tomāra—Your; se—that; śakti—potency; pele—obtaining; guru-sevā—service to the spiritual master; vastu—the real substance (the Absolute Truth); mile—receives; jīvana—life; sārthaka—successful; yadi haya—if it is; sei se—that particular; sevā—service; pele—obtaining; tāhale—upon that; sukhī—happy person; hale—becomes; tava saṅga—Your association; bhāgyete—by good fortune; milaya—meets.

If You bestow Your power, by serving the spiritual master one attains the Absolute Truth—one's life becomes successful. If that service is obtained, then one becomes happy and gets Your association due to good fortune.
   
Text 7
evaṁ janaṁ nipatitaṁ prabhavāhikūpe
kāmābhikāmam anu yaḥ prapatan prasaṅgāt
kṛtvātmasāt surarṣiṇā bhagavan gṛhītaḥ
so 'haṁ kathaṁ nu visṛje tava bhṛtya-sevām
   
evam—thus; janam—people in general; nipatitam—fallen; prabhava—of material existence; ahi-kūpe—in a blind well full of snakes; kāma-abhikāmam—desiring the sense objects; anu—following; yaḥ—the person who; prapatan—falling down (in this condition); prasaṅgāt—because of bad association or increased association with material desires; kṛtvā-ātmasāt—causing me (to acquire spiritual qualities like himself, Śrī Nārada); sura-ṛṣiṇā—by the great saintly person (Nārada); bhagavan—O my Lord; gṛhītaḥ—accepted; saḥ—that person; aham—I; katham—how; nu—indeed; visṛje—can give up; tava—Your; bhṛtya-sevām—the service of Your pure devotee.

“My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, because of my association with material desires, one after another, I was gradually falling into a blind well full of snakes, following the general populace. But Your servant Nārada Muni kindly accepted me as his disciple and instructed me how to achieve this transcendental position. Therefore, my first duty is to serve him. How could I leave his service?” [Prahlāda Mahārāja to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, Bhāg. 7.9.28)
   
Text 8
tumi mor cira sāthī bhuliyā māyār lāthi
khāiyāchi janma-janmāntare
āji punaḥ e sujoga jadi hoy jogāyoga
tabe pāri tuhe milibāre

tumi—You; mora—my; cira-sāthī—perpetual companion; bhuliyā—forgetting; māyāra—of illusion; lāthi—kicks; khāiyāchi—I am suffering; janma-janmāntare—birth after birth; āji—today; punaḥ—again; e—this; su-yoga—opportunity; yadi haya—if it is; yogāyoga—association; tabe—then; pāri—I am able; tuhe milibāre—to meet You.

O Lord Kṛṣṇa, You are my eternal companion. Forgetting You, I have suffered the kicks of māyā birth after birth. If today the chance to meet You occurs again, then I will surely be able to rejoin You.
Text 9
tomāra milane bhāi ābār se sukha pāi
gocārane ghuri din bhor
kata bane chuṭāchuṭi bane khāi luṭāpuṭi
sei din kabe habe mor

tomāra—Your; milane—in the meeting; bhāi—O dear friend; ābāra—once more; se sukha—that happiness; pāi—I will experience; go-cāraṇe—tending the cows; ghuri—I will wander; dina bhora—all through the day; kata vane—in so many forests; chuṭāchuṭi—joking and frolicking; vane—in the forest; khāi—I relish; luṭāpuṭi—rolling on the ground; sei dina—that day; kabe—when; habe mora—it will be mine.

O dear friend, in Your company I will experience great joy once again. In the early morning I will wander about the cowherd pastures and fields. Running and frolicking in the many forests of Vraja, I will roll on the ground in spiritual ecstasy. Oh when will that day be mine?
   
Text 10
āji se subidhāne tomāra smaraṇa bhela
baro āśā ḍākilām tāi
āmi tomāra nitya-dāsa tāi kori eta āśa
tumi binā anya gati nāi

āji—today; se—that; su-vidhāne—in a nice way; tomāra—Your; smaraṇa—remembrance; bhela—happened; baḍa āśā—great longing; ḍākilāma—I called out; tāi—just so; āmi—I; tomāra—Your; nitya-dāsa—eternal servant; tāi—just so; kari—I maintain; eta āśa—such a desire; tumi vinā—other than You; anya gati—another refuge; nāi—there is not.

   Today that remembrance of You came to me in a very nice way. Because I have a great longing I called to You. I am Your eternal servant and therefore I desire Your association so much. O Lord Kṛṣṇa, except for You there is no other means of success.
   
Text 1 (repeat)
kṛṣṇa taba puṇya habe bhāi
e-puṇya koribe jabe rādhārāṇī khusī habe
dhruva ati boli tomā tāi

O brother, Kṛṣṇa, I emphatically say to You that when You perform this pious act Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī will surely be pleased with You and You will achieve great piety.
Song 1: Mārkine Bhāgavata-dharma (baro-kṛpā kaile kṛṣṇa)
Mārkine Bhāgavata-dharma
by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda
at Boston Harbor, September 18, 1965
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
baro-kṛpā kaile kṛṣṇa adhamer prati
ki lāgiyānile hethā koro ebe gati

baḍa-kṛpā—great mercy; kaile—showed; kṛṣṇa—O Lord Kṛṣṇa; adhamera prati—to this fallen soul; ki lāgi—for what reason; ānile—You have brought me; hethā—here; kara—please show; ebe—now; gati—Your purpose.

My dear Lord Kṛṣṇa, You are so kind upon this useless soul, but I do not know why You have brought me here. Now You can do whatever You like with me.

Text 2
āche kichu kārja taba ei anumāne
nahe keno āniben ei ugra-sthāne

āche—there is; kichu—some; kārya—work; tava—Your; ei—this; anumāne—by guessing; nahe—if not; kena—why; ānibena—You have brought; ei—in this; ugra-sthāne—terrible place.

But I guess You have some business here, otherwise why would You bring me to this terrible place?

Text 3
rajas tamo guṇe erā sabāi ācchanna
bāsudeb-kathā ruci nahe se prasanna

rajaḥ—the mode of passion; tamaḥ—the mode of ignorance; guṇe—by the modes; erā—their; sabāi—all of them; ācchanna—covered; vāsudeva-kathā—topics about Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva; ruci—taste; nahe—not; se—they; prasanna—are happy or jubilant.

Most of the population here is covered by the material modes of ignorance and passion. Absorbed in material life, they think themselves very happy and satisfied, and therefore they have no taste for the transcendental message of Vāsudeva. I do not know how they will be able to understand it.

Text 4
tabe jadi taba kṛpā hoy ahaitukī
sakal-i sambhava hoy tumi se kautukī

tabe—then; yadi—if; tava—Your; kṛpā—mercy; haya—is shown; ahaitukī—causeless; sakala-i—all of them; sambhava haya—it is possible; tumi—You; se—that; kautukī—fond of amusements.

But I know Your causeless mercy can make everything possible because You are the most expert mystic.

Text 5
ki bhāve bujhāle tārā bujhe sei rasa
eta kṛpā koro prabhu kori nija-baśa

ki bhāve—in what manner; bujhāle—causing to understand; tārā—them; bujhe—comprehending; sei rasa—the mellows of devotional service; eta—such as this; kṛpā—mercy; kara—please display; prabhu—O Lord; kari—I am making; nija-vaśa—under Your controlling power.

How will they understand the mellows of devotional service? O Lord, I am simply praying for Your mercy so that I will be able to convince them about Your message.

Text 6
tomāra icchāya saba hoy māyā-baśa
tomāra icchāya nāśa māyār paraśa

tomāra icchāya—according to Your desire; saba—everyone; haya—is; māyā-vaśa—controlled by illusion; tomāra icchāya—according to Your desire; nāśa—destruction; māyāra paraśa—the touch of illusion.

All living entities have become under the control of the illusory energy by Your will, and therefore, if You like, by Your will they can also be released from the clutches of illusion.

Text 7
taba icchā hoy jadi tādera uddhār
bujhibe niścai tabe kathā se tomār

tava icchā—Your desire; haya—is; yadi—if; tādera—their; uddhāra—deliverance; bujhibe—they will comprehend; niścaya-i—definitely; tabe—then; kathā—message; se—that; tomāra—Your.

I wish that You may deliver them. Therefore if You so desire their deliverance, then only will they be able to understand Your message.

Text 8
bhāgavater kathā se taba avatār
dhīra haiyā śune jadi kāne bār bār

bhāgavatera kathā—the message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; se—that; tava avatāra—Your incarnation; dhīra haiyā—becoming grave; śune—by hearing; yadi—if; kāne—by aural reception; bāra bāra—again and again.

The words of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam are Your incarnation, and if a sober person repeatedly receives it with submissive aural reception, then he will be able to understand Your message.
   It is said in the Srīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.17-21):
śrnvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ   punya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ
hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi   vidhunoti suhṛt satām
naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu   nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā
bhagavaty uttama-śloke   bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī
tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ   kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye
ceta etair anāviddhaṁ   sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati
evaṁ prasanna-manaso   bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ
bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ   mukta-saṅgasya jāyate
bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś   chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ
kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi   dṛṣṭa evātmanīśvare

"Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramātmā [Supersoul] in everyone's heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who has developed the urge to hear His messages, which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted. By regular attendance in classes on the Bhāgavatam and by rendering of service to the pure devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is almost completely destroyed, and loving service unto the Personality of Godhead, who is praised with transcendental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact. As soon as irrevocable loving service is established in the heart, the effects of nature's modes of passion and ignorance, such as lust, desire and hankering, disappear from the heart. Then the devotee is established in goodness, and he becomes completely happy. Thus established in the mode of unalloyed goodness, the man whose mind has been enlivened by contact with devotional service to the Lord gains positive scientific knowledge of the Personality of Godhead in the stage of liberation from all material association. Thus the knot in the heart is pierced, and all misgivings are cut to pieces. The chain of fruitive actions is terminated when one sees the self as master."

Text 9
rajas tamo hate tabe pāibe nistār
hṛdayer abhadra sate ghucibe tāhār

rajaḥ—the mode of passion; tamaḥ—the mode of ignorance; ha’te—from; tabe—then; pāibe—will attain; nistāra—deliverance; hṛdayera—of the heart; abhadra—inauspicious; saba—all; ghucibe—will be removed; tāhāra—their.

He will become liberated from the influence of the modes of ignorance and passion and thus all inauspicious things accumulated in the core of the heart will disappear.

Text 10
ki ko're bujhābo kathā baro sei cāhi
khudra āmi dīna hīna kono śakti nāhi
   
ki kare—by doing what; bujhāba—I will make them understand; kathā—Your message; vara—benediction; sei—that; cāhi—I crave; kṣudra—tiny; āmi—I; dīna hīna—fallen and insignificant; kono śakti—any power; nāhi—there is not.

How will I make them understand this message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness? I am very unfortunate, unqualified and the most fallen. Therefore I am seeking Your benediction so that I can convince them, for I am powerless to do so on my own.
Text 11
athaca enecho prabhu kathā bolibāre
je tomār icchā prabhu koro ei bāre

athaca—nevertheless; enecha—You have brought; prabhu—O Lord; kathā—message; balibāre—to speak; ye—which; tomāra icchā—Your will; prabhu—O Lord; kara—do; ei-bāre—now.

Somehow or other, O Lord, You have brought me here to speak about You. Now, my Lord, it is up to You to make me a success or failure as You like.
Text 12
akhila jagat-guru! bacana se āmār
alaṅkṛta koribār khamatā tomār

akhila jagat-guru—O spiritual master of the entire universe; vacana—words; se—that; āmāra—my; alaṅkṛta—decorated; karibāra—to make; kṣamatā—the ability; tomāra—Your.

O spiritual master of all the worlds! I can simply repeat Your message, so if You like You can make my power of speaking suitable for their understanding.

Text 13
taba kṛpā ha'le mor kathā śuddha habe
śuniyā sabāra śoka duḥkha je ghucibe

tava kṛpāYour mercy; ha’le—upon showing; mora kathā—my speech; śuddha habe—will become pure; śuniyā—hearing; sabāra—of everyone; śoka-duḥkha—lamentation and misery; ye—which; ghucibe—will be removed.

Only by Your causeless mercy will my words become pure. I am sure that when this transcendental message penetrates their hearts they will certainly feel engladdened and thus become liberated from all unhappy conditions of life.
Text 14
āniyācho jadi prabhu āmāre nācāte
nācāo nācāo prabhu nācāo se-mate
kāṣṭhera puttali jathā nācāo se-mate

āniyācha—You have brought; yadi—if; prabhu—O Lord; āmāre—to me; nācāte—cause to dance; nācāo—make me dance; nācāo—make me dance; prabhu—O Lord; nācāo—make me dance; se-mate—in that manner; kāṣṭhera putula—a wooden puppet; yathā—just as; nācāo—make me dance; se-mate—in that manner.

O Lord, I am just like a puppet in Your hands. So if You have brought me here to dance, then make me dance, make me dance, O Lord, make me dance as You like.
   
Text 15
bhakti nāi beda nāi nāme khub daro
"bhaktivedānta" nām ebe sārthak kor

bhakti nāi—no devotion; veda nāi—no knowledge; nāme—by the title; khuba—very much; baḍa—great; bhaktivedānta nāma—the name Bhaktivedānta; ebe—now; sārthak kara—please fulfill it.

I have no devotion, nor do I have any knowledge, but I have strong faith in the holy name of Kṛṣṇa. I have been designated as Bhaktivedānta, and now, if You like, You can fulfill the real purport of Bhaktivedānta.
Signed–the most unfortunate, insignificant beggar
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami,
on board the ship Jaladuta, Commonwealth Pier,
Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A.
dated 18th of September, 1965

Part 2: songs of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
songs of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
Song 2: Aruṇodaya-kīrtana I (udilo aruṇa)
Aruṇodaya-kīrtana I
Udilo Aruṇa
Kīrtana songs to be sung at dawn 
(from Gītāvalī)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
udilo aruṇa pūraba-bhāge,
dwija-maṇi gorā amani jāge,
bhakata-samūha loiyā sāthe,
gelā nagara-brāje

udilo—the rising; aruṇa—redness; pūraba-bhāge—the eastern horizon; dvija-maṇi—the jewel of the twice-born brāhmaṇas; gorā—Lord Gaura; amani jāge—immediately awakens; bhakata-samūha—all the devotees; loiyā sāthe—taking them along; gelā—journeyed; nagara-brāje—wandering throughout the towns and villages.

When a tinge of red on the eastern horizon heralded the sunrise, the jewel of the twice-born, Lord Gaurasundara, immediately awakened. Taking His devotees with Him, He went all over the countryside, visiting the towns and villages of Nadia. 
Text 2
 'tāthaī tāthaī bājalo khol,
ghana ghana tāhe jhājera rol,
preme ḍhala ḍhala soṇāra aṅga,
caraṇe nūpura bāje

‘tāthaī tāthaī'—making the sound tāthaī tāthaī; bājalo khol—the mṛdaṅga drums resounded; ghana ghana—played in time; tāhe—in that kīrtana; jhāṅjera—of the large metal cymbals; rol—the tumult; preme—in ecstatic love; ḍhala ḍhala—slightly trembled; soṇāra aṅga—the golden form of Lord Gaurāṅga; caraṇe—upon His feet; nūpura bāje—the ankle bells jingled.

The mṛdaṅgas resounded "tāthaī, tāthaī," the cymbals chimed in time, and Lord Gaurāṅga's footbells jingled as His golden form trembled slightly in ecstatic love of God. 
Text 3
mukunda mādhava yādava hari,
bolena bolo re vadana bhori',
miche nida-baśe gelo re rāti,
divasa śarīra-sāje

mukunda mādhava yādava hari—with the holy names, “Mukunda!” “Mādhava!” “Yādava!” and “Hari!”; bolena—chanting; bolo re—oh sing!; vadana bhori'—filling your mouths; miche—uselessly; nida-vaśe—under the control of sleep; gelo—have spent; re—O!; rāti—the nights; divasa—the days; śarīra-sāje—in decorating your bodies.

Lord Caitanya called out to the townsfolk: "You spend your nights uselessly sleeping and your days decorating your bodies! Now just fill your mouths with the vibration of the holy names—Mukunda, Mādhava, Yādava, Hari—chanting without offense! 
Text 4
emana durlabha mānava-deho,
pāiyā ki koro bhāva nā keho,
ebe nā bhajile yaśodā-suta,
carame poribe lāje

emana—this; durlabha—rare; mānava-deho—human body; pāiyā—having achieved; ki koro—what are you doing?; bhava nā keho—you have not thought about it at all; ebe—now; nā bhajile—you do not worship; yaśodā-suta—the darling of Mother Yaśodā; carame—ultimately; poḍibe—you will fall (die); lāje—in shame.

"You have achieved the rare human body. Don't you care for this gift? If you do not serve the darling of Yaśodā now, great sorrow awaits you at death.
Text 5
udita tapana hoile asta,
dina gelo boli' hoibe byasta,
tabe keno ebe alasa hoy,
nā bhaja hṛdoya-rāje

udita—arisen; tapana—the sun; hoile asta—having set; dina gelo—the day passes; boli'—saying; hoibe byasta—will be lost; tabe keno—then why; ebe—now; alasa hoy—you remain idle; nā bhaja—you do not worship; hṛdoya-rāje—the Lord of the heart.

"Each time the sun rises and sets, a day passes and is lost. Then why do you remain idle and refuse to serve the Lord of the heart? 
Text 6
jīvana anitya jānaha sār,
tāhe nānā-vidha vipada-bhār,
nāmāśraya kori' jatane tumi,
thākaha āpana kāje

jīvana—life; anitya—is temporary; jānaha sār—please understand this essential fact; tāhe—in that; nānā-vidha—various kinds; vipada-bhār—filled with miseries; nāmāśraya kori'—taking shelter of the holy name; jatane—carefully; tumi—you; thākaha—remain always engaged; āpana kāje—in His service as your own eternal occupation.

"Understand this essential fact: life is temporary and full of all kinds of miseries. So take shelter of the holy name as your only business.
Text 7
jīvera kalyāna-sādhana-kām,
jagate āsi' e madhura nām,
avidyā-timira-tapana-rūpe,
hṛd-gagane birāje

jīvera—of all living entities; kalyāṇa-sādhana-kām—desiring to bless; jagate asi'—in the material universe; e—this; madhura nām—sweet name of Kṛṣṇa; avidyā-timira—the darkness of ignorance; tapana-rūpe—like the sun; hṛd-gagane—in the sky of the heart; virāje—shines.

"Desiring to bless all souls, the sweet name of Kṛṣṇa has descended to the material world and now shines like the sun in the sky of the heart, destroying the darkness of ignorance."
Text 8
kṛṣṇa-nāma-sudhā koriyā pān,
jurāo bhakativinoda-prāṇ,
nāma binā kichu nāhiko āro,
caudda-bhuvana-mājhe

kṛṣṇa-nāma-sudhā—the pure nectar of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa; koriyā pān—drinking; juḍāo—thus satisfy; bhakativinoda-prāṇ—the soul of Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda; nāma vinā—except for the holy name; kichu nāhiko āra—there is nothing else; caudda-bhuvana-mājhe—within the fourteen worlds.

Drink the pure nectar of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa and thus satisfy the soul of Bhaktivinoda. There is nothing but the holy name within all the fourteen worlds.
Song 2: Aruṇodaya-kīrtana II (Jīv Jāgo)
Aruṇodaya-kīrtana II
Jīv Jāgo
(from Gītāvalī)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
jīv jāgo, jīv jāgo, gauracānda bole
kota nidrā jāo māyā-piśācīra kole

jīv jāgo—wake up, sleeping souls!; jīv jāgo—wake up, sleeping souls!; gauracānda bole—Lord Gaurāṅga calls; kota nidrā yāo—how long are you sleeping?; māyā-pīśācīra—of the witch Māyā; kole—in the lap.

Lord Gaurāṅga is calling, "Wake up, sleeping souls! Wake up, sleeping souls! You have slept so long on the lap of the witch Māyā! 
Text 2
bhajibo boliyā ese saṁsāra-bhitare
bhuliyā rohile tumi avidyāra bhare

bhajibo—I will certainly worship the Lord; boliyā—saying; ese—having come; saṁsāra-bhitore—into the material world; bhuliyā—having forgotten; rohile tumi—you have remained; avidyāra bhore—in the darkness of ignorance.

"You came into this world of birth and death saying 'My Lord, I will certainly worship You,' but you have forgotten this promise and remained in great ignorance.
Text 3
tomāre loite āmi hoinu avatāra
āmi binā bandhu āra ke āche tomāra

tomāre loite—to reclaim you; āmi—I; hoinu avatāra—have descended as an incarnation; āmi vinā—other than Myself; bandhu āra—another friend; ke āche—who is?; tomāra—yours.

 "I have descended just to save you. Except for Me, who is your friend? 
Text 4
enechi auṣadhi māyā nāśibāro lāgi'
hari-nāma mahā-mantra lao tumi māgi'

enechi—I have brought; auṣadhi—the medicine; māyā—illusion of Māyā; nāśibāro lāgi'—for destroying; hari-nāma mahā-mantra—the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra; lao—please take it; tumi—you; māgi'—begging.

"I have brought the medicine to eradicate the disease of illusion. Now pray for this Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra and take it." 
Text 5
bhakativinoda prabhu-caraṇe pariyā
sei hari-nāma-mantra loilo māgiyā

bhakativinoda—Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura; prabhu-caraṇe—at the lotus feet of Lord Gaurāṅga; poḍiyā—falling down; sei hari-nāma-mantra—that Hari-nāma-mantra; loilo—he received; māgiyā—after begging.

 Bhaktivinoda fell at the lotus feet of Lord Gaurāṅga, and after begging for the holy name, he received that mahā-mantra.
Song 2: Śrī Nāma (gāy gorā madhur sware)
Śrī Nāma
(from Gītāvalī)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
gāy gorā madhur sware
hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare
hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare

gāy—sings; gorā—Lord Gaurasundara; madhur sware—in a very sweet voice;
hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare
hare rāma hare rāma, rāma rāma hare hare

Lord Gaurasundara sings in a very sweet voice, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare."
Text 2
gṛhe thāko, vane thāko, sadā 'hari' bole' ḍāko,
sukhe duḥkhe bhulo nā'ko, vadane hari-nām koro re

gṛhe thāko—just live at home; vane thāko—or live in the forest; sadā—always; ‘hari'—the holy name of Hari; bole' ḍāko—shout while chanting; sukhe duḥkhe—in happiness or distress; bhulo nā'ko—don't forget; vadane—with your lips; hari-nām—the holy names; koro re—oh please chant!

(2) Whether you are a householder or a sannyāsī, constantly chant, "Hari, Hari!" Don't forget this chanting, either in happiness or distress. Just fill your mouth with hari-nāma.
Text 3
māyā-jāle baddha ho 'ye, ācho miche kāja lo 'ye,
ekhona cetana pe'ye, 'rādhā-mādhav' nām bolo re

māyā-jāle—in the entangling network of māyā; baddha ho'ye—you are bound up; ācho—yours is; miche kāja—fruitless toil; lo'ye—accepting; ekhona—now; cetana pe'ye—obtaining full consciousness; ‘rādhā-mādhav' nām—the names of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Mādhava; bolo re—so chant!

You are bound up in the network of māyā and are forced to toil fruitlessly. Now you have obtained full consciousness in the human form of life, so chant the names of Rādhā-Mādhava.
Text 4
jīvana hoilo śeṣa, nā bhajile hṛṣīkeśa
bhaktivinodopadeśa, ekbār nām-rase māto re

jīvana—your life; hoilo śeṣa—may end at any moment; na bhajile—you have not served; hṛṣīkeśa—the Lord of the senses; bhaktivinoda-upadeśa—this advice of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura; ekbār—just once; nām-rase—in the nectar of the holy name; māto—become intoxicated; re—oh!

Your life may end at any moment, and you have not served the Lord of the senses, Hṛṣīkeśa. Take this advice of Bhaktivinoda: "Just once, relish the nectar of the holy name!"
Song 2: Gopīnātha
Gopīnātha
(from Kalyāṇa-kalpataru)
Audio
 Audio Download 
part One
Text 1
gopīnāth, mama nivedana śuno
viṣayī durjana, sadā kāma-rata,
kichu nāhi mora guṇa

gopīnāth—O Lord of the gopīs!; mama nivedana—my request; śuno—please hear; viṣayī—I am a sense-gratifier; durjana—and a wicked materialist; sadā—always; kāma-rata—addicted to worldly desires; kichu nāhi—not in the least; mora—my; guṇa—good qualities.

O Gopīnātha, Lord of the cowherd girls, please hear my prayer. I am a wicked materialist, always addicted to worldly desires, and no good qualities do I possess.
Text 2
gopīnāth, āmāra bharasā tumi
tomāra caraṇe, loinu śaraṇa,
tomāra kiṅkora āmi

gopīnāth; āmāra—my; bharasā—only hope; tumi—You are; tomāra caraṇe—at Your lotus feet; loinu śaraṇa—I have taken shelter; tomāra—Your; kiṅkora—servant; āmi—I.

(2) O Gopīnātha, You are my only hope, and so I have taken shelter at Your lotus feet. I am Your eternal servant.
Text 3
gopīnāth, kemone śodhibe more
nā jāni bhakati, karme jaḍa-mati,
porechi soṁsāra-ghore

gopīnāth; kemone—how?; śodhibe—will be purified; more—me; nā jāni—I do not know; bhakati—devotion; karme—in fruitive work; jaḍa-mati—my materialistic mind; poḍechi—I have fallen; soṁsāra-ghore—into this dark and perilous worldly existence.

O Gopīnātha, how will You purify me? I do not know what devotion is, and my materialistic mind is absorbed in fruitive work. I have fallen into this dark and perilous worldly existence.
Text 4
gopīnāth, sakali tomāra māyā
nāhi mama bala, jñāna sunirmala,
swādīna nahe e kāyā

gopināth; sakali—everything here; tomāra—is Your; māyā—illusory energy; nāhi mama—I have none; bala—strength; jñāna—or knowledge; sunirmala—pure and transcendental; svādhīna nāhe—is not independent from the control of material nature; e kāya—this body of mine.

O Gopīnātha, everything here is Your illusory energy. I have no strength or transcendental knowledge, and this body of mine is not independent, being controlled by material nature.
Text 5
gopīnāth, niyata caraṇe sthāna
māge e pāmara, kāndiyā kāndiyā,
korohe karuṇā dāna

gopināth; niyata—eternal; caraṇe—at Your feet; sthāna—a place; māge—begs; e pāmara—this sinner; kāndiyā kāndiyā—who is weeping and weeping; korohe—oh please give; karuṇā dāna—the gift of Your mercy.

O Gopīnātha, weeping and weeping, this sinner begs for an eternal place at Your divine feet. Please give him Your mercy.
Text 6
gopīnāth, tumi to' sakali pāro
durjane tārite, tomāra śakati,
ke āche pāpīra āro

gopināth; tumi—You; to'—certainly; sakali pāro—are able to do anything; durjane—all sinners; tarite—to deliver; tomāra—Your; śakati—power; ke āche—who is there?; pāpīra āro—more of a sinner than myself.

O Gopīnātha, since You can do anything, You have the power to deliver all sinners. Who is a greater sinner than I?
Text 7
gopīnāth, tumi kṛpā-pārābāra
jīvera kāraṇe, āsiyā prapañce,
līlā koile subistāra

gopināth; tumi—You are; kṛpā-pārābāra—the ocean of mercy; jīvera kāraṇe—for the sake of the fallen souls; āsiyā—having come; prapañce—into this phenomenal world; līlā—Your divine pastimes; koile suvistāra—You expand.

O Gopīnātha, You are the ocean of mercy. After entering this phenomenal world, You expand Your divine pastimes for the sake of the fallen souls.
Text 8
gopīnāth, āmi ki doṣe doṣī
asura sakala, pāilo caraṇa,
vinoda thākilo bosi'

gopināth; āmi—I; ki doṣe doṣī—am contaminated with how many sins?; asura sakala—all the demons; pāilo caraṇa—have attained Your lotus feet; vinoda—but this Bhaktivinoda; thākilo bosi—has remained in worldly existence.

O Gopīnātha, although all the demons You killed attained Your lotus feet, this Bhaktivinoda is so sinful that he has remained in worldly existence.

part Two
Text 9
gopināth, ghucāo saṁsāra jwālā
avidyā-jātanā, āro nāhi sahe,
janama-maraṇa-mālā

gopināth; ghucāo—please remove; saṁsāra jvālā—the torment of worldly existence; avidyā-jātanā—the pain of ignorance; āro nāhi sahe—I can no longer tolerate; janama-maraṇa—of births and deaths; mālā—the repeated succession.

O Gopīnātha, please remove the torment of worldly existence. I can no longer tolerate the pain of ignorance and the cycle of repeated births and deaths.
Text 10
gopīnāth, āmi to' kāmera dāsa
viṣaya-bāsanā, jāgiche hṛdoye,
phādiche karama phāsa

gopināth; āmi—I; to'—am certainly; kāmera dāsa—a servant of lust; viṣaya-vāsanā—worldly desires; jāgiche hṛdoye—are awakening in my heart; phāṅdiche—is tightening; karama-phāṅsa—the noose of fruitive work.

O Gopīnātha, I am a confirmed servant of lust. Worldly desires are awakening in my heart, and thus the noose of fruitive work is beginning to tighten.
Text 11
gopināth, kabe vā jāgibo āmi
kāma-rūpa ari, dūre teyāgibo,
hṛdoye sphuribe tumi

gopināth; kabe vā—and when?; jāgibo āmi—I will wake up; kāma-rūpa ari—this enemy of lust; dūre teyāgibo—I will abandon afar; hṛdoye—in my heart; sphuribe tumi—You will manifest.

O Gopīnātha, when will I wake up and cast this enemy of lust far away, and when will You manifest Yourself in my heart?
Text 12
gopīnāth, āmi to' tomāra jana
tomāre chāriyā, saṁsāra bhajinu,
bhuliyā āpana-dhana

gopināth; āmi—I; to'—am certainly; tomāra jana—Your devotee; tomāre chāḍiyā—having abandoned You; saṁsāra bhajinu—I have worshiped this mundane world; bhuliyā āpana-dhana—thus having forgotten my real treasure.

O Gopīnātha, I am Your devotee, but because I abandoned You and thus forgot my real treasure, I have worshiped this mundane world.
Text 13
gopināth, tumi to' sakali jāno
āpanāra jane, daṇḍiyā ekhano,
śrī-caraṇe deho sthāno

gopināth; tumi—You; to'—certainly; sakali jāno—know everything; āpanāra jane—Your own servant; daṇḍiyā—having punished; ekhano—now; śrī-caraṇe—at Your divine lotus feet; deho sthāna—please give him a place.

O Gopīnātha, You know everything. Now, having punished Your servant, please give him a place at Your lotus feet.
Text 14
gopīnāth, ei ki vicāra taba
bimukha dekhiyā, chāro nija-jane,
na koro' karuṇā-laba

gopināth; ei ki—is this; vicāra tava—Your judgment; vimukha dekhiyā—seeing me averse to You; chāḍo—You abandon; nija-jane—Your own servant; na koro'—and not bestow; karuṇā-lava—even a particle of mercy.

O Gopīnātha, is this your judgment, that seeing me averse to You, You abandon Your servant and bestow not even a particle of mercy upon him?
Text 15
gopīnāth, āmi to mūrakha ati
kise bhālo hoya, kabhu nā bujhinu,
tāi heno mama gati

gopināth; āmi—I; to'—am certainly; mūrakha ati—very foolish; kise bhālo hoya—what is good for me; kabhu nā bujhinu—I have never known; tāi heno—therefore such; mama gati—is my condition.

O Gopīnātha, I am certainly very foolish, and I have never known what is good for me. Such is my condition.
Text 16
gopīnāth, tumi to' paṇḍita-bara
mūḍhera maṅgala, tumi anveṣibe,
e dāse nā bhāvo' para

gopināth; tumi—You; to'—are certainly; paṇḍita-bara—the wisest person; mūḍhera maṅgala—auspiciousness for this fool; tumi anveṣibe—if You will look for a way; e dāse—this servant; nā bhāvo'—please do not consider; para—an outsider.

O Gopīnātha! You are indeed the wisest person. Please find a way to bring good fortune to this fool, and please do not consider this servant an outsider.

part Three
Text 17
gopīnāth, āmāra upāya nāi
tumi kṛpā kori', āmāre loile,
saṁsāre uddhāra pāi

gopināth; āmāra upāya nāi—I have no means of success; tumi kṛpā kori'—having bestowed Your mercy upon me; āmāre loile—if You take me; saṁsāre—from this world; uddhāra pāi—then I will obtain deliverance.

O Gopīnātha, I have no means of success, but if You bestow Your mercy upon me and take me to You, I will be delivered from this world.
Text 18
gopīnāth, porechi māyāra phere
dhana, dāra, suta, ghireche āmāre,
kāmete rekheche jere

gopināth; poḍechi—I have fallen; māyāra phere—into the perils of material illusion; dhana—wealth; dāra—wife; suta—and sons; ghireche āmāre—have surrounded me; kāmete—absorbed in lust; rekheche jere—is wasting me away.

O Gopīnātha, I have fallen into the perils of material illusion. Wealth, wife, and sons have surrounded me, and I am wasting away from lust.
Text 19
gopīnāth, mana je pāgala mora
nā māne śāsana, sadā acetana,
viṣaye ro 'yeche ghora

gopināth; mana—the mind; je—which; pāgala—is crazy; mora—my; nā māne—it does not care; śāsana—for any authority; sadā acetana—always senseless; viṣaye—in worldly affairs; ro'yeche—has remained; ghora—the dark pit.

O Gopīnātha, my mind is crazy and disregards all authority. It is always senseless and stays in the dark pit of worldly affairs.
Text 20
gopināth, hāra je menechi āmi
aneka jatana, hoilo bifala,
ekhano bharasā tumi

gopināth; hāra—defeat; je—which; menechi āmi—I have accepted; aneka jatana—all of my various endeavors; hoilo biphala—were totally useless; ekhano—now; bharasā tumi—You are the only hope.

O Gopīnātha, I have accepted defeat. All my efforts have failed. Now You are my only hope.
Text 5
gopīnāth, kemone hoibe gati
prabala indriya, bośī-bhūta mana,
nā chāre viṣaya-rati

gopināth; kemone—how?; hoibe gati—shall I make any advancement; prabala indriya—the powerful senses; bośī-bhūta—has come under the control; mana—my mind; nā chāḍe—and does not abandon; viṣaya-rati—its attachment to materialism.

O Gopīnātha, how shall I make any advancement when my mind has come under the sway of my powerful senses and stubbornly clings to sense gratification?
Text 21
gopīnāth, hṛdoye bosiyā mora
manake śamiyā, laho nija pāne,
ghucibe vipada ghora

gopināth; hṛdoye—in the core of my heart; bosiyā—after sitting down; mora manake—my mind; śamiyā—subduing; laho—please take me; nija pāne—to Yourself; ghucibe—will be relieved; vipada ghora—the horrible dangers of this world.

O Gopīnātha, after sitting down in the core of my heart and subduing my mind, please take me to You. Thus the horrible dangers of this world will vanish.
Text 22
gopīnāth, anātha dekhiyā more
tumi hṛṣīkeśa, hṛṣīka damiyā,
tāro 'he saṁsṛti-ghore

gopināth; anātha dekhiyā more—seeing me so helpless; tumi hṛṣīkeśa—You are Hṛṣīkeśa, the Lord of the senses; hṛṣīka damiyā—controlling these senses of mine; tāro'he—oh please deliver!; saṁsṛti-ghore—from this dark and perilous worldly existence.

O Gopīnātha, You are Hṛṣīkeśa, the Lord of the senses. Seeing me so helpless, please control these senses of mine and deliver me from this dark and perilous worldly existence.
Text 23
gopīnāth, galāya legeche phāsa
kṛpā-asi dhori', bandhana chediyā,
vinode koroho dāsa

gopināth; galāya—around my neck; legeche—is fixed; phāṅsa—the noose of materialism; kṛpā-asi—the sword of Your mercy; dhori'—taking up; bandhana chediyā—and cutting this bondage; vinode—this Bhaktivinoda; koroho dāsa—make him Your humble servant.

O Gopīnātha, I am bound around the neck by the noose of materialism. Take up Your sword of mercy and cut my bonds, and make Bhaktivinoda Your humble servant.
Song 2: Gurudeva (kṛpā-bindu diyā)
Gurudeva
(from Śaraṇāgati)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
gurudev!
kṛpā-bindu diyā, koro' ei dāse,
tṛṇāpekhā ati hīna
sakala sahane, bala diyā koro',
nija-māne spṛhā-hīna

gurudev!—O Gurudeva!; kṛpā-bindu—a drop of your mercy; diyā—giving; koro'—make; ei dāse—this servant; tṛṇāpekhā—than a blade of grass; ati hīna—very humble; sakala sahane—to bear all trials and troubles; bala diyā—giving strength; koro'—make; nija-māne—in personal honor; spṛhā-hīna—free from all desires.

Gurudeva! With a drop of mercy make this servant of yours humbler than a blade of grass. Give me the strength to bear all trials and troubles, and free me from all desire for honor.
Text 2
sakale sammāna korite śakati,
deho' nātha! jathājatha
tabe to' gāibo, hari-nāma-sukhe,
aparādha ha 'be hata

sakale sammāna—honoring all living beings; korite—to do; śakati—the power; deho'—please give; nātha!—O Lord!; yathāyatha—befittingly; tabe—then; to'—certainly; gāibo—I will sing; hari-nāma-sukhe—in the ecstasy of the holy name; aparādha—offenses; ha'be—will become; hata—finished.

O lord and master! Please invest me with the power to honor all living beings properly. Only then will I sing the holy name in great ecstasy, free of offenses.
Text 3
kabe heno kṛpā, labhiyā e jana,
kṛtārtha hoibe, nātha!
śakti-buddhi-hīna, āmi ati dīna,
koro' more ātma-sātha

2kabe—when?; heno—such; kṛpā—mercy; labhiyā—obtaining; e jana—this devotee; kṛtārtha—fulfilled; hoibe—will become; nātha!—O lord and master!; śakti-buddhi-hīna—devoid of all strength and intelligence; āmi—I; ati dīna—very fallen; koro'—please make; more—me; ātma-sātha—Your beloved servant.

O lord and master! When will such mercy fall to this weak and foolish devotee? Please make me your beloved servant.
Text 4
jogyatā-vicāre, kichu nāhi pāi,
tomāra karuṇā-sāra
karuṇā nā hoile, kāndiyā kāndiyā,
prāṇa nā rākhibo āra

yogyatā-vicāre—in examining my worth; kichu nāhi—absolutely nothing; pāi—I find; tomāra—Your; karuṇā sāra—mercy is essential; karuṇā nā hoile—if You are not merciful; kāndiyā kāndiyā—weeping constantly; prāṇa—life; nā rākhibo—I will not maintain; āra—any longer.

When I examine myself, I find nothing of value. Therefore your mercy is essential to me. If you are not merciful, I shall simply weep and weep, and I shall not maintain my life.
Song 2: Mānasa Deha Geha
Mānasa Deha Geha
Mind, Body, and Home
(from Śaraṇāgati)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
mānasa, deho, geho, jo kichu mor
arpilū tuwā pade, nanda-kiśor!

mānasa—my mind; deho—body; geho—family and home; yo kichu—whatever; mor—is mine; arpil—I have offered; tuyā pade—at Your lotus feet; nanda-kiśor—O youthful son of Nanda!

Mind, body, and family, whatever may be mine, I have surrendered at Your lotus feet, O youthful son of Nanda!
Text 2
sampade vipade, jīvane-maraṇe
dāy mama gelā, tuwā o-pada baraṇe

sampade vipade—in good fortune or in bad; jīvane-maraṇe—in life or death; dāy—difficulties; mama—my; gelā—have disappeared; tuyā o-pada—those feet of Yours; varaṇe—by submissive acceptance.

In good fortune or bad, in life or death, all my difficulties have disappeared because I have chosen those lotus feet of Yours as my only shelter.
Text 3
mārobi rākhobi-jo icchā tohārā
nitya-dāsa prati tuwā adhikārā

mārobi rākhobi—slay me or protect me; yo icchā tohāra—as You wish; nitya-dāsa—Your eternal servant; prati—toward; tuyā adhikāra—it is Your prerogative.

Slay me or protect me as You wish, for You are the master of Your eternal servant.
Text 4
janmāobi moe icchā jadi tor
bhakta-gṛhe jani janma hau mor

janmāobi moe—that I be born again; icchā jadi tor—if it is Your will; bhakta-gṛhe—in the home of Your devotee; jani janma—take birth; hau—may it be; mor—mine.

If it is Your will that I be born again, then may it be in the home of Your devotee.
Text 5
kīṭa-janma hau jathā tuwā dās
bahir-mukha brahma janme nāhi āś

kīṭa-janma—born as a worm; hau—may it be; jathā—so long as; tuyā dās—I remain Your devotee; bahir-mukha—averse to You; brahma-janme—to be born as Lord Brahmā; nāhi āś—I have no desire.

Let me be born again even as a worm, as long as I may remain Your devotee. I have no desire to be born as a Brahmā averse to You.
Text 6
bhukti-mukti-spṛhā vihīna je bhakta
labhaite tāko saṅga anurakta

bhukti-mukti-spṛhā—desire for worldly enjoyment or liberation; vihīna—who is completely devoid; ye bhakta—that devotee; labhaite—to attain; tāṅko saṅga—their association; anurakta—I yearn.

I yearn for the company of that devotee who is completely free of all desire for worldly enjoyment or liberation.
Text 7
janaka, jananī, dayita, tanay
prabhu, guru, pati-tuhū sarva-moy

janaka—father; jananī—mother; dayita—lover; tanay—son; prabhu—Lord; guru—preceptor; pati—husband; tuh—You; sarva-moy—are everything to me.

Father, mother, lover, son, Lord, preceptor, husband—You are everything to me.
Text 8
bhakativinoda kohe, śuno kāna!
rādhā-nātha! tuhū hāmāra parāṇa

bhakativinoda kohe—Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda says; śuno kāna!—O Kāna, please hear me!; rādhā-nātha!—O Lord of Rādhā!; tuh—You; hāmāra parāṇa—are my life and soul.

Bhaktivinoda says, "O Kāna, please hear me! O Lord of Rādhā, You are my life and soul!"
Song 2: Vidyāra Vilāse (rādhā-kṛṣṇa prāṇa mora)
Vidyāra Vilāse
(from Śaraṇāgati)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
vidyāra vilāse,  kāṭāinu kāla,
parama sāhase āmi
tomāra caraṇa,  nā bhajinu kabhu,
ekhona śaraṇa tumi

vidyāra vilāse—in the distractions of mundane learning; kāṭāinu kāla—I passed the time; parama sahase—with great confidence; āmi—I; tomāra caraṇa—Your lotus feet, O Lord; nā bhajinu—I did not worship; kabhu—ever; ekhona—but now; śaraṇa tumi—You are my only shelter.

With great enthusiasm I spent my time in the pleasures of mundane learning, and never worshiped Your lotus feet, O Lord. Now You are my only shelter.
Text 2
poḍite poḍite,  bharasā bārilo,
jñāne gati habe māni'
se āśā biphala,  se jñāna durbala,
se jñāna ajñāna jāni

poḍite poḍite—reading on and on; bharasā bāḍilo—my hope grew; jñāne—material knowledge; gati—life's true goal; habe—will be attained; māni'—I considered; se āśā—that hope; biphala—was fruitless; se jñāna—that knowledge; durbala—proved feeble; se jñāna—that knowledge; ajñāna jāni—I know now to be ignorance.

Reading on and on, my hopes grew and grew, for I considered the acquisition of material knowledge to be life's true goal. How fruitless those hopes turned out to be, for all my knowledge proved feeble. Now I know that all such erudition is actually pure ignorance.
Text 3
jaḍa-vidyā jata,  māyāra vaibhava,
tomāra bhajane bādhā
moha janamiyā,  anitya saṁsāre,
jīvake koraye gādhā

jaḍa-vidyā—mundane knowledge; jata—all; māyāra vaibhava—is the power of the illusory energy; tomāra bhajane—to Your service; bādhā—an impediment; moha janamiyā—bringing about infatuation; anitya saṁsāre—for this temporary world.; jīvake—to the eternal soul; karaye gādhā—it turns into an ass.

All the so-called knowledge of this world is born of the flickering potency of Your illusory energy (māyā). It is an impediment to the execution of devotional service to You. Indulgence in mundane knowledge verily makes an ass of the eternal soul by encouraging his infatuation with this temporary world.*
Text 4
sei gādhā ho'ye,  saṁsārera bojhā,
bahinu aneka kāla
bārdhakye ekhona,  śaktira abhāve,
kichu nāhi lāge bhālo

sei gādhā ho'ye—here is one such ass; saṁsārera bojhā—the burden of material existence; vahinu—I have carried on my back; aneka kāla—for a long time; bārdhakye—in my old age; ekhano—now; śaktira abhāve—for want of the power to enjoy; kichu nāhi—absolutely nothing; lāge bhālo—pleases me.

Here is one person who has been turned into such an ass, who for so long has carried on his back the useless burden of material existence. Now in my old age, for want of the power to enjoy, I find that nothing at all pleases me.
Text 5
jīvana jātanā,  hoilo ekhona,
se vidyā avidyā bhelo
avidyāra jwālā,  ghaṭilo biṣama,
se vidyā hoilo śelo

jīvana jātanā hoilo—life has become agony; ekhano—now; se vidyā—that knowledge; avidyā bhelo—has become ignorance; avidyāra jvālā—the burning pain of ignorance; ghaṭilo viṣama—has become intolerable; se vidyā—that knowledge; hoilo śelo—has become a pointed spear.

Life has now become agony, for my so-called erudite knowledge has proven itself to be worthless ignorance. Material knowledge has now become a pointed shaft and has pierced my heart with the intolerable, burning pain of ignorance.
Text 6
tomāra caraṇa,  binā kichu dhana,
saṁsāre nā āche āra
bhakativinoda,  jaḍa-vidyā chāḍi,'
tuwā pada kore sāra

tomāra caraṇa—Your lotus feet; vinā—besides; kichu dhana—any treasure; saṁsāre—in this world; nā āche āra—there is none else; bhakativinoda—this Bhaktivinoda; jaḍa-vidyā chāḍi'—giving up all mundane knowledge; tuyā pada—Your lotus feet; kore sāra—makes the sum and substance of his life.

O Lord, there is no treasure worth seeking in this world other than Your lotus feet. Bhaktivinoda abandons all his mundane knowledge and makes Your lotus feet the sum and substance of his life.
Song 2: Tumi Sarveśvareśvara
Tumi Sarveśvareśvara
(from Śaraṇāgati)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
tumi sarveśvareśvara, brajendra-kumāra!
tomāra icchāya viśve sṛjana saṁhāra

O youthful son of the King of Vraja, You are Lord of all lords. According to Your will, creation and destruction take place in the universe.
Text 2
tava icchā-mato brahmā korena sṛjana
tava icchā-mato viṣnu korena pālana

According to Your will Lord Brahmā creates, and according to Your will Lord Viṣnu maintains.
Text 3
tava icchā-mate śiva korena saṁhāra
tava icchā-mate māyā sṛje kārāgāra

According to Your will Lord Śiva destroys, and according to Your will Māyā constructs the prison house of this world.
Text 4
tava icchā-mate jīver janama-maraṇa
samṛddhi-nipāte duḥkha sukha-saṁghaṭana

According to Your will the living beings take birth and die, and according to Your will they meet with prosperity and ruin, happiness and sorrow.
Text 5
miche māyā-baddha jīva āśā-pāśe phire'
tava icchā binā kichu korite nā pāre

The tiny soul bound up by Māyā vainly struggles in the fetters of worldly desire. Without Your sanction he is unable to do anything.
Text 6
tumi to' rākhaka ār pālaka āmāra
tomāra caraṇa binā āśā nāhi āra

You are my only protector and maintainer. Except for Your lotus feet there is no other hope for me.
Text 7
nija-bala-ceṣṭā-prati bharasā chāḍiyā
tomāra icchāya āchi nirbhara koriyā

No longer confident of my own strength and endeavor, I have become solely dependent on Your will.
Text 8
bhakativinoda ati dīna akiñcana
tomāra icchāya tā'r jīvana maraṇa

Bhaktivinoda is most poor, and his pride has been leveled. Now in accordance with Your will he lives and dies.
Song 2: Prasāda-sevāya I
Prasāda-sevāya I
songs for the Honoring of Spiritual Food
(from Gītāvalī)
Audio
 Audio Download 
(this first song should be sung before honoring the Lord's prasāda)
Text 1
 bhāi-re!
śarīra abidyā-jāl, joḍendriya tāhe kāl,
jīve phele viṣaya-sāgore
tā'ra madhye jihwā ati, lobhamoy sudurmati,
tā'ke jetā kaṭhina saṁsāre
kṛṣṇa baro doyāmoy, koribāre jihwā jay,
swa-prasād-anna dilo bhāi
sei annāmṛta pāo, rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa gāo,
preme ḍāko caitanya-nitāi

hāi-re—O brothers; śarīra—material body; avidyā—ignorance; jāl—network; joḍa-indriya—material senses; tāhe—they; kāl—death; jīve—the soul; phele—throw; viṣaya—of sense enjoyment; sāgore—the ocean; tā’ra—them; madhye—among; jihvā—the tongue; ati lobhamoy—most voracious; su-durmati—uncontrollable; tā’ke—that; jetā—to conquer; kaṭhina—very difficult; saṁsāre—in this world.

O Lord, this material body is a place of ignorance, and the senses are a network of paths to death. Somehow, we have fallen into this ocean of material sense enjoyment, and of all the senses the tongue is most voracious and uncontrollable; it is very difficult to conquer the tongue in this world. But You, dear Kṛṣṇa, are very kind to us and have given us such nice prasāda, just to control the tongue. Now we take this prasāda to our full satisfaction and glorify You Lord-Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa-and in love call for the help of Lord Caitanya and Nityānanda.
Song 2: Prasāda-sevāya II
Prasāda-sevāya II
Songs for the Honoring of Spiritual Food
(from Gītāvalī)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
bhāi-re!
eka-dina śāntipure,  prabhu adwaitera ghare,
dui prabhu bhojane bosilo
śāk kori' āswādana,  prabhu bole bhakta-gaṇa,
ei śāk kṛṣṇa āswādilo

O brothers! One day at Śrī Advaita's house in śāntipura, the two Lords—Caitanya and Nityānanda—were seated for lunch. Lord Caitanya tasted the green leafy vegetable preparation and addressed the assembly of His devotees, "This śāk is so delicious! Lord Kṛṣṇa has definitely tasted it.
Text 2
heno śāk-āswādane,  kṛṣṇa-prema aise mane,
sei preme koro āswādana
jaḍa-buddhi parihari',  prasād bhojana kori',
'hari hari' bolo sarva jan

"At the taste of śāk like this, love of Kṛṣṇa arises in the heart. In such love you should taste these remnants. Giving up all materialistic conceptions and taking the Lord's prasād, all of you just chant 'Hari! Hari!'" [for more details of this pastime, see Caitanya Bhāgavata, Antya 4.234-299]
Song 2: Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Bol
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Bol
(from Gītāvalī)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
'rādhā-kṛṣṇa' bol bol bolo re sobāi
(ei) śikhā diyā, sab nadīyā
phirche nece' gaura-nitāi
(miche) māyār bośe, jāccho bhese',
khāccho hābuḍubu, bhāi

‘rādhā-kṛsna' bol bol bolo—everyone chant, chant, chant, ‘Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa!'; re—oh!; sobāi—everyone; (ei) śikhā—this teaching; diyā—giving; sab nadīyā—all over the land of Nadia; phirche—wandering around; nece'—while dancing; gaura-nitāi—Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda; (miche)—needlessly; māyār bośe—under the control of māyā; yāccho bhese'—carried away by the waves; khāccho hābuḍubu—sometimes floating and sometimes sinking; bhāi—O brothers!

"Everyone chant, chant, chant, 'Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa'!" Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda are dancing throughout Nadia, giving this teaching to all. O brothers, you are needlessly suffering under the control of māyā and being carried away by her waves, sometimes floating and sometimes sinking in this ocean of illusion.
Text 2
(jīv) kṛṣṇa-dās, e biśwās,
korle to' ār duḥkho nāi
(kṛṣṇa) bolbe jabe, pulak ha'be
jhorbe āṅkhi, boli tāi

jīv—the spirit soul; kṛṣṇa-dās—the eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa; e viśvās korle—if you have this faith; to'—then; ār duhkho nāi—there will be no more misery; (kṛṣṇa) bolbe jabe—when you chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa; pulak ha'be—your body will shiver in ecstasy; jhorbe ānkhi—your eyes will shed tears; boli tāi—this is what I say.

If you just understand that the spirit soul is the eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, you will never have any more sorrows. And when you chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, your eyes will fill with tears and your body shiver in transcendental ecstasy. This is what I say.
Text 3
('rādhā) kṛṣṇa' bolo, saṅge calo,
ei-mātra bhikhā cāi
(jāy) sakal'bipod bhaktivinod
bole, jakhon o-nām gāi

(‘rādhā) kṛṣṇa' bolo—chant “Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa”; saṅge calo—please join with us; ei-mātra—only this; bhikhā—request; cāi—do I beg; (jay) sakal vipod—all dangers go away; bhaktivinod bole—Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda says; yakhon—when; o-nām gāi—I chant those holy names.

Chant "Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa" in the association of devotees. This is all I ask. Bhaktivinoda says, "When I chant the holy name of the Lord, all dangers flee."
Song 2: Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava
Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava
(from Gītāvalī)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
(jaya) rādhā-mādhava (jaya) kuñja-bihārī
(jaya) gopī-jana-vallabha (jaya) giri-vara-dhārī
(jaya) jaśodā-nandana, (jaya) braja-jana-rañjana,
(jaya) jāmuna-tīra-vana-cārī

jaya—all glories to:
rādhā-mādhava—Rādhā and the Lord of sweetness; kuñja-bihārī—He who enjoys loving pastimes in the groves of Vṛndāvana; gopī-jana-vallabha—the lover of the cowherd maidens of Vraja; giri-vara-dhārī—the holder of the great hill named Govardhana; yaśodā-nandana—the beloved son of Mother Yaśodā; vraja-jana-rañjana—the delighter of the inhabitants of Vraja; yāmuna-tīra-vana-cārī—who wanders in the forests along the banks of the river Yamunā.

Kṛṣṇa is the lover of Rādhā. He displays many amorous pastimes in the groves of Vṛndāvana, He is the lover of the cowherd maidens of Vraja, the holder of the great hill named Govardhana, the beloved son of Mother Yaśodā, and the delighter of the inhabitants of Vraja, and He wanders in the forests along the banks of the River Yamunā.
(Śrīla Prabhupāda was very fond of this song and sang it just before his lectures. In Allahabad and Gorakhpur Śrīla Prabhupāda fell into a trance after singing the first two lines, and after some time he came back into external consciousness and said, "Now just chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." Śrīla Prabhupāda said that this song is "a picture of Vṛndāvana. Everything is there—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Vṛndāvana, Govardhana, Yaśodā, and all the cowherd boys.")
Song 2: Siddhi Lalasa (kabe gaura-bane)
Siddhi Lālasā
Wandering madly in Navadvipa
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
kabe gaura-bane, suradhuni-tate,
"ha radhe ha krsna" bo'le
kandiya bedabo, deho-sukha chadi,
nana-lata taru-tale

kabe—when?; gaura-vane—in the forest of Lord Gaurāṅga (Navadvīpa); suradhunī-taṭe—on the banks of the celestial Ganges; ‘ha rādhe ha kṛṣṇa' bole'—chanting, “O Rādhā! O Kṛṣṇa!”; kāndiyā—while weeping; berā'bo—I will wander; deho-sukha chāḍi'—forgetting all physical comforts; nānā latā-taru—of various creepers and trees; tale—under the shade.

When, oh when will I wander here and there weeping in the shade of the trees and creepers along the banks of the celestial Ganges River in Navadvipa? I will cry out "Oh Radhe! Oh Krsna!", and will completely forget about all the so-called pleasures of the material body.
Text 2
(kabe) swapaca-grhete, magiya khaibo,
pibo saraswati-jal
puline puline, gadagadi dibo,
kori' krsna-kolahal

śva-paca-gṛhete—at the homes of the dog-eaters; māgiyā—by begging; khāibo—I will take my meals; pibo—I will drink; sarasvatī-jala—the water of the Sarasvatī river; puline puline—along both the banks of the river; gaḍā-gaḍi dibo—I will roll on the ground; kori' kṛṣṇa-kolāhala—raising an uproar of "Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!"

When will I be able to live so simply by begging some food from the homes of the untouchables? I will drink the water of the Sarasvati river, and in ecstasy I will roll about on the banks of the river, raising a loud uproar of "Krsna! Krsna!"
Text 3
(kabe) dhama-basi jane, pranati koriya,
magibo krpar lesa
vaisnava-carana- renu gay makhi',
dhori' avadhuta-besa

dhāma-bāsī jane—to the inhabitants of the holy land; praṇati koriyā—bowing down; māgibo—I will beg; kṛpāra leśa—a bit of their mercy; vaiṣṇava-caraṇa-renu—the dust of the Vaiṣṇavas' feet; gāya mākhi'—smearing on my body; dhori'—I will wear; avadhūta-veśa—the dress of a mendicant.

When will I bow down to all the inhabitants of the holy land of Navadvipa and humbly beg for a drop of their mercy? I will smear the dust of the Vaisnavas' lotus feet all over my body, and will wander around wearing the dress of a madman.
Text 4
(kabe) gaura-braja-bane, bheda na koriya,
hoibo baraja-basi
(takhan) dhamer swarupa, sphuribe nayane,
hoibo radhar dasi

gauḍa-braja-jane—the inhabitants of Navadvīpa and those of Vraja-bhūmi; bheda nā dekhibo—I will see no difference; hoibo—I will be transformed; baraja-bāsī—into a resident of Vraja; dhāmera svarūpa—the true nature of the Lord's abode; sphuribe nayane—will manifest itself to my eyes; hoibo—and I will become; rādhāra dāsī—a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

When will I make no distinction between the holy land of Gaura-mandala and Vraja-mandala? At that time, I shall be transformed into a Vraja-basi. Then I will see the true form of the transcendental realm opening up before my very eyes, and I will thus become one of the maidservants of Srimati Radharani.
Song 2: Kabe Ha'be Bolo
Kabe Ha'be Bolo
(from Śaraṇāgati)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
kabe ha'be bolo se-dina āmār
(āmār) aparādha ghuci', śuddha nāme ruci,
kṛpā-bale ha'be hṛdoye sañcār

kabe ha'be—when will it be?; bolo—please tell me; se-dina—that day; āmār—mine; (āmār)—my; aparādhā ghuci'—offenses ceasing; śuddha nāme—for the pure holy name; ruci—increasing taste; kṛpā-bale—by the power of divine grace; ha'be—will be; hṛdoye—within my heart; sañcār—infused.

Please tell me, When will that day be mine—when my offenses will end and the power of divine grace will infuse my heart with a taste for the pure holy name?
Text 2
tṛṇādhika hīna, kabe nije māni',
sahiṣṇutā-guṇa hṛdoyete āni'
sakale mānada, āpani amānī,
ho'ye āswādibo nāma-rasa-sār

tṛṇādhika hīna—lower than a blade of grass; kabe—when?; nije māni'—considering myself; sahiṣnutā-guṇa—the quality of forbearance; hṛdoyete—into my heart; āni'—bringing; sakale mānada—showing respect to all; āpani—myself; amānī hoye—being freed from false pride; āsvādibo—I will taste; nāma-rasa-sār—the essence of the nectar of the holy name.

Thinking myself lower than a blade of grass, bringing forbearance into my heart, respecting all, and freed of false pride—when will I taste the essence of the liquid nectar of the holy name?
Text 3
dhana jana āra, kobitā-sundarī,
bolibo nā cāhi deho-sukha-karī
janme-janme dāo, ohe gaurahari!
ahaitukī bhakti caraṇe tomār

dhana—wealth; jana—following; āra—and; kavitā-sundarī—beautiful women, as described in worldly poetry; bolibo—I will say; nā cāhi—I do not want; deho-sukha-karī—bodily pleasures; janme janme—birth after birth; dāo—please give; ohe gaurahari—O Lord Gaurahari!; ahaitukī bhakti—unmotivated devotion; caraṇe tomār—to Your lotus feet.

Neither wealth nor followers, nor beautiful women described in worldly poetry—none of these bodily pleasures do I covet. O Lord Gaurahari, please give me causeless devotion to Your lotus feet, birth after birth!
Text 4
(kabe) korite śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma uccāraṇa,
pulakita deho gadgada bacana
baibarṇya-bepathu ha'be saṅghaṭana,
nirantara netre ba'be aśru-dhār

(kabe)—when?; korite—to do; śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma uccāraṇa—while articulating the divine name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; pulakita deho—body thrilled in ecstatic rapture; gadgada vacana—words choked with emotion; vaivarṇya-vepathu—changing bodily color and ecstatic trembling; ha'be saṅghaṭana—will occur; nirantara—constantly; netre—from my eyes; ba'be—will flow; aśru-dhār—streams of tears.

When, as I chant the divine name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, will my body thrill with ecstasy and my words choke up, when will pallor and trembling occur, and when will my eyes pour forth endless streams of tears?
Text 5
kabe navadwīpe, suradhunī-taṭe,
gaura-nityānanda boli' niṣkapaṭe
nāciyā gāiyā, berāibo chuṭe,
bātulera prāya chāriyā bicār

kabe—when?; navadvīpe—in the land of Navadvīpa; suradhunī-taṭe—on the banks of the celestial Ganges; gaura-nityānanda boli'—calling, “O Gaura! O Nityānanda!”; niṣkapaṭe—innocently; nāciyā—dancing; gāiyā—singing; beḍāibo chuṭe—I will joyfully run about; bātulera prāya—just like a madman; chāḍiyā vicār—giving up all considerations.

When will I run about on the Ganges bank in Navadvīpa, guilelessly calling out "Gaura-Nityānanda!" dancing and singing like a madman, giving up all mundane considerations?
Text 6
kabe nityānanda, more kori 'doyā,
chārāibe mora viṣayera māyā
diyā more nija-caraṇera chāyā,
nāmera hāṭete dibe adhikār

kabe—when?; nityānanda—Lord Nityānanda; more kori' doyā—being merciful to me; chāḍāibe mora—He will release me; viṣayera māyā—from the illusion of worldliness; diyā more—having given me; nija-caraṇera chāyā—the shade of His own feet; nāmera hāṭete—into the marketplace of the holy name; dibe adhikār—He will allow me to enter.

When will Lord Nityānanda show me mercy and release me from the illusion of materialism? When will He give me the shade of His lotus feet and let me enter the marketplace of the holy name?
Text 7
kinibo, luṭibo, hari-nāma-rasa,
nāma-rase māti' hoibo bibaśa
rasera rasika-caraṇa paraśa,
koriyā mojibo rase anibār

kinibo—I shall buy; luṭibo—I shall plunder; hari-nāma-rasa—the mellows of the name of Hari; nāma-rase—by those mellows of the holy name; māti'—becoming intoxicated; hoibo vivaśa—I shall become stunned; rasera rasika—of those great souls who relish those mellows; caraṇa paraśa—by touching the feet; koriyā majibo—I will be immersed; rase—in the sweet nectar; anibār—constantly.

I shall buy or steal the mellows of the holy name of Hari, and after becoming intoxicated with those mellows I shall become stunned. By touching the lotus feet of the great souls who relish those mellows, I shall constantly drown in the sweet nectar of the name.
Text 8
kabe jībe doyā, hoibe udoya,
nija-sukha bhuli' sudīna-hṛdoya
bhakativinoda, koriyā binoya,
śrī-ājñā-ṭahala koribe pracār

kabe—when?; jīve doya—compassion for all fallen souls; hoibe udoya—there will be an awakening; nija-sukha bhuli'—forgetting my own happiness; sudīna-hṛdoya—with a meek heart; bhakativinoda—this Bhaktivinoda; koriyā vinoya—by humble entreaty; śrī-ājñā-tahala—the sacred order of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; koribe pracār—will set out to propagate.

When will compassion for all fallen souls awaken within this Bhaktivinoda, and when will he thus forget his own happiness and with a meek heart set out to propagate by humble entreaty the sacred order of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu?
Song 2: Śuddha-bhakata
Śuddha-bhakata
(from Śaraṇāgati)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
śuddha-bhakata-caraṇa-reṇu,
bhajana-anukūla
bhakata-sevā, parama-siddhi,
prema-latikāra mūla

śuddha-bhakata—of pure devotees; caraṇa-reṇu—dust from the lotus feet; bhajana-anukūla—is conducive to devotional service; bhakata-sevā—service to the Vaiṣṇavas; parama-siddhi—is the supreme perfection; prema-latikāra mūla—and the root of the creeper of divine love.

The dust from the lotus feet of pure devotees gives rise to devotional service, and service to the devotees is itself the supreme perfection and the root of the tender creeper of divine love.
Text 2
mādhava-tithi, bhakti-jananī,
jetane pālana kori
kṛṣṇa-basati, basati boli',
parama ādare bori

mādhava-tithi—the holy days like Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī; bhakti-jananī—the mother of devotion; yatane pālana kori—I observe with great care; kṛṣṇa-basati—the transcendental abode of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; vasati boli'—I choose as my dwelling place; parama ādare bori—with the greatest of reverence and love.

With great care I observe holy days like Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī, for they are the mother of devotion. And with the greatest reverence and love I choose as my dwelling place the transcendental abode of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Text 3
gaur āmāra, je-saba sthāne,
koralo bhramaṇa raṅge
se-saba sthāna, heribo āmi,
praṇayi-bhakata-saṅge

gaur āmāra—my Lord Gaurasundara; ye-saba sthāne—all the places; koralo bhramaṇa—had traveled; raṅge—for pastimes; se-saba sthāna—all those places; heribo āmi—I will behold; praṇayi-bhakata-saṅge—in the company of loving devotees.

In the company of loving devotees I will visit all those places where my Lord Gaurasundara traveled and performed His pastimes.
Text 4
mṛdaṅga-bādya, śunite mana,
abasara sadā jāce
gaura-bihita, kīrtana śuni',
ānande hṛdoya nāce

mṛdaṅga-vādya—the music of the mṛdaṅga drum; śunite—to hear; mana—my mind; avasara—an opportunity; sadā yāce—always begs; gaura-vihita—approved by Lord Gauracandra; kīrtana—the congregational chanting; śuni'—hearing; ānande—in ecstasy; hṛdoya nāce—my heart dances.

My mind always begs to hear the music of the mṛdaṅga, and my heart dances in ecstasy whenever I hear the kind of kīrtana established by Lord Gauracandra. 
Text 5
jugala-mūrti, dekhiyā mora,
parama-ānanda hoya
prasāda-sebā korite hoya,
sakala prapañca jaya

yugala-mūrti—the Deity forms of the divine couple; dekhiyā—beholding; mora—my; parama-ānanda hoya—supreme bliss comes about; prasāda-sevā korite—to honor the prasāda food remnants; hoya—there is; sakala prapañca—all worldly illusions; jaya—I conquer.

I feel supreme bliss when I behold the Deity forms of the divine couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and I conquer all worldly illusions by honoring the Lord's prasādam.
Text 6
je-dina gṛhe, bhajana dekhi,
gṛhete goloka bhāya
caraṇa-sīdhu, dekhiyā gaṅgā,
sukha nā sīmā pāya

ye-dina—that day; gṛhe—in my house; bhajana dekhi—seeing the worship ceremonies; gṛhete—within the house; goloka bhāya—Goloka Vṛndāvana appears; caraṇa-sīdhu—the river of nectar emanating from the Lord's lotus feet; dekhiyā gaṅgā—seeing the Ganges river; sukha—my happiness; nā sīmā pāya—knows no bounds.

Every day Goloka Vṛndāvana appears in my home when I see Lord Hari being worshiped there. My joy knows no bounds when I see the Ganges, a river of nectar emanating from the Lord's lotus feet.
Text 7
tulasī dekhi',  jurāya prāṇa,
mādhava-toṣaṇī jāni'
gaura-priya, śāka-sevane,
jīvana sārthaka māni

tulasī dekhi'—seeing the holy tulasī tree; juḍāya prāṇa—soothes my soul; mādhava-toṣaṇī—she who is pleasing to Lord Mādhava; jāni'—I understand; gaura-priya—dear to Lord Caitanya; śāka-sevane—honoring the spinach preparation; jīvana—life itself; sārthaka māni—I consider successful.

The sight of the tulasī plant soothes my soul, for I know she gives pleasure to Lord Kṛṣṇa. I feel that my life has been fulfilled when I honor śāk, a green leafy vegetable preparation that is a favorite of Lord Caitanya's. 
Text 8
bhakativinoda, kṛṣṇa-bhajane,
anakūla pāya jāhā
prati-dibase, parama-sukhe,
swīkāra koroye tāhā

bhakativinoda—this Bhaktivinoda; kṛṣṇa-bhajane—for the worship of Lord Kṛṣṇa; anukūla—favorable; pāya yāhā—whatever is obtained; prati-divase—every day; parama-sukhe—with the greatest of joy; svīkāra koroye—accepts; tāhā—that.

Whatever Bhaktivinoda obtains that furthers devotional service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa he accepts every day with the greatest joy.
Song 2: Bhoga-ārati (bhaja bhakata-vatsala)
Bhoga-ārati
(from Gītāvalī)
(at Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda's home at Surabhi-kuñja in Godruṁa-dvīpa)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
bhaja bhakata-vatsala śrī-gaurahari
śrī-gaurahari sohi goṣṭha-bihārī
nanda-jaśomatī-citta-hari

bhaja—just worship; bhakata-vatsala—who is always very affectionate to His devotees; śrī-gaurahari—Lord Caitanya; śrī-gaurahari—this Śrī Gaurahari; sohi—is the same as; goṣṭha-bihārī—He who sports in the pasturelands; nanda-yaśomatī-citta-hārī—who has stolen the hearts of Nanda Mahārāja and Mother Yaśodā.

Just worship Śrī Gaurahari, who is always affectionate toward His devotees. He is the same Supreme Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, who sported in the cowherd pastures of Vraja and stole the hearts of Nanda and Yaśodā.
Text 2
belā ho'lo dāmodara āisa ekhano
bhoga-mandire bosi' koraho bhojana

[Mother Yaśodā calls to Kṛṣṇa:] belā ha'lo—it is very late; dāmodara—O Dāmodara!; āisa ekhona—please come now; bhoga-mandire—in the prasāda hall; basi'—sitting; karoha bhojana—please take Your lunch.

Mother Yaśodā calls to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear Dāmodara, it is very late. Please come right now, sit down in the dining hall, and take Your lunch."
Text 3
nandera nideśe baise giri-bara-dhārī
baladeva-saha sakhā baise sāri sāri

nandera nideśe—on the direction of Nanda Mahārāja; baise—sits; giri-vara-dhārī—the holder of Govardhana Hill; baladeva-saha—along with Śrī Baladeva; sakhā—the cowherd boys; baise sāri sāri—sit down in rows.

On the direction of Nanda Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa, the holder of Govardhana Hill, sits down, and then all the cowherd boys, along with Kṛṣṇa's elder brother, Śrī Baladeva, sit down in rows to take their lunch.
Text 4
śuktā-śākādi bhāji nālitā kuṣmāṇḍa
dāli dālnā dugdha-tumbī dadhi mocā-khaṇḍa

śuktā—bitter curry; śāka—spinach; ādi—and so forth; bhāji—fried savories; nālitā—salad with green leaves of the jute plant; kuṣmāṇḍa—pumpkin; ḍāli ḍālnā—baskets of fruit; dugdha-tumbī—squash cooked with milk; dadhi—thick yogurt; mocā-khaṇḍa—vegetable preparations made from the flower of the banana tree.

They are then served a feast of śuktā and various kinds of green leafy vegetables, then nice fried things, and a salad made of the green leaves of the jute plant. They are also served pumpkin, baskets of fruit, small square cakes made of lentils and cooked-down milk, then thick yogurt, squash cooked in milk, and vegetable preparations made from the flower of the banana tree.
Text 5
mudga-borā māṣa-borā roṭikā ghṛtānna
śaṣkulī piṣṭaka khīr puli pāyasānna

mudga-boḍā—fried squares of dahl paddies; roṭikā—capātīs; ghṛtānna—rice with ghee; śaṣkulī—sweetmeats made with milk, sugar and sesamum; piṣṭaka—sweetened rice flour cakes; khīr—thick, cooked-down milk; puli—sweet rolls; pāyasānna—sweet rice in condensed milk.

Then they receive fried squares of mung dahl patties, and urad dahl patties, capātīs, and rice with ghee. Next, sweets made with milk, sugar, and sesamum; rice flour cakes; thick cooked-down milk; cakes floating in milk; and sweet rice.
Text 6
karpūra amṛta-keli rambhā khīra-sāra
amṛta rasālā, amla dwādaśa prakāra

karpūra—scented with camphor; amṛta-keli—exotic sweet rice; rambhā—bananas; khīra-sāra—delicious cheese; amṛta rasāla—nectarean mangos; amla—sour preparations; dvādaśa prakāra—of twelve different kinds.

There is also sweet rice that tastes just like nectar due to its being mixed with camphor. There are bananas, and cheese which is nectarean and delicious. They are also served twelve kinds of sour preparations made with tamarinds, limes, lemons, oranges, and pomegranates.
Text 7
luci cini sarpurī lāḍḍu rasābalī
bhojana korena kṛṣṇa ho'ye kutūhalī

luci cini—purīs with sugar; sarpurī—purīs filled with cream; lāḍḍu—chick-pea flour sweetballs; rasābalī—dahl paddies boiled in sugared rice; bhojana korena kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa eats; ho'ye kutūhalī—in great fun.

There are purīs made with white flour and sugar; purīs filled with cream; laḍḍus; and dahl patties boiled in sugared rice. Kṛṣṇa eagerly eats all of the food.
Text 8
rādhikāra pakka anna vividha byañjana
parama ānande kṛṣṇa korena bhojana

rādhikāra—by Rādhikā; pakka anna—cooked grains; vividha—various; vyañjana—cooked vegetables; parama ānande—in supreme bliss; kṛṣṇa korena bhojana—Kṛṣṇa eats.

In great ecstasy and joy Kṛṣṇa eats the rice, curried vegetables, sweets, and pastries cooked by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.
Text 9
chale-bale lāḍḍu khāy śrī-madhumaṅgala
bagala bājāy āra drya hari-bolo

chale-bale—by hook or by crook; lāḍḍu khāy—eats lāḍḍu sweetballs; śrī-madhumaṅgala—Kṛṣṇa's funny brāhmaṇa friend Madhumaṅgala; bagala bājāy—makes a funny sound by slapping his hands under his armpits; āra deya—give me more!; hari-bolo—“Haribol! Haribol!” 

Kṛṣṇa's funny brāhmaṇa friend Madhumaṅgala, who is very fond of laḍḍus, gets them by hook or by crook. Eating the laḍḍus, he shouts, "Haribol! Haribol!" and makes a funny sound by slapping his sides under his armpits with his hands.
Text 10
rādhikādi gaṇe heri' nayanera koṇe
tṛpta ho'ye khāy kṛṣṇa jaśodā-bhavane

rādhikādi gaṇe—Rādhārāṇī and Her gopī friends; heri'—beholding; nayanera koṇe—out of the corners of His eyes; tṛpta ho'ye—being very satisfied; khāy kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa eats; yaśodā-bhavane—at the house of Mother Yaśodā.

Beholding Rādhārāṇī and Her gopī friends out of the corners of His eyes, Kṛṣṇa eats at the house of Mother Yaśodā with great satisfaction.
Text 11
bhojanānte piye kṛṣṇa subāsita bāri
sabe mukha prakhāloy ho'ye sāri sāri

bhojanānte—after lunch; piye kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa drinks; suvāsita vāri—sweet-scented water; sabe—all His friends; mukha prakhāloy—wash their mouths; ho'ye sāri sāri—standing in lines. 

After lunch, Kṛṣṇa drinks rose-scented water. Then all of the boys, standing in lines, wash their mouths.
Text 12
hasta-mukha prakhāliyā jata sakhā-gaṇe
ānande biśrāma kore baladeva-sane

hasta-mukha—their hands and mouths; prakhāliyā—after washing; jata sakhā-gaṇe—all the cowherd boys; ānande—in great bliss; viśrāma kore—they take rest; baladeva-sane—along with Lord Balarāma. 

After all the cowherd boys wash their hands and mouths, in great bliss they take rest with Lord Balarāma.
Text 13
jambula rasāla āne tāmbūla-masālā
tāhā kheye kṛṣṇa-candra sukhe nidrā gelā

jambula rasāla—Kṛṣṇa's servants named Jambula and Rasāla; āne—bring; tāmbūla-masālā—spiced betel nuts; tāhā kheye—chewing that; kṛṣṇa-candra—the moonlike Kṛṣṇa; sukhe—happily; nidrā gelā—goes to sleep. 

The two cowherd boys Jambula and Rasāla then bring Kṛṣṇa pān made with betel nuts, fancy spices, and catechu. After eating that pān, Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra then happily goes to sleep.
Text 14
biśālākha śikhi-puccha-cāmara ḍhulāya
apūrba śayyāya kṛṣṇa sukhe nidrā jāya.

viśālākṣa—His servant named Viśālākṣa; śikhi-puccha-cāmara—a fan of peacock feathers; ḍhulāya—waves; apūrva śayyāya—on an excellent bedstead; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; sukhe—happily; nidrā jāya—goes to sleep.

While Kṛṣṇa happily takes His rest on an excellent bedstead, His servant Viśālākṣa cools Him with a fan of peacock feathers.
Text 15
jaśomatī-ājñā pe'ye dhaniṣṭhā-ānīto
śrī-kṛṣṇa-prasāda rādhā bhuñje ho'ye prīto

yaśomatī-ājñā—the order of Mother Yaśodā; pe'ye—receiving; dhaniṣṭhā-ānīto—brought by the gopī named Dhaniṣṭhā; śrī-kṛṣṇa-prasāda—the food remnants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; rādhā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; bhuñje—eats; ho'ye prīto—being extremely delighted.

At Mother Yaśodā's request the gopī Dhaniṣṭhā brings remnants of food left on Kṛṣṇa's plate to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who eats them with great delight.
Text 16
lalitādi sakhī-gaṇa avaśeṣa pāya
mane mane sukhe rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa gāya

lalitādi—headed by Lalitā; sakhī-gaṇa—the assembly of girlfriends; avaśeṣa pāya—receiving Her remnants; mane mane—in their heart-of-hearts; sukhe—blissfully; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa—the qualities of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; gāya—they sing.

Lalitā-devī and the other gopīs then receive the remnants, and within their hearts they sing the glories of Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa with great joy.
Text 17
hari-līlā ek-mātra jāhāra pramoda
bhogārati gāy ṭhākur bhakativinoda

hari-līlā—the wonderful pastimes of Lord Hari; ekmātra—one and only; yāhāra—whose; pramoda—joy; bhogārati—this Bhoga-ārati song; gāy—sings; ṭhākur bhakativinoda—Ṭhākur Bhaktivinoda.

Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda, whose one and only joy is the pastimes of Lord Hari, sings this Bhoga-ārati song.
Song 2: Gaura-ārati (kiba jaya jaya gorācānder āratiko śobhā)
Gaura-ārati
(from Gītāvalī)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
(kiba) jaya jaya gorācānder āratiko śobhā
jāhnavī-taṭa-vane jaga-mana-lobhā
jaga-jana-mana-lobhā
   (First Refrain)
gaurāṅger ārotik śobhā
jaga-jana-mana-lobhā

jaya jaya—all glories, all glories!; gorācānder—of the moonlike Lord Caitanya; āratiko śobhā—the beautiful ārati ceremony; jāhnavī-taṭa-vane—in a grove on the banks of the Ganges river; jaga-mana-lobhā—attracting the minds of all living entities in the universe.

All glories, all glories to the beautiful ārati ceremony of Lord Caitanya! This Gaura-ārati is being performed in a grove on the bank of the Ganges and is captivating everyone in the universe.
Text 2
dakhiṇe nitāicānd, bāme gadādhara
nikaṭe adwaita, śrīnivāsa chatra-dhara

dakhiṇe nitāi-cānd—on His right side is the moonlike Lord Nityānanda; vāme gadādhara—on His left is Śrī Gadādhara; nikaṭe advaita—nearby stands Śrī Advaita; śrīnivāsa chatra-dhara—and Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura is holding an umbrella.

On Lord Caitanya's right is Lord Nityānanda, and on His left is Śrī Gadādhara. Nearby stands Śrī Advaita, and Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura holds an umbrella over Lord Caitanya's head.
Text 3
bosiyāche gorācānd ratna-siṁhāsane
ārati koren brahmā-ādi deva-gaṇe

bosiyāche—is sitting; gorācānd—Lord Gaura-candra; ratna-siṁhāsane—upon a jeweled throne; ārati korena—performing the ārati ceremony; brahmā-ādi deva-gaṇe—the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā.

Lord Caitanya has sat down on a jeweled throne, and Lord Brahmā and the other demigods are performing His ārati.
Text 4
narahari-ādi kori' cāmara dhulāya
sañjaya-mukunda-bāsu-ghoṣ-ādi gāya

narahari-ādi—Narahari Sārakāra and other associates; kori' cāmara ḍhulāya—fanning Him with cāmara whisks; sañjaya-mukunda-vāsu-ghoṣ-ādi—the devotees headed by Sañjaya, Mukunda and Vāsu Ghoṣa; gāya—are singing.

As Narahari Sarakāra and other associates of Lord Caitanya fan Him with cāmaras, Sañjaya Paṇḍita, Mukunda Datta, Vāsu Ghoṣa and other devotees sing sweet kīrtana.
Text 5
śaṅkha bāje ghaṇṭā bāje bāje karatāla
madhura mṛdaṅga bāje parama rasāla
   (Second Refrain) 
śankha bāje ghaṇṭā bāje
madhur madhur madhur bāje

śaṅkha bāje—conchshells resound; ghaṇṭā bāje—bells resound; bāje karatāla—hand-cymbals resound; madhura mṛdaṅga bāje—sweet clay drums resound; parama rasāla—supremely sweet and relishable to hear.

Conchshells, bells, and karatālas resound, and the mṛdaṅgas play very sweetly. This kīrtana music is supremely sweet and relishable to hear.
Text 6
bahu-koṭi candra jini' vadana ujjvala
gala-deśe bana-mālā kore jhalamala

bahu-koṭi—many millions; candra—of moons; jini'—conquering; vadana ujjvala—the brilliance of Lord Caitanya's face; gala-deśe—around His neck; vana-mālā—the garland of forest flowers; kore jhalamala—shines.

The brilliance of Lord Caitanya's face conquers millions upon millions of moons, and the garland of forest flowers around His neck shines.
Text 7
śiva-śuka-nārada preme gada-gada
bhakativinoda dekhe gorāra sampada

śiva-śuka-nārada—Lord Śiva, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and Nārada Muni; preme—with the ecstasy of transcendental love; gada-gada—their voices are choked; bhakativinoda—thus Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda; dekhe—beholds; gorāra sampada—the glory of Lord Caitanya.

Lord Śiva, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and Nārada Muni are all present, and their voices are choked with the great ecstasy of transcendental love. Thus Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda envisions the glory of Lord Śrī Caitanya.
Song 2: Śrī Nāma-kīrtana (yaśomatī-nandana)
Śrī Nāma-kīrtana
Chanting of the Holy Names
(from Gītāvalī)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
yaśomatī-nandana, braja-baro-nāgara,
gokula-rañjana kāna
gopī-parāṇa-dhana, madana-manohara,
kāliya-damana-vidhāna

yaśomatī-nandana—Lord Kṛṣṇa is the beloved son of Mother Yaśodā; vraja-vara-nāgara—most beloved of the inhabitants of Vraja; gokula-rañjana—the attractor of the people of Gokula; kāna—(an intimate nickname);  gopī-parāṇa-dhana—the wealth of the lives of the gopīs; madana-manohara—who can attract even the mind of Cupid; kāliya-damana-vidhāna—the chastiser of the Kāliya serpent.

Lord Kṛṣṇa is the beloved son of Mother Yaśodā; the transcendental lover in the land of Vraja; the delight of Gokula; Kāna [a nickname of Kṛṣṇa]; the wealth of the lives of the gopīs. He steals the mind of even Cupid and punishes the Kāliya serpent.
Text 2
amala harinām amiya-vilāsā
vipina-purandara, navīna nāgara-bora,
baṁśī-badana suvāsā

amala harinām—these pure holy names; amiya vilāsā—are full of sweet, nectarean pastimes; vipina-purandara—He is the monarch of the garden groves; navīna nāgara-bora—He is the best of youthful lovers; vaṁśī-vadana—He is seen with His flute placed to His lips; suvāsā—He is an excellent dresser.

These pure holy names of Lord Hari are full of sweet, nectarean pastimes. Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of the twelve forests of Vraja, He is ever-youthful and is the best of lovers. He is always playing on a flute, and He is an excellent dresser.
Text 3
braja-jana-pālana, asura-kula-nāśana
nanda-godhana-rākhowālā
govinda mādhava, navanīta-taskara,
sundara nanda-gopālā

braja-jana-pālana—the protector of the inhabitants of Vraja; asura-kula-nāśana—the destroyer of demonic dynasties; nanda-godhana-rākhaoyālā—the keeper of Nanda Mahārāja's valuable cows; govinda—the giver of pleasure to the cows; mādhava—the husband of the goddess of fortune; navanīta-taskara—the butter thief; sundara nanda-gopālā—the beautiful cowherd son of Nanda Mahārāja.

Kṛṣṇa is the protector of the inhabitants of Vraja; the destroyer of various demoniac dynasties; the keeper and tender of Nanda Mahārāja's cows; the giver of pleasure to the cows, land, and spiritual senses; the husband of the goddess of fortune; the butter thief; and the beautiful cowherd boy of Nanda Mahārāja.
Text 4
yāmuna-taṭa-cara, gopī-basana-hara,
rāsa-rasika, kṛpāmoya
śrī-rādhā-vallabha, bṛndābana-naṭabara,
bhakativinod-āśraya

yāmuna-taṭa-cara—He wanders along the banks of the river Yamunā; gopī-vasana-hara—He steals the garments of the gopīs; rāsa-rasika—He delights in the mellows of the rāsa dance; kṛpāmoya—He is very merciful; śrī-rādhā-vallabha—the most beloved of Śrīmatī Rādhāraṇī; vṛndāvana-naṭabara—the great dancer of Vṛndāvana; bhakativinod-āśraya—the shelter of Bhaktivinoda.

Kṛṣṇa wanders along the banks of the river Yamunā. He stole the garments of the young damsels of Vraja who were bathing there. He delights in the mellows of the rāsa dance; He is very merciful; the lover and beloved of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; the great dancer of Vṛndāvana; and the shelter and only refuge of Bhaktivinoda.
Song 2: Ohe! Vaiṣṇava Ṭhākura
Ohe! Vaiṣṇava Ṭhākura
(from Śaraṇāgati)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
ohe!
vaiṣṇaba ṭhākura, doyāra sāgara,
e dāse koruṇā kori'
diyā pada-chāyā, śodho he āmāya,
tomāra caraṇa dhori

ohe! vaiṣṇava ṭhākura—O venerable Vaiṣṇava!; doyāra sāgara—O ocean of mercy!; e dāse—to me, your servant; koruṇā kori'—be merciful; diyā pada-chāyā—giving the shade of your lotus feet; śodho he āmāya—O purify me!; tomāra caraṇa—your feet; dhori—I humbly hold.

O venerable Vaiṣṇava, O ocean of mercy, be merciful unto your servant. Give me the shade of your lotus feet and purify me. I hold on to your lotus feet.
Text 2
chaya bega domi', chaya doṣa śodhi',
chaya guṇa deho' dāse
chaya sat-saṅga, deho' he āmāre,
boshechi saṅgera āśe

chaya vega—the six urges; domi'—controlling; chaya doṣa—the six faults; śodhi'—purifying; chaya guṇa—the six good qualities; deho' dāse—please give to your servant; chaya sat-saṅga—the six kinds of holy association; deho' he āmāre—O give me!; bosechi—I have sat down here; saṅgera—of having your company; āśe—in the hope.

Teach me to control my iisix passions; rectify my iiisix faults, bestow upon me ivthe six qualities, and offer unto me the vsix kinds of holy association.
Text 3
ekākī āmāra, nāhi pāya bala,
hari-nāma-saṅkīrtane
tumi kṛpā kori', śraddhā-bindu diyā,
deho' kṛṣṇa-nāma-dhane

ekakī—alone; āmāra—my; nāhi pāya bala—have no strength; hari-nāma-saṅkīrtane—to chant the holy name of Lord Hari; tumi—you; kṛpā kori'—being merciful; śraddhā-bindu—a particle of faith; diyā—bestowing; deho'—please give; kṛṣṇa-nāma-dhane—the great treasure of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa.

I do not find the strength to carry on alone the saṅkīrtana of the holy name of Hari. Please bless me by giving me just one drop of faith with which to obtain the great treasure of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa.
Text 4
kṛṣṇa se tomāra, kṛṣṇa dite pāro,
tomāra śakati āche
āmi to' kāṅgala, 'kṛṣṇa' 'kṛṣṇa' boli',
dhāi tava pāche pāche

kṛṣṇa se—that Kṛṣṇa; tomāra—is yours; kṛṣṇa dite pāro—you are able to give Kṛṣṇa; tomāra śakati—your power; āche—is; āmi—I; to'—indeed; kāṅgāla—am wretched; ‘kṛṣṇa' ‘kṛṣṇa' boli'—crying Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!; dhāi—I run; tava pāche pāche—behind you.

Kṛṣṇa is yours; you have the power to give Him to me. I am simply running behind you shouting, "Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!"

Song 2: Vibhāvarī Śeṣa
Vibhāvarī Śeṣa
(from Kalyāṇa-kalpataru)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
vibhāvarī śeṣa, āloka-praveśa,
nidrā chāri' uṭho jīva
bolo hari hari, mukunda murāri,
rāma kṛṣṇa hayagrīva

vibhāvarī—the night; śeṣa—has come to an end; āloka-praveśa—the light of dawn is entering; nidrā chāḍi'—giving up your sleep; utho—arise; jīva—O soul!; bolo hari hari—chant the holy names of Lord Hari; mukunda—the giver of liberation; murāri—the enemy of the Mura demon; rāma—the supreme enjoyer; kṛṣṇa—the all-attractive one; hayagrīva—the horse-headed incarnation.

The night has come to an end and the light of dawn is entering. O jīva soul, arise and give up your sleep. Chant the holy names of Lord Hari, who is the giver of liberation; the enemy of the Mura demon; the supreme enjoyer; the all-attractive one; and the horse-headed incarnation, Hayagrīva.
Text 2
nṛsiṁha vāmana, śrī-madhusūdana,
brajendra-nandana śyāma
pūtanā-ghātana, kaiṭabha-śātana,
jaya dāśarathi-rāma

nṛsiṁha—the half-man, half-lion; vāmana—the dwarf brāhmaṇa; śrī-madhusūdana—the killer of the Madhu demon; brajendra-nandana—the beloved son of the King of Vraja; śyāma—who is blackish in complexion; pūtanā-ghātana—the slayer of the Pūtanā witch; kaiṭabha-śātana—the destoyer of the demon Kaiṭabha; jaya—all glories!; dāśarathi-rāma—Lord Rāma, the son of King Daśaratha.

Lord Hari [Kṛṣṇa] incarnated as the half-man, half-lion, Nṛsiṁha. He appeared as a dwarf brāhmaṇa named Upendra and is the killer of the Madhu demon. He is the beloved son of the King of Vraja, Nanda Mahārāja, and is blackish in complexion. He is the slayer of the Pūtanā witch and s the destroyer of the demon Kaiṭabha. All glories to Lord Hari, who appeared as Lord Rāma, the son of King Daśaratha!
Text 3
yaśodā dulāla, govinda-gopāla,
vṛndāvana purandara
gopī-priya-jana, rādhikā-ramaṇa,
bhuvana -sundara-bara

yaśodā dulāla—the darling of Mother Yaśodā; govinda—the giver of pleasure to the cows; gopāla—the protector of the cows; vṛndāvana purandara—the monarch of the Vṛndāvana forest; gopī-priya jana—the beloved of the gopīs; rādhikā-ramaṇa—the lover of Rādhikā; bhuvana-sundara-bara—the most beautiful personality in all the worlds.

He is the darling of mother Yaśodā, the giver of pleasure to the cows, land, and spiritual senses, and the protector of the cows. He is the Lord of the Vṛndāvana forest, the gopīs' beloved, the lover of Rādhikā, and the most beautiful personality in all the worlds.
Text 4
rāvaṇāntakara, mākhana-taskara,
gopī-jana-vastra-hārī
brajera rākhāla, gopa-vṛnda-pāla,
citta-hārī baṁśī-dhārī

rāvaṇāntakara—who brought about the end of the demon Rāvaṇa; makhana-taskara—who stole the older gopīs' butter; gopījana-vastra-hārī—who stole the younger gopīs' clothes; brajera rākhala—a cowherd boy of Vraja; gopa-vṛnda-pāla—the protector of the cowherd boys; citta-hārī—who steals the hearts of all; baṁśī-dhārī—who always holds a flute.

As Rāmacandra He put an end to the demoniac King Rāvaṇa. As Kṛṣṇa, in His childhood He stole butter from the elder gopīs, and in His youth He stole the clothes of the younger gopīs while they bathed in the Yamunā. He is a cowherd boy of Vraja and the protector of the cowherd boys. He steals the hearts of all and always holds a flute.
Text 5
yogīndra-bandana, śrī-nanda-nandana,
braja-jana-bhaya-hārī
navīna nīrada, rūpa manohara,
mohana-baṁśī-bihārī

yogīndra-vandana—worshiped by the best of yogīs; śrī-nanda-nandana—the delightful son of Nanda; braja-jana-bhaya-hārī—who removes all the fears of the inhabitants of Vraja; navīna nīrada—who is the color of a fresh rain cloud; rūpa manohara—whose form is enchanting; mohana-baṁśī-bihārī—who looks very charming wandering about playing His flute.

Lord Kṛṣṇa is worshiped by the best of yogīs, He is the son of Nanda, He removes all the fears of the inhabitants of Vraja, He is the color of a fresh rain cloud, and His form is enchanting. When He wanders about, playing His flute, He looks very charming.
Text 6
yaśodā-nandana, kaṁsa-nisūdana,
nikuñja-rāsa-vilāsī
kadamba-kānana, rāsa-parāyaṇa,
bṛnda-vipina-nivāsī

yaśodā-nandana—the delightful son of Yaśodā; kaṁsa-nisūdana—the killer of King Kaṁsa; nikuñja-rāsa-vilāsī—who sports the rāsa dance amongst the garden groves; kadamba-kānana rāsa-parāyaṇa—who is fond of engaging in the rāsa dance underneath the kadamba trees; vṛndā-vipina-nivāsī—who resides in the forest of Vṛndā Devī.

He is the son of Yaśodā and the killer of King Kaṁsa, and He sports in the rāsa dance among the groves of Vraja. Kṛṣṇa engages in the rāsa dance beneath the kadamba trees, and He resides in the forest of Vṛndāvana.
Text 7
ānanda-vardhana, prema-niketana,
phula-śara-jojaka kāma
gopāṅganā-gaṇa, citta-vinodana,
samasta-guṇa-gaṇa-dhāma

ānanda-vardhana—who increases the ecstasy of His devotees; prema-niketana—the reservoir of all love; phula-śara—flowered arrows; yojaka—who uses; kāma—the transcendental Cupid; gopāṅgana-gaṇa citta-vinodana—the pleasure of the cowherd girls' hearts; samasta-guṇa-gaṇa-dhāma—the abode of all wonderful qualities.

He increases the ecstasy of His devotees. He is the reservoir of all love and is the transcendental Cupid who uses His viflower arrows to increase the loving desires of the gopīs. He is the pleasure of the gopīs' hearts and the abode of all wonderful qualities.
Text 8
jāmuna-jīvana, keli-parāyaṇa,
mānasa-candra-cakora
nāma-sudhā-rasa, gāo kṛṣṇa-jaśa
rākho vacana mana mora

yāmuna-jīvana—the life of the River Yamunā; keli-parāyaṇa—who is always absorbed in amorous pastimes; mānasa-candra-cakora—who is the moon of the gopīs' minds, which are like cakora birds (that subsist only upon moonlight); nāma-sudhā-rasa—the nectarean mellows of these holy names; gāo—please sing; kṛṣṇa yaśa—the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; rākho vacana—please obey this advice; mana mora—O my dear mind!

Lord Kṛṣṇa is the life of the river Yamunā. He is always absorbed in amorous pastimes, and He is the moon for the viicakora birds of the gopīs' minds. O mind, obey these words of mine and sing the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the form of these holy names, which are full of nectarean mellows.
Song 2: Āmār Jīvan
Āmār Jīvan
My Life
(from Śaraṇāgati)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
āmāra jīvana, sadā pāpe rata,
nāhiko puṇyera leṣa
parere udvega, diyāchi ye koto,
diyāchi jīvere kleśa

āmāra—my; jīvana—life; sadā—always; pāpe—in sinful activities; rata—engaged; nāhiko—there is not; puṇyera—of pious activities; leṣa—a trace; parere—to others; udvega—anxiety; diyāchi—I am inclined to give; ye—who; koto—great; diyāchi—I give; jīvere—to living entities; kleśa—suffering.

My life is always engaged in sinful activities, without a trace of pious activities. I am always inclined to give great anxiety and trouble to other living entities.

Text 2
nija sukha lāgi', pāpe nāhi ḍori,
dayā-hīna svārtha-paro
para-sukhe duḥkhī, sadā mithya-bhāṣī,
para-duḥkha sukha-karo

nija—my own; sukha—sense gratification; lāgi’—for; pāpe—in sinful activity; nāhi—there is no; ḍori—restraint; dayā—mercy; hīna—devoid of; sva-artha—to my personal interest; paro—I am dedicated; para—of others; sukhe—in the happiness; duḥkhī—I am unhappy; sadā—always; mithya—false; bhāṣī—words; para—of others; duḥkha—the misery; sukha—my happiness; karo—makes.

For my personal sense gratification, I never reject any kind of sinful activity. I am not at all merciful, and I see only to my personal interest. When others are suffering I become very happy, I am always speaking lies, and if someone is suffering, that is very pleasant to me.
Text 3
āśeṣa kāmanā, hṛdi mājhe mora,
krodhī, dambha-parāyaṇa
mada-matta sadā, viṣaye mohita,
hiṁsā-garva vibhūṣaṇa

āśeṣa—endless; kāmanā—material desires; hṛdi—the heart;  mājhe—in; mora—my; krodhī—I am angry; dambha—to deceit; parāyaṇa—dedicated; mada—mad; matta—with intoxication; sadā—always; viṣaye—in sense gratification; mohita—captivated; hiṁsā—malice; garva—false pride; vibhūṣaṇa—ornaments.

I have lots of material desires within my heart and am always angry and deceitful. I am captivated by subject matters of sense gratification and am almost crazy. My ornaments are malice and false pride.
Text 4
nidrālasya hata, sukārye virata,
akārye udyogī āmi
pratiṣṭha lāgiyā, śāṭhya-ācaraṇa,
lobha-hata sadā kāmī

nidra—by sleep; ālasya—by laziness; hata—attacked; sukārye—to pious activities; virata—averse; akārye—of impious activities; udyogī—a performer; āmi—I am; pratiṣṭha—prestige; lāgiyā—for the sake of; śāṭhya—cheating; ācaraṇa—behavior; lobha—by greed; hata—conqured; sadā—always; kāmī—a lusty person.

I am conquered by sleep and laziness and am always averse to pious activities, but I am very enthusiastic to perform impious activities. I always cheat others for my prestige, I am conquered by greed, and I am always lusty. 
Text 5
e heno durjana, saj-jana-varjita,
aparādhi nirantara
śubha-kārya-śūnya, sadānartha-manāḥ,
nānā duḥkhe jara jara

e—a;  heno—such; durjana—fallen person; saj-jana—with devotees of the Lord; varjita—devoid of association; aparādhi—an offender; nirantara—always; śubha—auspicious; kārya—activity; śūnya—devoid; sadā—always; anartha—mischievous; manāḥ—mind; nānā—all kinds of; duḥkhe—sufferings; jara jara—very old age.

I am so fallen, I have no association with devotees, and I am always an offender. In my life there is not a bit of auspicious activity, and my mind is always attracted by something mischievous. Therefore, at the fag end of my life I have become almost an invalid because of all such sufferings.
Text 6
bārdhakye ekhona, upāya-vihīna,
tā'te dīna akiñcana
bhakativinoda, prabhura caraṇe,
kore duḥkha nivedana

bārdhakye—in old age; ekhona—now; upāya—an alternative means; vihīna—without; tāte—therefore; dīna—humble; akiñcana—poor; bhakativinoda— Bhaktivinoda; prabhura—of the Lord; caraṇe—to the lotus feet; kore—makes; duḥkha—with sadness; nivedana—offering.

Now in my old age, with no alternative, I have by force become very humble and meek. Thus Bhaktivinoda offers this sad statement of his life’s activities at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord.
Song 2: Anādi Karama Phale
Anādi Karama Phale
The Reactions of Beginningless Karma"
(from Gītāvalī)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
anādi' karama-phale, paḍi' bhavārṇara jale,
taribāre nā dekhi upāya
ei viṣaya-halāhale, divā-niśi hiyā jvale,
mana kabhu sukha nāhi pāya

anādi’—from time immemorial; karama—activities;  phale—fruitive; paḍi’—I have fallen into; bhava—of birth and death; arṇava—of the ocean; jale—the waters; taribāre—of deliverance; nāno; dekhi—I see; upāya—means; ei—of these; viṣaya—acts of sense gratification; halāhale—the poison; divā—day; niśi—night; hiyā—my heart; jvale—burns; mana—my mind; kabhu—at any time; sukha—happiness; nāhi—does not; pāya—attain.

Due to my past fruitive activities, I have fallen into this great ocean of nescience, and I do not find any means of getting out. Day and night my heart burns from the poison of these worldly activities, and so my mind is not at all satisfied.

Text 2
āśā-pāśa-śata-śata, kleśa deya avirata,
pravṛtti-ūrmira tāhe khelā
kāma-krodha-ādi chaya, bāṭapāḍe deya bhaya,
avasāna hoilo āsi' belā

āśā—plans for happiness; pāśa—ropes; śata-śata—hundreds and thousands; kleśa—pain; deya—giving; avirata—constantly; pravṛtti—materialism; ūrmira—the waves; tāhe—in that (ocean of nescience); khelā—pastimes; kāma—lust; krodha—anger; ādi—and so on; chaya—six; bāṭapāḍe—thieves and rogues; deya—giving; bhaya—fear; avasāna—the end (of my life); hoilo—is; āsi’—coming; belāsoon.

I am always making hundreds and thousands of plans to become happy, but all these plans give me pain twenty-four hours a day. Indeed, I am being dashed again and again by the waves of the ocean of materialism. In addition, there are many thieves and rogues, of whom six are prominent: lust, anger, greed, envy, illusion, and madness. They are causing me great fear, and in this way my life is coming to an end.
Text 3
jnāna-karma-ṭhaga dui, more pratārīya loi,
avaśeṣe phele sindhu-jale
e heno samaye, bandhu, tumi kṛṣṇa kṛpā-sindhu,
kṛpā kori' tolo more bale

jnāna—mental speculation; karma—fruitive activity; ṭhaga—cheaters or thugs; dui—two; more—me; pratārīya—misleading; loi—are taking; avaśeṣe—finally; phele—throwing; sindhu-jale—into the ocean of misery; e—this; heno—such as; samaye—time; bandhu—friend; tumi—You; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; kṛpāof mercy; sindhu—ocean; kṛpā—mercy; kori’—having shown; tolo—pick up; more—me; bale—by Your strength.

The two thugs of mental speculation and fruitive activity have cheated me, misled me, and finally thrown me into the ocean of misery. Under the circumstances, my dear Kṛṣṇa, O ocean of mercy, You are my only friend. I have no strength to get out of this ocean of nescience, so I pray to Your lotus feet that You will be kind and by Your strength lift me out of this ocean of suffering.

Text 4
patita-kiṅkare dhari', pāda-padma-dhuli kari',
deho bhaktivinoda āśraya
āmi tava nitya-dāsa, bhuliyā māyāra pāśa,
baddha ho'ye āchi dayāmaya

patita—fallen; kiṅkare—servant; dhari’—having held up; pāda—feet; padma—lotus; dhuli—particle of dust; kari’—having fixed; deho—give; bhaktivinoda—Bhaktivinoda; āśraya—shelter; āmi—I am; tava—Your; nitya—eternal; dāsa—servant; bhuliyā—having forgotten; māyāra—of Māyā; pāśa—network; baddha—bound up; ho’ye—being; āchi—I am; dayāmaya—kindly save me.

Kindly lift up this fallen servant of Yours and fix me as one of the particles of dust at Your lotus feet. Please give this Bhaktivinoda shelter at Your lotus feet. I am Your eternal servant, but somehow or other I forgot You and have now fallen into this entangling network of Māyā. Kindly save me.

Song 2: Bhuliyā Tomāre
Bhuliyā Tomāre
Forgetting You
(from Śaraṇāgati)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
bhuliyā tomāre, saṁsāre āsiyā,
peye nānā-vidha byathā
tomāra caraṇe, āsiyāchi āmi,
bolibo duḥkhera kathā

bhuliyā—forgetting; tomāre—You; saṁsāre—to this material world; āsiyā—having come; peye—experienced; nānā—many; vidha—varieties; byathā—of sufferings; tomāra—Your; caraṇe—to lotus feet; āsiyāchi—have come; āmi—I; bolibo—I will speak; duḥkhera—of woe; kathā—my tale.

O Lord, having forgotten You and come to this material world, I have experienced a host of sins and sorrows. Now I approach Your lotus feet and submit my tale of woe.
Text 2
jananī jaṭhare, chilāma jakhona,
biṣama bandhana-pāśe
eka-bāra prabhu! dekhā diyā more,
vañcile e dīna dāse

jananī—of my mother; jaṭhare—in the womb; chilāma—I was; jakhona—when; biṣama—painful; bandhana—in the encagement; pāśe—bound up; eka—one; bāra—time; prabhu—O Lord; dekhā—a vision (of Yourself); diyā—having given; more—to me; vañcile—abandoned; e—this; dīna—poor; dāse—servant.

While I was bound up tightly in the unbearable confines of my mother’s womb, O Lord, You once revealed Yourself before me. After appearing briefly, You abandoned this poor servant of Yours.
Text 3
takhona bhāvinu, janama pāiyā,
koribo bhajana tava
janama hoilo, paḍi' māyā-jāle,
nā hoilo jñāna-lava

takhona—at that time; bhāvinu—I thought; janama—birth; pāiyā—after taking; koribo—I will perform; bhajana—worship; tava—Your; janama—birth; hoilo—having taken; paḍi’—I fell; māyā—of illusions; jāle—into a network;  nā—not; hoilo—there was; jñāna—of knowledge; lava—a drop.

At that moment I thought, “After my birth this time, I will surely worship You with undivided attention.” But alas, after taking birth I fell into the entangling network of worldly illusions; thus I possessed not even a drop of true knowledge.
Text 4
ādarera chele, sva-janera kole,
hāsiyā kāṭānu kāla
janaka jananī-snehete bhuliyā,
saṁsāra lāgilo bhālo

ādarera—dear; chele—son; sva-janera—of relatives; kole—in the arms; hāsiyā—laughing; kāṭānu—spent; kāla—my time; janaka—of my father; jananī—of my mother; snehete—by the affection; bhuliyā—I forgot (You); saṁsāra—the material world; lāgilo—began (to seem); bhālo—good.

As a dear son fondled in the laps of attentive relatives, I passed my time smiling and laughing. The affection of my father and mother helped me forget You still more, and I began to think that the material world was a very nice place.
Text 5
krame dina dina, bālaka hoiyā,
bhelinu bālaka-saha
āra kichu dine, jnāna upajilo,
pāṭha poḍi ahar-ahaḥ

krame—gradually; dina dina—day by day; bālaka—a young boy; hoiyā—I became; bhelinu—played; bālaka—other boys; saha—with;  āra—more; kichu—(after) a few; dine—days; jnāna—my knowledge; upajilo—grew; pāṭha—school lessons; poḍi—I studied; ahar-ahaḥ—every day.
 
Day by day I gradually grew into a young boy and began playing with other boys. Soon my powers of understanding emerged, so I diligently studied my school lessons every day.
Text 6
vidyāra gaurave, bhrami' deśe deśe,
dhana uparjana kori
sva-jana pālana, kori eka-mane,
bhulinu tomāre, hari!

vidyāra—of my education; gaurave—proud; bhrami’—I traveled; deśe deśe—from place to place; dhana—of wealth;  uparjana—the earning; kori—I did; sva-jana—of my family; pālana—the maintenance; kori—I did; eka—with one-pointed; mane—attention; bhulinu—I forgot; tomāre—You; hari—O Lord Hari.

Proud of my accomplished education, I later traveled from place to place and earned much wealth. Thereby maintaining my family with undivided attention, I forgot You, O Lord Hari!
Text 7
bārdhakye ekhona, bhakativinoda,
kāṇdiyā kātara ati
nā bhajiyā tore, dina bṛthā gelo,
ekhona ki have gati?

bārdhakye—in old age; ekhona—now; bhakativinoda— Bhaktivinoda; kāṇdiyā—weeps; kātara—in sadness; ati—great; nā—not; bhajiyā—worshiped; tore—You; dina—days; bṛthā—useless; gelo—have gone; ekhona—now; ki—what; have—will be; gati—my fate.

Now in old age, this Bhaktivinoda very sadly weeps as death approaches. I failed to worship You, O Lord, and instead passed my days in vain. What will be my fate now?
Song 2: Nārada Muni Bājāy Vīṇā
Nārada Muni Bājāy Vīṇā
 "Nārada Muni Plays His Vīṇā"
(from Gītāvalī)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
nārada muni, bājāy vīṇā
'rādhikā-ramaṇa'-nāme
nāma amani, udita haya,
bhakata-gītā-sāme

nārada muni—Nārada Muni; bājāy—plays; vīṇāhis vīṇā; ‘rādhikā-ramaṇa’ nāme—the holy name Rādhikā-ramaṇa; nāma—that name; amani—spontaneously; udita—rise; haya—does; bhakata—the devotees of the Lord; gītā—singing; sāme—in the association.

When the great soul Nārada Muni plays his stringed vīṇā, the holy name Rādhikā-ramaṇa descends and immediately appears amidst the kīrtana of the Lord's devotees.
Text 2
amiya-dhārā, bariṣe ghana,
śravaṇa-yugale giyā
bhakata jana, saghane nāce,
bhoriyā āpana hiyā

amiya—of nectar; dhārāa flood; bariṣe—does shower down; ghana—like a monsoon cloud; śravaṇa—of ears; yugale—into their pairs; giyā—gives; bhakata jana—the devotees; saghane—enthusiastically; nāce—dance; bhoriyā—full; āpana—one’s own; hiyā—heart.

Like a monsoon cloud, the holy name showers pure nectar into their ears. Due to great ecstasy, all the devotees enthusiastically dance to their heart's content.
Text 3
mādhurī-pūra, āsava paśi',
mātāya jagata-jane
keho vā kānde, keho vā nāce,
keho māte mane mane

mādhurī-pūra—full of sweetness; āsava—intoxicating beverage; paśi’—drinking; mātāya—maddening; jagata—of the universe; jane—inhavbitants; keho vā—some; kānde—weeping; keho vāsome; nāce—dancing; keho—some; māte—intoxicated; mane mane—within their minds.

All the inhabitants of the universe become maddened upon entering these intoxicating showers of divine sweetness. Some people cry, some dance, and others become fully intoxicated within their minds.
Text 4
pañca-vadana, nārade dhori',
premera saghana rol
kamalāsana, nāciyā bole,
'bolo bolo hari bolo'

pañca-vadana—the five-faced one (Śiva); nārade—Narada; dhori’—embraces; premera—out of love; saghana—ecstatically rol—shouts; kamala-āsana—Brahmā, whose seat is a lotus; nāciyā—dances; bole—declares; bolo bolo—chant, chant; hari—the name Hari; bolo—chant.

Five-faced Lord Śiva embraces Nārada Muni and repeatedly shouts in ecstasy, while Lord Brahmā dances very ecstatically and exclaims, "All of you chant 'Haribol! Haribol!'"
Text 5
sahasrānana, parama-sukhe,
'hari hari' boli' gāya
nāma-prabhāve, mātilo viśva,
nāma-rasa sabe pāya

sahasrānana—the thousand-faced one, Ananta Śeṣa; parama—in supreme; sukhe—happiness; hari hari—Hari, Hari; boli’—calls out; gāya—sings; nāma—of the name; prabhāve—by the influence; mātilo—goes mad; viśva—the universe; nāma—of the holy name; rasa—by the mellows; sabe—everyone; pāya—relishes.

In supreme happiness, thousand-faced Ananta Śeṣa sings and calls out, "Hari! Hari!" By the influence of the transcendental vibration of the holy name, the whole universe becomes mad with ecstasy as everyone relishes the mellows of the holy name.
Text 6
śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma, rasane sphuri',
pūrā'lo āmār āśa
śrī-rūpa-pade, yācaye ihā,
bhakativinoda-dāsa

śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma—the holy name of Kṛṣṇa; rasane—on the tongue; sphuri’—by manifesting; pūrālo—has fulfilled; āmār—my; āśa—desires; śrī-rūpa—of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī; pade—the lotus feet; yācaye—I beg; ihānow;  bhakativinoda— Bhaktivinoda; dāsa—the servant.

The holy name of Śrī Krishna has fulfilled all my desires by thus manifesting on everyone's tongue. Bhakativinoda, the humble servant of the Lord, therefore prays at the feet of Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī that the chanting of harināma may always continue in this way.
Part 3: songs of Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura
songs of Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura
Song 3: Iṣṭa-deve Vijñapti (hari hari! bifale)
Iṣṭa-deve Vijñapti
Hari Hari Biphale
Prayer to One's Beloved Lord
(from Prārthanā)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
hari hari! bifale janama goṅāinu
manuṣya-janama pāiyā, rādhā-kṛṣṇa nā bhajiyā,
jāniyā śuniyā biṣa khāinu

hari hari!—O Lord Hari!; biphale—uselessly; janama goṅāinu—I have spent my life; manuṣya-janama pāiyā—having obtained a human birth; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; nā bhajiyā—having not worshiped; jāniyā śuniyā—even after knowing and hearing about it; viṣa khāinu—I have drunk poison.

O Lord Hari, I have wasted my life. Although I have taken this rare human birth, I have not served Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and thus I have knowingly drunk poison.

Text 2
	golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana,
rati nā janmilo kene tāy
saṁsāra-biṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jwale,
jurāite nā koinu upāy

golokera—of Goloka Vṛndāvana; prema-dhana—the treasure of divine love; hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana—the congregational chanting of Lord Hari's holy names; rati—my attraction; nā janmilo—never came about; kene—why?; tāy—for that; saṁsāra-viṣānale—in the fire of the poison of worldliness; divā-niśi—day and night; hiyā jvale—my heart burns; juḍāite—to relieve it; nā koinu upāy—I have not taken the means.

The treasure of divine love in Goloka Vṛndāvana has descended as the congregational chanting of Lord Hari’s holy names. Why did my attraction for that chanting never come about? Day and night my heart burns in the fire of the poison of worldliness, and I have not accepted the means for relieving it.

Text 3
brajendra-nandana jei, śacī-suta hoilo sei,
balarāma hoilo nitāi
dīna-hīna jata chilo, hari-nāme uddhārilo,
tāra śākṣī jagāi mādhāi

brajendra-nandana yei—Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of the King of Vraja; śacī-suta—the son of śacī (Lord Caitanya); hoilo—became; sei—He; balarāma—Lord Balarāma; hoilo—became; nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; dīna-hīna—who were lowly and wretched; yata chilo—all those souls who were; hari-nāme—by the holy name; uddhārilo—were delivered; tāra śākṣī—the evidence of that; jagāi mādhāi—the two sinners named Jagāi and Mādhāi.

Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of the King of Vraja, became the son of Śacī, and Balarāma became Nitāi. The holy name delivered all those souls who were lowly and wretched. The two sinners Jagāi and Mādhāi are evidence of this.
Text 4
hā hā prabhu nanda-suta, vṛṣabhānu-sutā-juta,
koruṇā karoho ei-bāro
narottama-dāsa koy, nā ṭheliho rāṅgā pāy,
tomā bine ke āche āmāra

hā hā prabhu—alas! alas! O dear Lord!; nanda-suta—O son of Nanda!; vṛṣabhānu-sutā yuta—accompanied by the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu; koruṇā karoho—please be merciful to me; ei-bāro—now; narottama-dāsa koy—Narottama dāsa says; nā ṭheliho—please do not push me away; raṅga pāy—from Your reddish lotus feet; tomā bine—except for You; ke āche āmāra—who is my beloved?

O Lord Kṛṣṇa, son of Nanda, accompanied by the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu, please be merciful to me now. Narottama Dāsa says, “O Lord, please do not push me away from Your reddish lotus feet, for who is my beloved except for You?”
Song 3: Lālasā-mayī Prārthanā ('gaurāṅga' bolite habe)
Lālasā-mayī Prārthanā
(from Prārthanā)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
'gaurāṅga' bolite habe pulaka-śarīra
'hari hari' bolite nayane ba' be nīra

‘gaurāṅga' bolite—while chanting the holy name of Lord Gaurāṅga; habe—will it be?; pulaka-śarīra—shivering bodily limbs; ‘hari hari' bolite—while chanting the holy name of Lord Hari; nayane—from my eyes; ba'be nīra—tears will fall.

When will that opportune moment come to me when there will be shivering of the body as soon as I chant Lord Gaurāṅga's name? And after the shivering, while chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, when will there be tears pouring down from my eyes?
Text 2
āra kabe nitāi-cānder koruṇā hoibe
saṁsāra-bāsanā mora kabe tuccha ha'be

āra kabe—and when?; nitāi-cander koruṇā—the compassion of the moonlike Lord Nityānanda; hoibe—will be shown to me; saṁsāra-vasanā mora—my worldly desires; kabe—when?; tuccha ha'be—will become very insignificant.

And when will Nityānanda bestow His causeless mercy upon me so that my desire for material enjoyment will become very insignificant? When will that time come?

Text 3
viṣaya chāriyā kabe śuddha ha 'be mana
kabe hāma herabo śrī-bṛndābana

viṣaya chāḍiyā—giving up sense gratification; kabe—when?; śuddha ha'be—will become completely purified; mana—my mind; kabe—when?; hāma herabo—I will behold; śrī-bṛndābana—the transcendental realm of Śrī Vṛndāvana.

When my mind is completely purified, being freed from material anxieties and desires, then I shall be able to understand Vṛndāvana and the conjugal love of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and then my spiritual life will be successful.

Text 4
rūpa-raghunātha-pade hoibe ākuti
kabe hāma bujhabo se jugala-pīriti

rūpa-raghunātha-pade—for the feet of Śrīla Rūpa and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmīs; hoibe ākuti—will be eager; kabe—when?; hāma bujhabo—I will understand; se—that; jugala-pīriti—the conjugal loving affairs of the divine couple.

When shall I be very much eager to study the books left by the Six Gosvāmīs? One has to learn of the conjugal loving affairs of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa through the teachings of these Six Gosvamīs.
Text 5
rūpa-raghunātha-pade rahu mora āśa
prārthanā koroye sadā narottama-dāsa

rūpa-raghunātha-pade—at the feet of Śrīla Rūpa and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmīs; rahu—may it remain; mora āśa—my hope; prārthanā koroye—making prayers; sadā—always; narottama-dāsa—is this Narottama dāsa.

Narottama Dāsa always longs to remain at the lotus feet of Śrīla Rūpa and Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmīs.
Song 3: Nāma-saṅkīrtana (hari haraye namaḥ kṛṣṇa)
Hari Haraye Namaḥ
Nāma-saṅkīrtana
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
hari haraye namaḥ kṛṣṇa yādavāya namaḥ
yādavāya mādhavāya keśavāya namaḥ

hari haraye—unto Hari; namaḥ—obeisances; kṛṣṇa yādavāya—unto Kṛṣṇa known as Yādava (the best of the Yadu dynasty); namaḥ—obeisances; yādavāya—unto Yādava; mādhavāya—unto Mādhava, the husband of the goddess of fortune; keśavāya—unto Keśava, He of fine hair; namaḥ—obeisances.

O Lord Hari, O Lord Kṛṣṇa, I offer my obeisances to You, who are known as Hari, Yādava, Mādhava, and Keśava.
Text 2
gopāla govinda rāma śrī-madhusūdana
giridhārī gopīnātha madana-mohana

gopāla—He appears as a cowherd boy; govinda—the pleaser of the cows; rāma—the reservoir of pleasure; śrī-madhusūdana—the magnificent killer of the demon named Madhu; giridhārī—the lifter of Govardhana Hill; gopīnātha—the Lord of the cowherd damsels; madana-mohana—the enchanter of Cupid.

O Gopāla, Govinda, Rāma, Śrī Madhusūdana, Giridhārī Gopīnātha, and Madana-mohana!
Text 3
śrī-caitanya-nityānanda śrī-advaita-sītā
hari guru vaiṣṇaba bhāgavata gītā

śrī-caitanya-nityānanda—chanting the names of Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda; śrī-advaita-sītā—Śrī Advaita ācārya and his wife Sītā Ṭhākurāṇī; hari—Lord Hari; guru—the spiritual master; vaiṣṇava—all the assembled devotees; bhāgavata—the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; gītā—the Bhagavad-Gītā. 

All glories to Śrī Caitanya and Nityānanda! All glories to Śrī Advaita Ācārya and His consort, Śrī Sītā Ṭhākurāṇī. All glories to Lord Hari, to the spiritual master, the Vaiṣṇavas, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and Śrīmad Bhagavad-Gītā.
Text 4
śrī-rūpa sanātana bhaṭṭa-raghunātha
śrī-jīva gopāla-bhaṭṭa dāsa-raghunātha

śrī-rūpa sanātana bhaṭṭa-raghunāth śrī-jīva gopāla-bhaṭṭa dāsa-raghunāth—chanting the names of the Six Gosvāmīs : Śrī Rūpa, Sanātana, Raghunāth Bhaṭṭa, Śrī Jīva, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, and Raghunāth dāsa.

All glories to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.
Text 5
ei chay gosāir kori caraṇa vandan
jāhā hoite bighna-nāś abhīṣṭa-pūraṇ

ei chay gosāir—of these six Gosvāmīs; kori—I offer; caraṇa vandan—obeisances unto their feet; yāhā hoite—by which; vighna-nāś—obstacles to devotion are destroyed; abhīṣṭa-pūraṇ—all spiritual desires are fulfilled.

I offer my obeisances to the feet of these six Gosvāmīs. Bowing to them destroys all obstacles to devotional service and fulfills all spiritual desires.
Text 6
ei chay gosāi jār-mui tār dās
tā-sabāra pada-reṇu mora pañca-grās

ei chay gosāi—of these six Gosvāmīs; jār—whoever is; mui—I; tār—their; dās—servant; tā-sabāra—of all of them; pada-reṇu—the dust of the feet; mora—my; pañca-grās—five kinds of foodstuffs.

I am the servant of that person who is a servant of these six Gosvāmīs. The dust of their lotus feet is my five kinds of foods.
Text 7
tādera caraṇa-sebi-bhakta-sane bās
janame janame hoy ei abhilāṣ

tāṅdera caraṇa—the lotus feet of these six Gosvāmīs; sevi bhakta—those devotees who serve; sane vās—living along with; janame janame—birth after birth; hoy—there is; ei abhilāś—this is my desire. 

This is my desire: that birth after birth I may live with those devotees who serve the lotus feet of these six Gosvāmīs.
Text 8
ei chay gosāi jabe braje koilā bās
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-nitya-līlā karila prakāś

ei chay gosāi—these six Gosvāmīs; jabe—when; vraje—in Vraja; koilā vās—lived; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-nitya-līlā—the eternal pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; karila prakāś—they revealed. 

When these six Gosvāmīs lived in Vraja they revealed the lost holy places and explained the eternal pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Text 9
ānande bolo hari bhaja bṛndāban
śrī-guru-vaiṣṇaba-pade majāiyā man

ānande—in bliss; bolo—just chant; hari—the names of Lord Hari; bhaja—just worship; vṛndāban—the transcendental realm of Vṛndāvana; śrī-guru vaiṣṇava—the spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas; pade—on the lotus feet; majāiyā man—absorbing your mind in meditation.

Just shout the names of Lord Hari in great ecstasy and worship the transcendental realm of Vṛndāvana while absorbing your mind in meditation upon the divine feet of the spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas.
Text 10
śrī-guru-vaiṣṇaba-pada-padma kori āś
narottama dāsa kohe nāma-saṅkīrtana

śrī-guru-vaiṣṇava—of Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas; pāda-padma—the lotus feet; kori āś—I am desiring; nāma-saṅkīrtana—the glorification of the holy name; kohe—sings; narottama dās—the author, Narottama dās Ṭhākura.

Desiring to serve the lotus feet of Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas, Narottama Dāsa sings this saṅkīrtana of the holy names of Lord Hari.
Song 3: Sakhī-vṛnde Vijñapti (rādhā-kṛṣṇa prāṇa mora)
Sakhī-vṛnde Vijñapti
Rādhā Kṛṣṇa Prāṇa Mora
Prayer to the Sakhīs
(from Prārthanā)
Text 1
rādhā-kṛṣṇa prāṇa mora jugala-kiśora
jīvane maraṇe gati āro nāhi mora

rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Śrī Rādha and Kṛṣṇa; prāṇa mora—are my life and soul; yugala-kiśora—the youthful couple; jīvane maraṇe—in life or in death; gati—refuge; āra nāhi—no other; mora—my.

The divine couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, are my life and soul. In life or death I have no other refuge but Them.
Text 2
kālindīra kūle keli-kadambera vana
ratana-bedīra upara bosābo du'jana

kālindīra kūle—on the bank of the Yamunā; keli-kadambera vana—in a forest of kadamba trees; ratana-vedīra upara—upon a throne made of brilliant jewels; bosābo—I will seat; du'jana—the divine couple.

In a forest of small kadamba trees on the bank of the Yamunā, I will seat the divine couple on a throne made of brilliant jewels.
Text 3
śyāma-gaurī-aṅge dibo (cūwā) candanera gandha
cāmara ḍhulābo kabe heri mukha-candra

śyāma-gaurī-aṅge—on Their dark and fair forms; dibo—I will anoint; cūyā—condensed perfume; candanera gandha—scented sandalwood paste; cāmara—with a cāmara whisk; dhulābo—I will fan Them; kabe heri—when will I behold?; mukha-candra—Their moonlike faces.

I will anoint Their dark and fair forms with sandalwood paste scented with cūyā, and I will fan Them with a cāmara whisk. Oh, when will I behold Their moonlike faces?
Text 4
gāthiyā mālatīr mālā dibo dohāra gale
adhare tuliyā dibo karpūra-tāmbūle

gāthiyā—after stringing together; mālatīr mālā—garlands of jasmine flowers; dibo—I will place them; dohāra gale—around both Their necks; adhare—to Their lotus mouths; tuliyā—lifting; dibo—I will offer; karpūra-tāmbūle—betel nuts scented with camphor.

After stringing together garlands of mālatī flowers, I will place them around Their necks, and I will offer tāmbūla scented with camphor to Their lotus mouths.
Text 5
lalitā viśākhā-ādi jata sakhī-bṛnda
ājñāya koribo sebā caraṇāravinda

lalitā viśākhā-ādi—headed by Lalitā and Viśākhā; yata sakhī-vṛnda—of all the sakhīs; ājñāya—on the orders; koribo sevā—I will serve; caraṇāravinda—the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

With the permission of Lalitā, Viśākhā, and all the other sakhīs, I will serve the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Text 6
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-prabhur dāser anudāsa
sevā abhilāṣa kore narottama-dāsa

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-prabhur—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu; dāser anudāsa—the servant of the servant; sevā—this service to the divine couple; abhilāṣa kore—longs for; narottama-dāsa—this Narottama dāsa.

Narottama Dāsa, the servant of the servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu, longs for this service to the divine couple.
Song 3: Sapārṣada-bhagavad-virahajanita-vilāpa (je ānilo prema-dhana)
Sapārṣada-bhagavad-viraha-janita-vilāpa
Lamentation Due to Separation 
From the Lord and His Associates
(from Prārthanā)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
je ānilo prema-dhana koruṇā pracur
heno prabhu kothā gelā ācārya-ṭhākur

ye ānilo—he who brought; prema-dhana—the treasure of divine love; koruṇā pracur—who was filled with compassion and mercy; heno prabhu—such a personality; kothā gelā—where has he gone?; ācārya-ṭhākur—Śrīnivāsa ācārya.

He who brought the treasure of divine love and who was filled with compassion and mercy—where has such a personality as Śrīnivāsa Ācārya gone?
Text 2
kāhā mora swarūp rūpa kāhā sanātan
kāhā dāsa raghunātha patita-pāvan

kāhā—where is; mora—my; svarūp rūpa—Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rūpa Gosvāmī; kāhā—where is; sanātan—Sanātana Gosvāmī; kāhā—where is; dāsa raghunātha patita-pāvan—Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, the savior of the fallen.

Where are my Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rūpa Gosvāmī? Where is Sanātana? Where is Raghunātha Dāsa, the savior of the fallen?
Text 3
kāhā mora bhaṭṭa-juga kāhā kavirāj
eka-kāle kothā gelā gorā naṭa-rāj

kāhā—where is; mora—my; bhaṭṭa yuga—the two Bhaṭṭas (Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa and Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī); kāhā—where is; kavirāj—Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja; eka-kāle—all at once; kothā gelā—where have they gone?; gorā naṭa-rāj—Lord Gaurāṅga, the great dancer.

Where are my Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa and Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, and where is Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja? Where did Lord Gaurāṅga, the great dancer, suddenly go?
Text 4
pāṣāṇe kuṭibo māthā anale paśibo
gaurāṅga guṇera nidhi kothā gele pābo

pāṣāṇe—against the rock; kuṭibo māthā—I will pound my head; anale paśibo—I will enter the fire; gaurāṅga—Lord Gaurāṅga; guṇera nidhi—the reservoir of all wonderful qualities; kothā—where?; gele pābo—may I go in order to find.

I will smash my head against the rock and enter into the fire. Where will I find Lord Gaurāṅga, the reservoir of all wonderful qualities?
Text 5
se-saba saṅgīra saṅge je koilo bilās
se-saṅga nā pāiyā kānde narottama dās

se-saba—all these; saṅgīra saṅge—the association of all these devotees of the Lord; ye—with whom; koilo vilās—Lord Gaurāṅga performed His pastimes; se-saṅga—their association; nā pāiyā—being unable to obtain; kānde narottama dās—Narottama dāsa simply weeps.

Being unable to obtain the association of Lord Gaurāṅga accompanied by all of these devotees in whose association He performed His pastimes, Narottama dāsa simply weeps.
Song 3: Sāvaraṇa-śrī-gaura-mahimā (gaurāṅgera duṭi pada)
Sāvaraṇa-śrī-gaura-mahimā
The Glories of Śrī Gaurāṅga
(from Prārthanā)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
gaurāṅgera duṭi pada, jār dhana sampada,
se jāne bhakati-rasa-sār
gaurāṅgera madhura-līlā, jār karṇe praveśilā,
hṛdoya nirmala bhelo tār

gaurāṅgera—of Lord Gaurāṅga; duṭi pada—the two lotus feet; jār—whose; dhana sampada—wealth and treasure; se jane—that person; bhakati-rasa-sār—(they understand) the essence of devotion; gaurāṅgera—of Lord Gaurāṅga; madhura-līlā—the sweet pastimes; jār karṇe—in whose ear; praveśila—has entered; hṛdoya—the heart; nirmala bhelo—becomes purified; tār—his.

Anyone who has accepted the two lotus feet of Lord Caitanya as his only asset knows the true essence of devotional service. The heart of anyone who gives submissive aural reception to the pleasing and sweet pastimes of Lord Caitanya immediately becomes cleansed of all material contamination.

Text 2
je gaurāṅgera nāma loy, tāra hoy premodoy,
tāre mui jāi bolihāri
gaurāṅga-guṇete jhure, nitya-līlā tāre sphure,
se jana bhakati-adhikārī

je—who; gaurāṅgera—of Lord Gaurāṅga; nāma loy—chants the holy name; tāra—his; hoy—it is affected; premodoy—the awakening of divine love; tāre—unto him; mui—I (say); jāi bolihari—bravo, very nice!; gaurāṅga-guṇete—appreciating the qualities of Lord Gaurāṅga; jhure—(if someone) cries; nitya-līlā—then the Lord's eternal pastimes; tāre—unto him; sphure—are manifest; se jana—that person; bhakati-adhikārī—is qualified to perform devotional service.

Anyone who simply chants the name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya will immediately develop love of Godhead. I offer him all congratulations by saying “Bravo!” If anyone feels ecstasy and cries by simply hearing the transcendental qualities of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he at once understands the eternal loving affairs between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Text 3
gaurāṅgera saṅgi-gaṇe, nitya-siddha kori' māne,
se jāy brajendra-suta-pāś
śrī-gauḍa-maṇḍala-bhūmi, jebā jāne cintāmaṇi,
tāra hoy braja-bhūme bās

gaurāṅgera—of Lord Gaurāṅga; saṅgi-gaṇe—the associates; nitya-siddha—eternally liberated; kori' māne—considers; se jāy—that person goes; brajendra-suta-pāś—to the company of the son of the king of Vraja; śrī-gauḍa-maṇḍala-bhūmi—the holy land of Navadvīpa; jebā—whoever; jāne—understands; cintāmaṇi—that it's made of transcendental touchstones; tāra hoy—his is; braja-bhūme bās—residence in the holy land of Vraja.

Anyone who has understood that the associates of Lord Caitanya are eternally liberated souls immediately becomes eligible to enter into the abode of Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja in Vṛndāvana, in his next birth. If anyone understands that there is no difference between Gauḍa-maṇḍala, the place in West Bengal wherein Lord Caitanya had His pastimes, and the transcendental abode of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, then he actually lives in Vṛndāvana.
Text 4
gaura-prema-rasārṇave, se taraṅge jebā ḍube,
se rādhā-mādhava-antaraṅga
gṛhe bā vanete thāke, 'hā gaurāṅga' bo'le ḍāke,
narottama māge tāra saṅga

gaura-prema—of love for Lord Gaurāṅga; rasārṇave—in the ecstatic mellow-ocean; se taraṅge—in those waves; jebā—whoever; ḍube—dives; se—that person; rādhā-mādhava-antaraṅga—(becomes) one of the confidential associates of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Mādhava; gṛhe—at home; vā—or; vanete—in the forest; thāke—living; ‘hā gaurāṅga' bo'le—chanting “O Gaurāṅga!”; ḍāke—shouting; narottama māge—Narottama begs; tāra saṅga—his company.

Anyone who takes pleasure in sporting within the waves of the ocean of Lord Caitanya’s distribution of love of God immediately becomes a confidential devotee of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava. It doesn’t matter whether such a devotee is in the renounced order of life or whether he is a householder. If he is actually taking part in Lord Caitanya’s saṅkīrtana activities and actually understanding what it is, then such a person is always liberated. Narottama Dāsa aspires for his association.
Song 3: Śrī Guru-vandanā (śrī-guru-caraṇa-padma)
Śrī Guru-vandanā
The Worship of Śrī Guru
(from Prema-bhakti-candrikā)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
śrī-guru-caraṇa-padma, kevala-bhakati-sadma,
bando mui sāvadhāna mate
jāhāra prasāde bhāi, e bhava toriyā jāi,
kṛṣṇa-prāpti hoy jāhā ha'te

śrī-guru-caraṇa-padma—the lotus feet of our spiritual master; kevala bhakati—pure devotional service; sadma—the abode; vando mui—I bow down; sāvadhāna mate—with great care and attention; yāhāra prasāde—by whose mercy; bhāi—O my dear brothers!; e bhava—this material existence; toriyā yāi—crossing over; kṛṣṇa-prāpti—obtaining Kṛṣṇa; hoy—there is; yāhā haite—by which. 

The lotus feet of our spiritual master are the abode of pure devotional service. I bow down to his lotus feet with great viiicare and attention. My dear brothers! It is through the grace of our spiritual master that we can cross over this material existence and attain Kṛṣṇa.
Text 2
guru-mukha-padma-vākya, cittete koriyā aikya,
ār nā koriho mane āśā
śrī-guru-caraṇe rati, ei se uttama-gati,
je prasāde pūre sarva āśā

guru-mukha-padma—from the lotus mouth of the spiritual master; vākya—the words; cittete—with your heart; koriyā aikya—making one; ār—anything else; nā—do not; koriho mane—consider in the mind; āśā—desires; śrī-guru-caraṇe—to the lotus feet of the spiritual master; rati—attachment; ei—this; sei—that; uttama-gati—ultimate goal; ye prasāde—by which mercy; pūre—fulfills; sarva āśā—all desires.

Make the teachings emanating from the lotus mouth of our spiritual master one with your heart, and do not desire anything else. Attachment to his lotus feet is the best way to make spiritual advancement. His mercy fulfills all desires for spiritual perfection.

Text 3
cakhu-dān dilo jei, janme janme prabhu sei,
divya-jñān hṛde prokāśito
prema-bhakti jāhā hoite, avidyā vināśa jāte,
vede gāy jāhāra carito

cakhu-dān—the gift of transcendental vision; dilo yei—who has given; janme janme—birth after birth; prabhu sei—he is my lord; divya-jñān—divine knowledge; hṛde—in the heart; prokāśito—is revealed; prema-bhakti—loving devotional service; yāhā hoite—by which; avidyā—ignorance; vināśa yāte—is destroyed; vede—in the Vedic scriptures; gāy—is sung; yāhāra carito—whose character.

He who has given us the gift of transcendental vision is our lord, birth after birth. It is by his mercy that divine knowledge is revealed within our hearts, bestowing pure love for Kṛṣṇa and destroying ignorance. The Vedic scriptures sing of his character.

Text 4
śrī-guru karuṇā-sindhu, adhama janāra bandhu,
lokanāth lokera jīvana
hā hā prabhu koro doyā, deho more pada-chāyā,
ebe jaśa ghuṣuk tribhuvana

śrī-guru—O spiritual master!; karuṇā-sindhu—O ocean of mercy!; adhama janāra—of the fallen souls; bandhu—the friend; lokanāth—O Lokanātha!; lokera jīvana—the life of all people; hā hā—alas! alas!; prabhu—O master!; koro doyā—please be merciful; deho more—give to me; pada-chāyā—the shade of your lotus feet; ebe—now; yaśa—fame; ghuṣuk—may it be proclaimed; tri-bhuvana—throughout the three worlds.

O spiritual master, O ocean of mercy and friend of the fallen! O universal teacher and life of all people! Alas, alas, O master, please be merciful unto us and give us the shade of your lotus feet. May your glories now be proclaimed throughout the three worlds.

Song 3: Sāvaraṇa-śrī-gaura-pāda-padme (śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu)
Sāvaraṇa-śrī-gaura-pāda-padme
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu
A Prayer to the Lotus Feet of Śrī Gaurāṅga
(from Prārthanā)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu doyā koro more
tomā binā ke doyālu jagat-saṁsāre

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu—O my Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya!; doyā koro—please show mercy; more—to me; tomā vinā—other than You; ke doyālu—who is merciful?; jagat-saṁsāre—in this material world.

My dear Lord Caitanya, please be merciful to me, because who can be more merciful than Your Lordship within these three worlds?
Text 2
patita-pāvana-hetu tava avatāra
mo sama patita prabhu nā pāibe āra

patita-pāvana-hetu—for the purpose of delivering the fallen souls; tava avatāra—Your incarnation; mo-sama—like me; patita—fallen; prabhu—O Lord!; nā pāibe āra—another cannot be found.

Your incarnation is just to reclaim the conditioned, fallen souls, but I assure You that You will not find a greater fallen soul than me. Therefore, my claim is first.
Text 3
hā hā prabhu nityānanda, premānanda sukhī
kṛpābalokana koro āmi boro duḥkhī

hā hā—alas! alas!; prabhu nityānanda—O Lord Nityānanda!; premānanda—in the bliss of divine love; sukhī—You are delighted; kṛpābalokana—glance of mercy; koro—please cast; āmi boḍo duḥkhī—I am very sad.

My dear Lord Nityānanda, You are always joyful in spiritual bliss. Since You always appear very happy, I have come to You because I am most unhappy. If You kindly put Your glance over me, then I may also become happy.
Text 4
doyā koro sītā-pati adwaita gosāi
tava kṛpā-bale pāi caitanya-nitāi

doyā koro—please show mercy; sītā-pati—O husband of Sītā Ṭhākurāṇī!; advaita gosāi—O Advaita ācārya!; tava kṛpā-bale—by the power of your mercy; pāi—I can attain; caitanya-nitāi—Lord Caitanya and Nityānanda.

My dear Advaita Prabhu, husband of Sītā, You are so kind. Please be merciful to me. If You are kind to me, naturally Lord Caitanya and Nityānanda will also be kind to me.
Text 5
hā hā swarūp, sanātana, rūpa, raghunātha
bhaṭṭa-juga, śrī-jīva hā prabhu lokanātha

hā hā—alas! alas!; swarūp—O Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī!; sanātana—O Sanātana Gosvāmī!; rūpa—O Rūpa Gosvāmī!; raghunātha—O Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī!; bhaṭṭa-juga—O two Bhaṭṭas!; śrī-jīva—O Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī!; hā—alas!; prabhu lokanātha—O my spiritual master, Lokanātha Gosvāmī!

O Svarūpa Dāmodara, personal secretary of Lord Caitanya, O Six Gosvāmīs; Śrī Rupa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Srī Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī! O Lokanātha Gosvāmī, my beloved spiritual master! Narottama Dāsa also prays for your mercy.
Text 6
doyā koro śrī-ācārya prabhu śrīnivāsa
rāmacandra-saṅga māge narottama-dāsa

doyā koro—please show mercy; śrī-ācārya prabhu śrīnivāsa—O Śrīnivāsa ācārya!; rāmacandra-saṅga—the association of Rāmacandra Kavirāja; māge—begs; narottama-dāsa—this Narottama dāsa.

O Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, successor to the Six Gosvāmīs! Please be merciful to me. Narottama Dāsa always desires the company of Rāmacandra Cakravartī.

Song 3: Vāsantī-rāsa (vṛndāvana ramya-sthāna)
Vāsantī-rāsa
(Amorous Pastimes in the Spring)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
vṛndāvana ramya-sthāna divya-ciṅtāmaṇi-dhāma
ratana-mandira manohara
abṛta kālindī-nīre rāja-haṁsa keli kare
tāhe śobhe kanaka-kamala
tāra madhye hema-pīṭha aṣṭa-dale beṣṭita
aṣṭa-dale pradhānā nāyikā
tāra madhye ratnāsane ba’si āchen dui-jane
śyāma-saṅge sundarī rādhikā
o-rūpa-lābaṇya-rāśi amiya pariche khasi
hāsya-parihāsa-sambhāṣaṇe
narottama-dāsa kaya nitya-līlā sukha-maya
sadāi sphurūka mora mane

vṛndāvana—Śrī Vṛndāvana; ramya-sthāna—beautiful abode; divya—transcendental; cintāmaṇi-dhāma—full of gems; ratana—jewelled; mandira—temples; manohara—enchanting; abṛta—surrounded; kālindī-nīre—the waters of Yamunā; rāja-haṁsa keli kare—the swans are sporting; tāhe śobhe—in that water; kanaka—golden; kamala—lotus; tā’ra madhye—in the middle of that lotus; hema-pīṭha—golden altar; aṣṭa-dale beṣṭita—surrounded by eight petals; aṣṭa-dale—eight petals; pradhānā nāyikā—principal sakhīs; tā’ra madhye—in the midst of them; ratnāsane—on a golden throne; ba’si āchen—are seated; dui-jane—both of Them; śyāma-saṅge—along with Śyāmasundara; sundarī rādhikā—beautiful Śrī Rādhikā; o-rūpa-lābaṇya-rāśi—the beauty and sweetness; amiya pariche khasi—shower of nectar; hāsya—smiling; parihāsa—teasing; sambhāṣaṇe—conversing; narottama-dāsa—Narottama dāsa; kaya—says; nitya-līlā—eternal pastimes; sukha-maya—full of bliss; sadāi—always; sphurūka—manifest; mora mane—in my heart.
The beautiful place known as Vṛndāvana is a transcendental abode in the spiritual world and is made entirely of divine touchstones. There are many beautiful temples made out of jewels, and swans known as rāja-haṁsa play in the waters of the River Yamunā, which flows through that transcendental land. In the water of that divine river there is a beautiful golden lotus of a hundred petals.
In the midst of that lotus, there is a golden platform surrounded by eight petals. Situated upon those eight petals are the principal sakhīs, headed by Lalitā and Viśākhā. On that golden platform, the Divine Couple sit upon a jewelled throne. In the company of Lord Śyāma sits the beautiful Rādhikā.
The beauty and sweetness of Śrī Rādhā and Govinda’s forms during Their talks, which are filled with smiles and laughter, is emanating showers of nectar. Narottama Dāsa says: “May these eternal pastimes, filled with transcendental joy, be ever manifest in my heart.”
Song 3: Manaḥ-śikṣā (nitāi-pada-kamala)
Manaḥ-śikṣā
Teachings to the Mind
(from Prārthanā)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
nitāi-pada-kamala, koṭi-candra-suśītala
je chāyāy jagata jurāy
heno nitāi bine bhāi, rādhā-kṛṣṇa pāite nāi
dṛḍha kori' dharo nitāir pāy

nitāi-pada-kamala—the lotus feet of Lord Nityānanda; koṭi-candra—ten million moons; suśītala—very soothing; ye chāyāy—by which moonbeams; jagata juḍāy—the universe is relieved; heno nitāi—such a Nitāi; bine—without; bhāi—O brothers!; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; pāite nāi—it is not possible to attain; dṛdha kori'—becoming fixed up; dharo—hold onto; nitāir pāy—the feet of Nitāi.

The lotus feet of Lord Nityānanda are a shelter where one will get the soothing moonlight not only of one but of millions of moons. If the world wants to have real peace, it should take shelter of Lord Nityānanda. Unless one takes shelter under the shade of the lotus feet of Lord Nityānanda, it will be very difficult for him to approach Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. If one actually wants to enter into the dancing party of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, he must firmly catch hold of the lotus feet of Lord Nityānanda.
Text 2
se sambandha nāhi jā'r, bṛthā janma gelo tā'r
sei paśu boro durācār
nitāi nā bolilo mukhe, majilo saṁsāra-sukhe
vidyā-kule ki koribe tār

se sambandha—a connection with him (Nityānanda); nāhi yā'r—whoever does not have; bṛthā—useless; janma—life; gelo—passes; tā'r—his; sei paśu—that animal; boḍo durācār—is very sinful; nitāi—the name of Nitāi; nā bolilo—not uttering; mukhe—with the mouth; majilo—absorbed; saṁsāra-sukhe—in so-called worldly happiness; vidyā-kule—education and high birth; ki koribe tār—how can it protect him?

Anyone who has not established his relationship with Nityānanda Prabhu is understood to have spoiled his valuable human birth. Such a human being is actually an uncontrollable animal. Because he never uttered the holy name of Nityānanda, he has become merged into so-called material happiness. What can his useless education and family tradition do to help him?
Text 3
ahaṅkāre matta hoiyā, nitāi-pada pāsariyā
asatyere satya kori māni
nitāiyer koruṇā habe, braje rādhā-kṛṣṇa pābe
dharo nitāi-caraṇa du'khāni

ahaṅkāre—in false ego; matta hoiyā—becoming maddened; nitāi-pada pāsariyā—forgetting the feet of Lord Nityānanda; asatyere—falsehood; satya kori māni—considers to be truth; nitāiyer koruṇā habe—if Nitāi is merciful; braje—in Vraja; rādhā-kṛṣṇa pabe—one attains Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; dharo—please grasp; nitāi-caraṇa du'khāni—the pair of Nitāi's feet.

Being maddened after false prestige and identification with the body, one is thinking, “Oh, what is Nityānanda? What can He do for me? I don’t care.” The result is that he is accepting something false to be truth. If you actually want to approach the association of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, you must first achieve the mercy of Lord Nityānanda. When He is merciful toward you, then you will be able to approach Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Therefore you should firmly grasp the lotus feet of Lord Nityānanda.
Text 4
nitāiyer caraṇa satya, tāhāra sevaka nitya
nitāi-pada sadā koro āśa
narottama boro dukhī, nitāi more koro sukhī
rākho rāṅgā-caraṇera pāśa

nitāiyer caraṇa—Nitāi's feet; satya—are true; tāhāra sevaka—his servants; nitya—are eternally liberated; nitāi-pada—the feet of Nitāi; sadā—perpetually; koro āśa—please hope; narottama—this Narottama dāsa; boḍo dukhī—is very unhappy; nitāi—O Lord Nityānanda!; more koro sukhī—please make me happy; rākho—please keep me; rāṅgā-caraṇera pāśa—close by Your reddish feet.

The lotus feet of Nityānanda are not illusion: they are a fact. One who engages in the transcendental loving service of Nityānanda is also transcendental. Always try to catch the lotus feet of Lord Nityānanda. This Narottama Dāsa is very unhappy. Therefore I am praying to Lord Nityānanda to make me happy. My dear Lord, please keep me close to Your lotus feet.
Song 3: Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī Pada
Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī Pada
The Feet of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī
(from Prārthanā)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
śrī-rūpa-mañjarī-pada, sei mora sampada,
sei mor bhajana-pūjana
sei mora prāṇa-dhana, sei mora ābharaṇa,
sei mor jīvanera jīvana

śrī-rūpa-mañjarī-pada—the feet of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī; sei—they; mora sampada—are my real wealth; sei mor bhajana-pūjana—they are the object of my service and worship; sei mora prāṇa-dhana—they are the treasure of my heart; sei mora ābharaṇa—they are my ornaments; sei mor jīvanera jīvana—and they are the life of my life.

The lotus feet of ixŚrī Rūpa Mañjarī are my real wealth. They are the object of my devotional service and worship. They are the treasure of my heart, and they are my ornaments and the life of my life.
Text 2
sei mora rasa-nidhi, sei mora vāñchā-siddhi,
sei mor vedera dharama
sei brata, sei tapa, sei mora mantra-japa,
sei mor dharama-karama

sei mora rasa-nidhi—they are the reservoirs of all transcendental mellows for me; sei mora vāñchā-siddhi—they are the fulfillment of all my desires.; sei mor vedera dharama—they are the conclusion of the religion of the Vedas for me; sei vrata—they are the goal of all my vows; sei tapa—and austerities; sei mora mantra-japa—and the chanting of my personal mantra; sei mor dharama-karama—they are the purpose of all my religious activities.

For me they are the reservoirs of all rasa and the conclusion of the religion of the Vedas. They are the fulfillment of all my desires and the goal of all my vows, my austerities, my religious activities, and the chanting of my mantra.
Text 3
anukūla habe vidhi, se-pade hoibe siddhi,
nirakhibo e dui nayane
se rūpa-mādhurī-rāśi, prāṇa-kuvalaya-śaśi,
praphullita habe niśi-dine

anukūla habe—will become favorable to devotion; vidhi—all my activities; se-pade—by the power of those feet; hoibe siddhi—spiritual perfection will be achieved; nirakhibo—I will be able to actually see; e dui nayane—with these two eyes; se rūpa-mādhurī-rāśi—the waves of sweet beauty flowing from Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī's feet; prāṇa-kuvalaya—upon the lotus of my heart; śaśī—shining like the brilliant moon; praphullita habe—will blossom; niśi-dine—both night and day.

By the power of those lotus feet my activities will become favorable to devotion, I will achieve spiritual perfection, and with these two eyes I shall be able to actually see. Both day and night the flood of exquisite beauty of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī’s divine lotus feet will shine like the brilliant full moon upon the lotus of my heart, soothing my afflicted soul.
Text 4
tuwā adarśana-ahi, garale jāralo dehī,
ciro-dina tāpita jīvana
hā hā rūpa koro doyā, deho more pada-chāyā,
narottama loilo śaraṇa

tuyā adarśana-ahi—the snake of separation from you; garale—by the venom; jāralo—has wasted away; dehī—my body; ciro-dina—perpetually; tāpita jīvana—my life is afflicted with a great fever; hā hā rūpa—alas! alas! O Rūpa Mañjarī!; koro doyā—please be merciful; deho more—give to me; pada-chāyā—the shade of your lotus feet; narottama—Narottama dāsa; loilo śaraṇa—has taken refuge.

O Rūpa Mañjarī, the venom of the snake of separation from you has enfeebled my soul, and now my life is ever afflicted and distressed. Alas! Please have mercy and give me the shade of your lotus feet. Narottama Dāsa has taken refuge.
Song 3: Vaiṣṇave Vijñapti (ei-bāro karuṇā koro)
Vaiṣṇave Vijñapti
Prayer to the Vaiṣṇava
(from Prārthanā)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
 ei-bāro karuṇā koro vaiṣṇava gosāi
patita-pāvana tomā bine keho nāi

ei-bāro—now; karuṇā koro—please be merciful; vaiṣṇava gosāi—O Vaiṣṇava Gosvāmī; patita-pāvana—who can purify the fallen souls; tomā bine—except for you; keho nāi—there is no one.

O Vaiṣṇava Gosvāmī, please be merciful to me now. There is no one except you who can purify the fallen souls.
Text 2
jāhāra nikaṭe gele pāpa dūre jāy
emona doyāla prabhu kebā kothā pāy

jāhāra nikaṭe—by whose mere audience; gele—approaching; pāpa—all sins; dure jāy—go far away; emona doyāla prabhu—such a merciful personality; kebā kothā pāy—where can anyone find?

Where can anyone find such a merciful personality, whose mere audience sends all sins far away?
Text 3
gaṅgāra paraśa hoile paścate pāvan
darśane pavitra koro-ei tomāra guṇ

gaṅgāra paraśa hoile—touching the waters of the sacred Ganges; paścāte pāvan—one becomes purified later; darśane—just by the sight of you; pavitra koro—you immediately purify; ei—this; tomāra guṇ—is your quality.

One becomes purified after bathing in the waters of the sacred Ganges many times, but just the sight of you purifies the fallen souls. This is your great power.
Text 4
hari-sthāne aparādhe tāre hari-nām
tomā sthāne aparādhe nāhi paritrāṇ

hari-sthāne—to Lord Hari; aparādhe—committing an offense; tāre hari-nām—the holy name delivers them; tomā sthāne aparādhe—but if one commits an offense to you; nāhi paritrān—there is no means of deliverance.

The holy name delivers one who has offended Lord Hari, but deliverance is impossible if one offends you.
Text 5
tomāra hṛdoye sadā govinda-viśrām
govinda kohena-mora vaiṣṇava parāṇ

tomāra hṛdoye—in your heart; sadā—always; govinda-viśrām—the resting place of Lord Govinda; govinda kohena—Lord Govinda says; mora vaiṣṇava parāṇ—“The Vaiṣṇavas are My heart.”

Your heart is always the resting place of Lord Govinda, and Lord Govinda says, "The Vaiṣṇavas are in My heart."
Text 6
prati-janme kori āśā caraṇera dhūli
narottame koro doyā āpanāra boli'

prati-janme—in every birth I may take; kori āśā—I desire; caraṇera dhūli—the dust of your holy feet; narottame—to Narottama dāsa; koro doyā—please be kind; āpanāra boli'—and consider to be your own property.

I desire to have the dust of your holy feet in every birth I may take. Please consider Narottama yours, and be kind upon him.
Song 3: Gaurā Pahu (gaurā pahu nā bhajiyā goinu)
Gaurā Pahu
(from Prārthanā)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
gaurā pahu nā bhajiyā goinu
prema-ratana-dhana helāya hārāinu

gaurā pahu—Lord Gaurāṅga; nā bhajiyā—not worshiping; goinu—I invited spiritual death; prema—of love of God; ratana—the jewel; dhana—transcendental treasure; helāya—by neglect; hārāinu—I have lost.

I invited my spiritual death by not worshiping Lord Caitanya. Due to my neglect, I have lost the transcendental treasure of love for Kṛṣṇa.
Text 2
adhane yatana kari dhana teyāginu
āpana karama-doṣe āpani ḍubinu

adhane—for worthless things; yatana—striving; kari—doing; dhana—the treasure of love of God (the real purpose of life); teyāginu—I have rejected; āpana—my; karama-doṣe—in the misdeeds; āpani—myself; ḍubinu—I have drowned.

I rejected the real purpose of my life and strove for worthless things. I am drowning in the ocean of birth and death because of my own misdeeds.
Text 3
sat-saṅga chāḍi' kainu asate vilāsa
te-kāraṇe lāgilo ye karma-bandha-phāṅsa

sat—of devotees; saṅga—the association; chāḍi’—giving up; kainu—I have made; asate—with materialists; vilāsa—enjoyment; te-kāraṇe—for that reason; lāgilo—began; ye—which; karma—of fruitive activities; bandha—of the entanglement; phāṅsa—the web.

I gave up the association of devotees to enjoy sense gratification in the association of common, nonsense men, and immediately Māyā caught me and entangled me in the web of fruitive activities.
Text 4
viṣaya-viṣama-viṣa satata khāinu
gaura-kīrtana-rase maghana nā hainu

viṣaya—of sense gratification; viṣama—most dangerous; viṣa—the poison; satata—always; khāinu—I have drunk; gaura—of Lord Caitanya; kīrtana—of the congregational chanting of the holy name; rase—in the mellows; maghana—merged; nā—not; hainu—I have become.

I have always drunk the most dangerous poison of sense gratification, and therefore I could not merge myself into the saṅkīrtana movement of Lord Caitanya.
Text 5
keno vā āchaye prāṇa ki sukha pāiyā
narottam dās keno nā gelo mariyā

keno vā—why; āchaye—is there; prāṇa—life; ki—what; sukha—happiness; pāiyā—getting; narottama dāsa—Narottama Dāsa; keno—why; nā—did not; gelo—go; mariyā—(to) death.

Why am I living? What is my happiness? Why did Narottama Dāsa not die long, long ago?
Part 4: songs of Other Vaiṣṇava Ācāryas
songs of Other Vaiṣṇava Ācāryas
Song 4: Śrī Rādhikā-stava (rādhe jaya jaya mādhava-dayite)
Śrī Rādhikā-stava
Rādhe Jaya Jaya Mādhava-dayite
(from Stava-mālā)
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
Audio
 Audio Download 
(refrain)
rādhe jaya jaya mādhava-dayite
gokula-taruṇī-maṇḍala-mahite

(chorus) rādhe—O Rādhā!; jaya jaya—all glories unto You! all glories unto You!; mādhava-dayite—O beloved of Mādhava!; gokula—of Gokula; taruṇī-maṇḍala—by all the young girls; mahite—O You who are glorified!

(refrain) O Rādhā! O Mādhava’s beloved! O You whom all the young girls of Gokula worship! All glories unto You! All glories unto You!
Text 1
dāmodara-rati-vardhana-veśe
hari-niṣkuṭa-vṛndā-vipineśe

dāmodara-rati—Lord Dāmodara's love and attachment; vardhana—to increase; veśe—O You who dress Yourself in such a way!; hari-niṣkuta—the pleasure grove of Lord Hari; vṛndā-vipina—of Vṛndā Devī's forest; īśe—O Queen!

O You who dress Yourself so as to make Lord Dāmodara love You more and more! O Queen of Lord Hari’s pleasure grove, Vṛndāvana!

Text 2
vṛṣabhānūdadhi-nava-śaśi-lekhe
lalitā-sakhi guṇa-ramita-viśākhe

vṛṣabhānu-udadhi—from the ocean of King Vṛṣabhānu; nava-śaśi-lekhe—O goddess of the newly-arisen moon!; lalitā-sakhi—O friend of Lalitā!; guṇa—due to Your wonderful qualities; ramita-viśākhe—O You who give intimate pleasure to Viśākhā!

O new moon arisen from the ocean of King Vṛṣabhānu! O friend of Lalitā! O You whose virtues delight Viśākhā!

Text 3
karuṇāṁ kuru mayi karuṇā-bharite
sanaka-sanātana-varṇita-carite

karuṇām kuru—please be merciful; mayi—to me; karuṇā-bharite—O You who are filled with compassion!; sanaka-sanātana—by the great sages Sanaka and Sanātana; varṇita carite—O You whose divine characteristics are described!

O most merciful goddess! O You whose divine qualities are sung by Sanaka and Sanātana Kumāras! O most merciful Rādhā, please have mercy on me!
Song 4: Śrī Daśāvatāra-stotra (pralaya-payodhi-jāle)
Śrī Daśāvatāra-stotra
Pralaya Payodhi Jale
(from Gītā-govinda)
by Jayadeva Gosvāmī
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
pralaya-payodhi-jale dhṛtavān asi vedaṁ
vihita-vahitra-caritram akhedam
keśava dhṛta-mīna-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare

pralaya-payodhi-jale—in the turbulent waters of devastation; dhṛtavān—holding; asi—You are; vedam—the Vedas; vihita—done; vahitra-caritram—acting as a boat; akhedam—easily; keśava—O Keśava, of fine hair!; dhṛta-mīna-śarīra—You who have accepted the form of a giant fish; jaya—all glories to You!; jagat-īśa—O Lord of the universe!; hare—O Lord Hari!

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari who have assumed the form of a fish! All glories to You! You easily acted as a boat in the form of a giant fish to give protection to the Vedas, which had sunk in the turbulent sea of devastation.
Text 2
kṣitir iha vipulatare tiṣṭhati tava pṛṣṭhe
dharaṇi-dharaṇa-kiṇa-cakra-gariṣṭhe
keśava dhṛta-kūrma-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare

kṣitiḥ—the great Mandara Mountain; iha—here; vipulatare—gigantic; tiṣṭhati—rests; tava pṛṣṭhe—upon Your back; dharaṇi-dharaṇa—holding up the world; kiṇa-cakra—a large circular scar; gariṣṭhe—the heaviest; keśava—O Lord Keśava, of fine hair!; dhṛta-kūrma-śarīra—who have accepted the form of a tortoise; jaya jagadīśa hare...

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari who have assumed the form of a tortoise! All glories to You! The great Mount Mandara rests upon Your gigantic back, which acts as a pivot for churning the ocean of milk and which has thus been marked with a large circular scarlike depression. In this way Your back has become most glorious.
Text 3
vasati daśana-śikhare dharaṇī tava lagnā
śaśini kalaṅka-kaleva nimagnā
keśava dhṛta-śūkara-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare

vasati—sits; daśana-śikhare—upon the tip of Your tusk; dharaṇī—the earth; tava—Your; lagnā—sits fixed; śaśini—of the moon; kalaṅka-kala—a faint spot; iva—just like; nimagnā—which had become immersed (in the Garbhodaka Ocean); keśava—O Lord Keśava, of fine hair!; dhṛta-śūkara-rūpa—who have accepted the form of a boar; jaya jagadīśa hare...

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari who have assumed the form of a boar! All glories to You! The earth, which had sunk to the bottom of the Garbha Ocean, sits fixed upon the tip of Your tusk like a spot upon the moon.
Text 4
tava kara-kamala-vare nakham adbhuta-śṛṅgaṁ
dalita-hiraṇyakaśipu-tanu-bhṛṅgam
keśava dhṛta-narahari-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare

tava—Your; kara-kamala-vare—upon the beautiful lotus hands; nakham—the nails; adbhuta-śṛṅgam—wonderfully sharp tips; dalita—ripped apart; hiraṇyakaśipu-tanu—the body of the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu; bhṛṅgam—the wasp; keśava—O Lord Keśava, of fine hair!; dhṛta-narahari-rūpa—who have accepted the form of half-man, half-lion (nara—man, hari—lion); jaya jagadīśa hare...

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari who have assumed the form of a half-man, half-lion! All glories to You! With the wonderfully sharp nails on Your beautiful lotus hands You have ripped apart the wasplike body of Hiraṇyakaśipu.
Text 5
chalayasi vikramaṇe balim adbhuta-vāmana
pada-nakha-nīra-janita-jana-pāvana
keśava dhṛta-vāmana-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare

chalayasi—You deceive; vikramaṇe—by Your massive steps; balim—King Bali; adbhuta-vāmana—O wonderful dwarf!; pada-nakha—from the nails of Your lotus feet; nīra-janita—by the (Ganges) water that has emanated; jana-pāvana—You deliver all living beings within this world; keśava—O Lord Keśava, of fine hair!; dhṛta-vāmana-rūpa—who have accepted the form of a dwarf brāhmaṇa; jaya jagadīśa hare...

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari who have assumed the form of a wonderful dwarf brāhmaṇa! All glories to You! With Your massive steps You deceive King Bali, and with the Ganges water emanating from the nails of Your lotus feet You deliver all living beings in this world.
Text 6
kṣatriya-rudhira-maye jagad-apagata-pāpam
snapayasi payasi śamita-bhava-tāpam
keśava dhṛta-bhṛgupati-rūpa jaya jagadiśa hare

kṣatriya-rudhira-maye—in the rivers of blood from the bodies of the demoniac kṣatriyas that You have slain; jagat—the earth; apagata-pāpam—the sins are taken away; snapayasi—You cause to bathe; payasi—in the water; śamita—people are relieved; bhava-tāpam—from the blazing fire of material existence; keśava—O Lord Keśava, of fine hair!; dhṛta-bhṛgupati-rūpa—who have accepted the form of Paraśurāma, protector of the sages (bhṛgu—of the sages, pati—the protector); jaya jagadīśa hare...

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari who have assumed the form of Bhṛgupati [Paraśurāma]! All glories to You! You bathe the earth in the rivers of blood from the bodies of the demonic kṣatriyas You have slain. In this way you wash away the sins of the world and give relief to those who suffer in material existence
Text 7
vitarasi dikṣu raṇe dik-pati-kamanīyaṁ
daśa-mukha-mauli-balim ramaṇīyam
keśava dhṛta-rāma-śarīra jaya jagadiśa hare

vitarasi—You distribute; dikṣu—in all directions; raṇe—in the battle (of Laṅkā); dik-pati—to the presiding deities of the ten directions; kamanīyam—which was desired by all of them; daśa-mukha—of the ten-headed demon Rāvaṇa; mauli-balim—an offering of the heads; ramaṇīyam—delightful; keśava—O Lord Keśava, of fine hair!; dhṛta-rāma-śarīra—who have accepted the form of Rāmacandra; jaya jagadīśa hare...

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari who have assumed the form of Rāmacandra! All glories to You! In the battle of Laṅkā You destroy the ten-headed demon Rāvaṇa and distribute his heads as a delightful offering to the presiding deities of the ten directions—a feat long desired by them all, whom that monster had much harassed.
Text 8
vahasi vapuṣi viśade vasanaṁ jaladābhaṁ
hala-hati-bhīti-milita-yamunābham
keśava dhṛta-haladhara-rūpa jaya jagadiśa hare

vahasi—You wear; vapuṣi viśade—on Your brilliant white body; vasanam—garments; jalada-ābham—the color of a fresh blue rain cloud; hala-hati—due to the striking of Your plowshare; bhīti—who feels great fear; milita—happened; yamunā-bham—the personified river Yamunā appeared; keśava—O Lord Keśava, of fine hair!; dhṛta-haladhara-rūpa—who have accepted the form of Lord Balarāma, the wielder of the plow (hala—plow, dhara—the holder); jaya jagadīśa hare...

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari who have assumed the form of plow-wielding Balarāma! All glories to You! On Your brilliant white body You wear garments colored like a fresh rain cloud and the river Yamunā, whom You frighten with the blows of Your plow.
Text 9
nindāsī yajña-vidher ahaha śruti-jātaṁ
sadaya-hṛdaya darśita-paśu-ghātam
keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare

nindasi—You decry; yajña-vidheḥ—performed by the rules of Vedic sacrifice; ahaha—oh!; śruti-jātam—according to the scriptures; sadaya-hṛdaya—of compassionate heart; darśita—shown; paśu-ghātam—the slaughtering of poor animals; keśava—O Lord Keśava, of fine hair!; dhṛta-buddha-śarīra—who have accepted the form of Lord Buddha; jaya jagadīśa hare...

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari who have assumed the form of Buddha! All glories to You! Your heart filled with compassion, you decry animal slaughter performed according to the scriptural rules of Vedic sacrifice.
Text 10
mleccha-nivaha-nidhane kalayasi karavālaṁ
dhūmaketum iva kim api karālam
keśava dhṛta-kalki-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare

mleccha-nivaha—the multitude of wicked barbarian men (at the end of the Kali-yuga); nidhane—for annihilating; kalayasi—You carry; karavālam—a sword; dhūmaketum iva—appearing like a comet; kim api—indescribably; karālam—terrifying; keśava—O Lord Keśava, of fine hair!; dhṛta-kalki-śarīra—who have accepted the form of Lord Kalki; jaya jagadīśa hare...

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari who have assumed the form of Kalki! All glories to You! Like a comet bearing an indescribably terrifying sword, You annihilate the wicked barbarian kings at the end of Kali-yuga.
Text 11
śrī-jayedeva-kaver idam uditam udāraṁ
śṛṇu sukha-daṁ śubha-daṁ bhava-sāram
keśava dhṛta-daśa-vidha-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare

śrī-jayadeva-kaveḥ—of the poet Jayadeva; idam—this hymn; uditam—which has arisen; udāram—which is most exalted; śṛṇu—please hear; sukha-dam—a bestower of happiness; śubha-dam—a bestower of auspiciousness; bhava-sāram—and is the best thing in this dark world; keśava—O Lord Keśava, of fine hair!; dhṛta—who have accepted; daśa-vidha-rūpa—these ten different forms of incarnation; jaya jagadīśa hare...

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed these ten different incarnations! All glories to You! O readers, please hear this most excellent hymn by poet Jayadeva, for it bestows happiness and good fortune and is the best thing in this dark world.
Text 12
vedān uddharate jaganti vahate bhū-golam udbibhrate
daityaṁ dārayate baliṁ chalayate kṣatra-kṣayaṁ kurvate
paulastyaṁ jayate halaṁ kalayate kāruṇyam ātanvate
mlecchān mūrchayate daśakṛti-kṛte kṛṣṇāya tubhyaṁ namaḥ

vedān uddharate—rescuing the Vedas; jaganti vahate—bearing the Mandara Mountain on Your back; bhū-golam udbibhrate—lifting the earth; daityam dārayate—tearing apart the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu; balim chalayate—tricking the demon king Bali; kṣatra-kṣayam kurvate—slaying all of the wicked kṣatriyas; paulastyam jayate—conquering the son of Pulastya [the rākṣasa king Rāvaṇa]; halam kalayate—carrying a plow; kāruṇyam ātanvate—showing compassion; mlecchān mūrchayate—killing the degraded low-class men; daśa-ākṛti kṛte—O You who appears in the forms of these ten incarnations!; kṛṣṇāya—O Lord Kṛṣṇa!; tubhyam namaḥ—I offer my obeisances unto You.

O Lord Kṛṣṇa, I offer my obeisances unto You, who incarnate in these ten forms. In the form of Matsya You rescue the Vedas, as Kūrma You bear Mount Mandara on Your back, as Varāha You lift the earth on Your tusk, as Narasiṁha You tear open the chest of the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu, as Vāmana You trick King Bali, as Paraśurāma You slay all the wicked kṣatriyas, as Rāmacandra you defeat Rāvaṇa, the son of Pulastya, as Balarāma You carry a plow, as Lord Buddha You show compassion toward all, and as Kalki You kill the mlecchas.
Song 4: Śrī Guru-paramparā (kṛṣṇa hoite catur-mukha)
Śrī Guru-paramparā
by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
kṛṣṇa hoite catur-mukha, hoy kṛṣṇa-sevonmukha,
brahmā hoite nāradera mati
nārada hoite vyāsa, madhwa kohe vyāsa-dāsa,
pūrṇaprajña padmanābha gati

kṛṣṇa hoite—from the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; catur-mukha—the four-headed Brahmā; hoy kṛṣṇa-sevonmukha—became fixed in devotional service to Kṛṣṇa; brahmā hoite—from Brahmā; nāradera mati—Devarṣi Nārada's understanding (of this divine science was obtained); nārada hoite—from Nārada; vyāsa—Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsadeva became a disciple; madhva—Śrīpāda Madhvācārya; kohe—calls himself; vyāsa-dāsa—a servant of Vyāsa; pūrṇaprajña—Purṇaprajña Tīrtha (Madhva); padmanābha gati—is the guru and sole refuge of Padmanābha Tīrtha.

In the beginning of creation, four-headed Brahmā received the science of devotional service from the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Brahmā taught this divine science to Devarṣi Nārada, and Nārada imparted it to Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa. Śrīpāda Madhvācārya, who is also known Pūrṇaprajña Tīrtha, calls himself a servant of Vyāsa and is the guru and sole refuge of Padmanābha Tīrtha.
Text 2
nṛhari mādhava-baṁśe, akṣobhya paramahaṁse,
śiṣya boli' aṅgīkāra kore
akṣobhyera śiṣya jaya-tīrtha nāme paricaya,
tāra dāsye jñānasindhu tore

nṛhari mādhava-vaṁśe—two other principal disciples of Madhva, Nṛhari Tīrtha and Mādhava Tīrtha; akṣobhya paramahaṁse—the great paramahaṁsa Akṣobhya Tīrtha; śiṣya boli'—was called a disciple of Mādhava Tīrtha; aṅgīkara kore—accepting him; akṣobhyera śiṣya—the principal disciple of Akṣobhya Tīrtha; jaya-tīrtha nāme—by the name of Jayatīrtha; paricaya—was known; tāra dāsye—in Jayatīrtha's service; jñānasindhu tore—his disciple Jñānasindhu was meant for.

The two other principal disciples of Madhva are Nṛhari Tīrtha and Mādhava Tīrtha. Mādhava Tīrtha accepted the great paramahaṁsa Akṣobhya Tīrtha as a disciple. The principal disciple of Akṣobhya Tīrtha was known as Jayatīrtha, serving whom was Jñānasindhu’s only purpose in life.
Text 3
tāhā hoite dayānidhi, tāra dāsa vidyānidhi,
rājendra hoilo tāhā ha'te
tāhāra kiṅkora jaya-dharma nāme paricaya,
paramparā jāno bhālo mate

tāhā hoite—from Jñānasindhu; dayānidhi—Dayānidhi received the science of devotional service; tāra dāsa—the servant of Dayānidhi; vidyānidhi—was Vidyānidhi (Vidyādhirāja Tīrtha); rājendra hoilo—Rājendra Tīrtha became; tāhā ha'te—a disciple of Vidyādhiraja Tīrtha; tāhāra kiṅkora—Rājendra Tīrtha's servant; jaya-dharma nāme—by the name of Jayadharma or Vijayadhvaja Tīrtha; paricaya—was known; paramparā—this disciplic succession; jano bhālo mate—you should properly understand.

Jñānasindhu taught the science of devotional service to Dayānidhi, whose servant was Vidyānidhi. Vidyānidhi in turn imparted this knowledge to Rājendra Tīrtha, and he accepted Jayadharma as his servant. In this way you should properly understand this disciplic succession.
Text 4
jayadharma-dāsye khyāti, śrī puruṣottama-jati,
tā ha'te brahmaṇya-tīrtha sūri
vyāsatīrtha tāra dāsa, lakṣmīpati vyāsa-dāsa,
tāhā ha'te mādhavendra purī

jayadharma-dāsye—in the service of his guru, Vijayadhvaja Tīrtha (Jayadharma); khyāti—known as; śrī puruṣottama-yati—the great sannyāsī Śrī Puruṣottama Tīrtha; tā ha'te—the principal disciple of Puruṣottama Tīrtha; brahmaṇya-tīrtha—was Subrahmaṇya Tīrtha; sūri—the great saint; vyāsatīrtha—Vyāsatīrtha (Vyāsa Rāya); tāra dāsa—Subrahmaṇya's servant; lakṣmīpati—Lakṣmīpati Tīrtha; vyāsa-dāsa—was Vyāsatīrtha's servant; tāhā ha'te—whose disciple was; mādhavendra purī—Mādhavendra Purī Gosvāmī.

The great sannyāsī Śrī Puruṣottama Tīrtha received the knowledge of devotional service from Jayadharma. The principal disciple of Puruṣottama Tīrtha was the saintly Subrahmaṇya Tīrtha, whose servant was the great Vyāsatīrtha. Vyāsatīrtha’s servant was Lakṣmīpati Tīrtha, and his disciple was Mādhavendra Purī Gosvāmī.

Text 5
mādhavendra purī-bara, śiṣya-bara śrī-īśwara,
nityānanda, śrī-adwaita vibhu
īśwara-purīke dhanya, korilen śrī-caitanya,
jagad-guru gaura mahāprabhu

mādhavendra purī-vara—of the eminent Mādhavendra Purī; śiṣya-vara—the chief disciple; śrī-īśvara—was īśvara Purī; nityānanda śrī-advaita—and also Śrī Nityānanda and Advaita ācārya; vibhu—the renowned incarnations of Godhead; īśvara-purīke dhanya korilen—who made īśvara Purī greatly fortunate (by acting as his disciple); śrī-caitanya—Śrī Caitanya; jagad-guru—the spiritual preceptor of all the worlds; gaura mahāprabhu—Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu.

The chief disciple of Mādhavendra Purī was Īśvara Purī, and two of his other disciples were the renowned incarnations of Godhead Śrī Nityānanda and Advaita Ācārya. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the spiritual preceptor of all the worlds, made Īśvara Purī greatly fortunate by accepting him as his spiritual master.
Text 6
mahāprabhu śrī-caitanya, rādhā-kṛṣṇa nahe anya,
rūpānuga janera jīvana
viśwambhara priyaṅkara, śrī-swarūpa dāmodara,
śrī-goswāmī rūpa-sanātana

mahāprabhu śrī-caitanya—Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; rādhā-kṛṣṇa nāhe anya—is nondifferent from Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; rūpānuga janera—of those Vaiṣṇavas who follow Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī; jīvana—the very life; viśvambhara priyaṅkara—the givers of great happiness to Viśvambhara (Śrī Caitanya); śrī-swarūpa dāmodara—Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī; śrī-goswāmī rūpa-sanātana—Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is none other than Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and is the very life of those Vaiṣṇavas who follow in the footsteps of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī, and Sanātana Gosvāmī gave great happiness to Viśvambhara [Lord Caitanya].
Text 7
rūpa-priya mahājana, jīva, raghunātha hana,
tāra priya kavi kṛṣṇadāsa
kṛṣṇadāsa-priya-bara, narottama sevā-para,
jāra pada viśwanātha-āśa

rūpa-priya—very dear to Rūpa Gosvāmī; mahājana—the great souls; jīva raghunātha—Jīva Gosvāmī and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī; hana—became; tāra priya—Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's beloved student; kavi kṛṣṇadāsa—was Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī; kṛṣṇadāsa-priya-bara—very dear to Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja; narottama—was Narottama dāsa; sevā-para—always engaged in the service of his guru, Lokanātha Gosvāmī (Kṛṣṇadāsa's intimate friend); jāra pada—for whose feet (Narottama's); viśvanātha-āśa—the only aspiration of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

The great souls Jīva Gosvāmī and Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī became very dear to Rūpa Gosvāmī. Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī’s beloved student was Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, who was an intimate friend of Lokanātha Gosvāmī. Lokanātha Gosvāmī’s single disciple was Narottama Dāsa; he always engaged in the service of his guru and was also very dear to Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja. To serve the lotus feet of Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura was the only desire of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.
Text 8
viśwanātha-bhakta-sātha, baladeva jagannātha,
tāra priya śrī-bhaktivinoda
mahā-bhāgavata-bara, śrī-gaurakiśora-bara,
hari-bhajanete jā'ra moda

viśvanātha-bhakta-sātha—Viśvanātha Cakravartī, along with the assembled devotees; baladeva—Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa; jagannātha—then Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī; tāra priya—his dear student; śrī-bhaktivinoda—Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura; mahā-bhāgavata-bara—the topmost among great devotees; srī-gaurakiśora-bara—the eminent Śrī Gaurakiśora dāsa Bābājī; hari-bhajanete—in unalloyed worship of Lord Hari; jā'ra moda—whose sole joy was found.

Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was the instructing spiritual master of Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa. Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī was a very prominent ācārya after Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa and was the beloved instructing spiritual master of Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s intimate friend and associate was the eminent mahā-bhāgavata Śrī Gaurakiśora Dāsa Bābājī, whose sole joy was found in hari-bhajana.
Text 9
x*  īhārā paramahaṁsa, gaurāṅgera nija-baṁśa
tādera caraṇe mama gati
āmi sebā-udāsīna, nāmete tridaṇḍī dīna
śrī-bhaktisiddhānta saraswatī

ihārā—all these great saintly Vaiṣṇavas; paramahaṁsa—are devotees of the highest order; gaurāṅgera nija-vaṁśa—members of Lord Gaurāṅga's own spiritual family; tāṅdera caraṇe—for their holy feet; mama gati—are my refuge; āmi sevā-udāsīna—I have no real interest in devotional service; nāmete—named; tridaṇḍī—a tridaṇḍī sannyāsī; dīna—poor and lowly; śrī-bhaktisiddhānta sarasvatī—Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī.

All these great saintly Vaiṣṇava paramahaṁsas are members of Lord Gaurāṅga’s spiritual family. Their lotus feet are my refuge. I am devoid of any real interest in devotional service and am but a poor and lowly tridaṇḍī sannyāsī named Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī.

xiText 10
śrī-vārṣabhānavī-barā, sadā sevya-sevā-parā,
tāhāra dayita-dāsa-nāma
tāra pradhān pracārako, śrī-bhaktivedānta nāmo,
patita-janete doyā-dhāma

śrī-varṣabhānavī-vara—the beloved devotee of Śrī Varṣabhānavī (Śrī Rādhikā, daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu); sadā sevya-sevā-parā—always engaged in the service of his worshipable spiritual master; tāhāra—his; dayita-dāsa-nāma—of he named Śrī Vārṣabhānavī-dayita dāsa (the initiated name of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī); tāra pradhān pracārako—his foremost disciple-preacher; śrī-bhaktivedānta nāmo—named Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda; patita-janete—for all fallen souls; doyā-dhāma—a reservoir of mercy and compassion.

The renowned Śrī Vārṣabhanavī-dayita Dāsa [the initiated name of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī] is always engaged in the service of his spiritual master, Śrīla Gaurakiśora Dāsa Bābājī. His foremost disciple-preacher is Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, who has spread the message of Lord Caitanya throughout the world and is thus a reservoir of mercy and compassion for all fallen souls.
Song 4: Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nityānander Dayā (parama koruṇa, pahū dui jana)
Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nityānander Dayā
The Mercy of Śrī Gaura and Nityānanda
(from Dhāmālī)
by Locana Dāsa Ṭhākura
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
parama koruṇa, pahū dui jana
nitāi gauracandra
saba avatāra-sāra śiromaṇi
kevala ānanda-kanda

parama koruṇa—supremely merciful; pahū dui jana—the two Lords; nitāi gauracandra—Lord Nityānanda and Lord Gauracandra; saba avatāra—of all incarnations; sāra—They are the essence; śiromaṇi—and the crest jewels; kevala ānanda-kanda—exclusive fountains of bliss.

Lord Nitāi and Lord Gauracandra are very merciful. They are the essence of all incarnations. The specific significance of these incarnations is that They introduced a process of chanting and dancing that is simply joyful.

Text 2
bhajo bhajo bhāi, caitanya nitāi
sudṛḍha biśwāsa kori
viṣaya chāḍiyā, se rase majiyā,
mukhe bolo hari hari

bhajo bhajo—just worship, just worship; bhāi—O brothers!; caitanya nitāi—Lord Caitanya and Nityānanda; sudṛḍha viśvāsa kori'—with firm faith; viṣaya chāḍiyā—giving up sense gratification; se rase—in that mellow of worship; majiyā—absorbing; mukhe—with your mouth; bolo hari hari—chant Hari! Hari!

My dear brothers, I request that you just worship Lord Caitanya and Nityānanda with firm conviction and faith. If one wants to be Kṛṣṇa conscious by this process, one has to give up his engagement in sense gratification. Become absorbed in worshiping Lord Caitanya and Nityananda and simply chant “Hare Kṛṣṇa! Hari Hari!” without any material motive.
Text 3
dekho ore bhāi, tri-bhuvane nāi,
emona doyāla dātā
paśu pākhī jhure, pāṣāṇa vidare,
śuni' jāṅra guṇa-gāthā

dekho—just see; ore bhāi—O dear brothers!; tri-bhuvane—within the three worlds; nāi—there is none; emona—such as these; doyāla dātā—charitable givers of mercy; paśu—even the animals; pakhī—and the birds; jhure—weep; pāṣāṇa vidare—stones melt; śuni'—upon hearing; jāra—whose; guṇa-gāthā—glorification of Their qualities.

My dear brothers, just try to examine this. Within the three worlds there is no one like Lord Caitanya or Lord Nityānanda. Their merciful qualities are so great that upon hearing them even birds and beasts cry and stones melt.
Text 4
saṁsāre majiyā, rohili poriyā,
se pade nahilo āśa
āpana karama, bhuñjāye śamana,
kahoye locana-dāsa

saṁsāre majiyā—entrapped in the materialistic sense gratification process; rohili poḍiyā—falling and remaining; se pade—for Their lotus feet; nahilo āśa—you have no aspiration; āpana karama—your own bad karma; bhuñjaye—you are being punished (lit. ‘enjoying'); śamana—by Yamarāja, lord of death; kahoye locana-dāsa—thus says Locana dāsa.

But I, Locana Dāsa, regret that I am entrapped by sense gratification. I have no attraction for the lotus feet of Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda, and therefore Yamarāja, the superintendent of death, is punishing me by not allowing me to be attracted by this movement.
Song 4: Bhajahū Re Mana Śrī Nanda-nandana
Bhajahū Re Mana Śrī Nanda-nandana
by Govinda Dāsa Kavirāja
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
bhajahū re mana śrī-nanda-nandana
abhaya-caraṇāravinda re
durlabha mānava-janama sat-saṅge
taroho e bhava-sindhu re

bhajah—just worship; re mana—O mind!; śrī-nanda-nandana—of the son of Nanda; abhaya-caraṇāravinda—the lotus feet which make one fearless; re—O!; durlabha mānava-janama—this rare human birth; sat-saṅge—in the association of saintly persons; taroho—cross over; e bhava-sindhu—this ocean of worldly existence; re—O!

O mind, just worship the lotus feet of the son of Nanda, which make one fearless. Having obtained this rare human birth, cross over this ocean of worldly existence by associating with saintly persons.
Text 2
śīta ātapa bāta bariṣaṇa
e dina jāminī jāgi re
biphale sevinu kṛpaṇa durajana
capala sukha-laba lāgi' re

śīta—the cold; ātapa—the heat; bāta—the wind; bariṣaṇa—the rain; e—this; dina—the day; yāminī—the night; jāgi—I remain sleepless; re—O!; biphale—uselessly; sevinu—I have served; kṛpaṇa durajana—miserly and wicked men; capala—flickering; sukha-lava—a fraction of happiness; lāgi'—for the purpose of; re—O!

Day and night I remain sleepless, suffering heat and cold, wind and rain. For a bit of flickering happiness I have vainly served wicked and miserly men.
Text 3
e dhana, yaubana, putra, parijana
ithe ki āche paratīti re
kamala-dala-jala, jīvana ṭalamala
bhajahū hari-pada nīti re

e—this; dhana—wealth; yauvana—youthfulness; putra—sons; parijana—family members; ithe—in these; ki āche—what is it?; paratīti—understanding; re—O!; kamala-dala—on a lotus petal; jala—like a drop of water; jīvana—this life; ṭalamala—is tottering; bhajah—you should always worship; hari-pada—the divine feet of Lord Hari; nīti—the practice; re—O!

What assurance of real happiness is there in all one’s wealth, youth, sons, and relatives? This life totters like a drop of water on a lotus petal; therefore you should always worship the lotus feet of Lord Hari.
Text 4
śravaṇa, kīrtana, smaraṇa, vandana,
pāda-sevana, dāsya re
pūjana, sakhī-jana, ātma-nivedana
govinda-dāsa-abhilāṣa re

śravaṇa—hearing the glories of Lord Hari; kīrtana—chanting those glories; smaraṇa—constantly remembering Him; vandana—offering prayers to Him; pāda-sevana—serving the Lord's lotus feet; dāsya—serving the Supreme Lord as a servant; re—O!; pūjana—worshiping Him with flowers and incense and so forth; sakhī-jana—serving Him as a friend; ātma-nivedana—and completely offering the Lord one's very self; govinda-dāsa-abhilāṣa—(these nine processes of devotion are) the desire and great longing of Govinda dāsa; re—O!

Govinda Dāsa longs to hear the glories of Lord Hari, chant His glories, constantly remember Him, offer Him prayers, serve His lotus feet, become His servant, worship Him, serve Him as a friend, and completely offer Him his very self.
Song 4: Śrī Dāmodaraṣṭaka (namāmīśvaraṁ sac-cid-ānanda-rūpaṁ)
Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭaka
(found in the Padma Purāṇa of Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa,
 spoken by Satyavrata Muni in a conversation with Nārada Muni
 and Śaunaka Ṛṣi)
"In the month of Kārttika one should worship Lord Dāmodara and daily recite the prayer known as Dāmodarāṣṭaka, which has been spoken by the sage Satyavrata and which attracts Lord Dāmodara."
(Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 2.16.198)
Audio
 Audio Download 
Text 1
namāmīśvaraṁ sac-cid-ānanda-rūpaṁ
lasat-kuṇḍalaṁ gokule bhrājamānam
yaśodā-bhiyolūkhalād dhāvamānaṁ
parāmṛṣṭam atyantato drutya gopyā

namāmi—I bow down; īśvaram—to the supreme controller; sat-cit-ānanda-rūpam—whose form is composed of eternity, knowledge, and bliss; lasat-kuṇḍalam—whose earrings play and swing; gokule bhrājamānam—who is splendrously manifest in Gokula; yaśodā-bhiyā—in fear of Mother Yaśodā; ulūkalāt-dhāvamānam—who gets down from the wooden rice-grinding mortar and runs away; para-āmṛṣṭam—catching Him by the back; atyam—very much; tatam drutya—chasing after Him quickly; gopyā—by the gopī (Śrī Yaśodā).

To the Supreme Lord, whose form embodies eternity, knowledge, and bliss, whose earrings swing to and fro, who shines beautifully in Gokula, who [due to the offense of breaking the pot of yogurt that His mother was churning into butter and then stealing the butter that was kept hanging from a swing] quickly ran from the grinding mortar in fear of Mother Yaśodā, and who was finally caught from behind by her, who ran faster than He—to that Supreme Lord, Śrī Dāmodara, I offer my humble obeisances.
Text 2
rudantaṁ muhur netra-yugmaṁ mṛjantam
karāmbhoja-yugmena sātaṅka-netram
muhuḥ śvāsa-kampa-trirekhāṅka-kaṇṭha-
sthita-graiva-dāmodaraṁ bhakti-baddham

rudantam—crying; muhuḥ—again and again; netra-yugmam—His two eyes; mṛjantam—rubbing; kara-ambhoja-yugmena—with His two lotus-like hands; sa-ātaṅka-netram—with very fearful eyes; muhuḥ—again and again; śvāsa—quick breathing and sighing; kampa—trembling; tri-rekha-aṅka-kaṇṭha—neck marked with three lines (just like a conchshell); sthita—situated; graiva—pearl necklaces and other neck-ornaments; dāma-udaram—unto He with a rope around His belly; bhakti-baddham—who is bound by devotion.

[Seeing His mother’s stick, ] He cried and rubbed His eyes again and again with His two lotus hands. His eyes were fearful, and His quick breathing shook the strand of pearls on His neck, which bore three lines like a conchshell. To that Supreme Lord, Śrī Dāmodara, whose belly is bound with the ropes of His mother’s pure love, I offer my humble obeisances.
Text 3
itīdṛk sva-līlābhir ānanda-kuṇḍe
sva-ghoṣaṁ nimajjantam ākhyāpayantam
tadīyeṣita-jñeṣu bhaktair jitatvaṁ
punaḥ prematas taṁ śatāvṛtti vande

iti īdṛk—displaying in this way (childhood pastimes such as the Dāmodara-līlā and so forth); sva-līlābhiḥ—by His own pastimes; ānanda-kuṇḍe—in a pool of bliss; sva-ghoṣam—His own family and the other residents of Gokula; nimajjantam—immersing; ākhyāpayantam—makes known; tadīya-īśita-jñeṣu—to those desirous of knowing His majesty (aiśvarya); bhaktaiḥ jitatvam—His quality of being conquered by His loving devotees (who are devoid of aiśvarya-jñāna); punaḥ—again; premataḥ—with love and devotion; tam—unto that Lord Dāmodara; śata-āvṛtti—hundreds and hundreds of times; vande—I praise.

With these superexcellent childhood pastimes Lord Kṛṣṇa drowned the residents of Gokula in pools of ecstasy. In this way He declared to those absorbed in knowledge of His majesty and opulence: “I am conquered only by My pure loving devotees.” With great love I again offer my obeisances to Lord Dāmodara hundreds and hundreds of times.
Text 4
varaṁ deva mokṣaṁ na mokṣāvadhiṁ vā
na cānyaṁ vṛṇe 'haṁ vareṣād apīha
idaṁ te vapur nātha gopāla-bālaṁ
sadā me manasy āvirāstāṁ kim anyaiḥ

varam—boons; deva—O Lord!; mokṣam—liberation; na—not; mokṣā-avadhim—the highest pinnacle of liberation (the realm of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-loka); vā—or; na—not; ca-anyam—or anything else; vṛṇe aham—I pray for; vara-īśāt—from You Who can bestow any boon; api—also; iha—here in Vṛndāvana; idam—this; te—Your; vapuḥ—divine bodily form; nātha—O Lord!; gopāla-bālam—a young cowherd boy; sadā—always; me manasi—in my heart; āvirāstām—may it be manifest; kim anyaiḥ—what is the use of other things (mokṣā, and so forth.)

O Lord, though You can award all kinds of benedictions, I pray to You neither for the boon of impersonal liberation, nor for the highest liberation of eternal life in Vaikuṇṭha, nor for any other such boon. O Lord, I simply wish that this form of Yours as Bāla Gopāla in Vṛndāvana may ever be manifest in my heart, for what use do I have for any other boon besides this?
Text 5
idaṁ te mukhāmbhojam atyanta-nīlair
vṛtaṁ kuntalaiḥ snigdha-raktaiś ca gopyā
muhuś cumbitaṁ bimba-raktādharaṁ me
manasy āvirāstām alaṁ lakṣa-lābhaiḥ

idam—this; te—Your; mukha-ambhojam—lotus-like face; avyakta-nīlaiḥ—by very dark blue; vṛtam—surrounded; kuntalaiḥ—by curling locks of hair; snigdha—soft and glossy; raktaiḥ—by reddish-tinted; ca—also; gopyā—by the gopī (Śrī Yaśodā); muhuḥ—again and again; cumbitam—kissed; bimba-rakta-adharam—with lips red as the bimba fruit; me—my; manasi—in the heart; āvirāstām—may it be manifest; alam—useless (there is no need for me); lakṣa-lābhaiḥ—by millions of attainments of other boons.

O Lord, again and again mother Yaśodā kisses Your lotus face, which is framed by locks of soft black hair tinged with red and beautified by Your lips colored red like the bimba fruit. May this vision of Your lotus face ever be manifest in my heart. Thousands and thousands of other benedictions are of no use to me.
Text 6
namo deva dāmodarānanta viṣṇo
prasīda prabho duḥkha-jālābdhi-magnam
kṛpā-dṛṣṭi-vṛṣṭyāti-dīnaṁ batānu
gṛhāṇeṣa mām ajñam edhy akṣi-dṛśyaḥ

namaḥ—I bow down; deva—O divine Lord!; dāmodara—O Lord whose belly is bound with a rope!; ananta—O limitless Lord!; viṣṇo—O all-pervading Lord!; prasīda—be pleased; prabho—O my Master!; duḥkha-jāla—a network of material miseries; abdhi-magnam—immersed in the ocean; kṛpā-dṛṣṭi-vṛṣṭyā—by the rain of merciful glances; āti-dīnam—very fallen; bata—alas!; anugṛhāṇa—please accept; īśa—O supremely independent Lord!; mām—me; ajñam—ignorant; edhi—please come; akṣi-dṛśyaḥ—perceptible to my eyes.

O Supreme Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. O Dāmodara! O Ananta! O Viṣṇu! O master! O Lord, be pleased upon me. Shower me with Your merciful glances and deliver this poor ignorant fool immersed in an ocean of worldly sorrows, and become visible to my eyes.
Text 7
kuverātmajau baddha-mūrtyaiva yadvat
tvayā mocitau bhakti-bhājau kṛtau ca
tathā prema-bhaktiṁ svakāṁ me prayaccha
na mokṣe graho me 'sti dāmodareha

kuvera-ātmajau—the two sons of Kuvera (named Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva); baddha-mūrtyā-eva—by He whose divine form was bound with ropes to the grinding mortar; yat-vat—since they were like that (cursed by Nārada to take birth as twin arjuna trees); tvayā—by You; mocitau—they who were liberated; bhakti-bhājau—the recipients of devotional service; kṛtau—You made them; ca—also; tathā—then; prema-bhaktim—loving devotion; svakām—Your own; me—unto me; prayaccha—please give; na mokṣe—not for liberation; grahaḥ—enthusiasm; me—my; asti—is; dāmodara—O Lord Dāmodara!; iha—this.

O Lord Dāmodara, as a baby tied to a grinding mortar, You delivered Kuvera’s two sons from the curse of Nārada and made them into great devotees. In the same way, please give me pure loving devotion for You. I long for this alone and have no desire for any kind of liberation.
Text 8
namas te 'stu dāmne sphurad-dīpti-dhāmne
tvadīyodarāyātha viśvasya dhāmne
namo rādhikāyai tvadīya-priyāyai
namo 'nanta-līlāya devāya tubhyam

namaḥ—obeisances; te—to You; astu—may there be; dāmne—unto the rope around Your waist; sphurat—splendrous; dīpti-dhāmne—unto the effulgent abode; tvadīya-udarāya—unto Your belly; atha—thus; viśvasya—of the entire universe; dhāmne—unto the shelter; namaḥ—obeisances; rādhikāyai—unto Rādhikā; tvadīya priyāyai—unto Your Beloved; namaḥ—obeisances; ananta-līlāya—unto Your limitless sportive pastimes; devāya—unto Your transcendental nature; tubhyam—unto You.

O Lord Dāmodara, obeisances unto the brilliantly effulgent rope binding Your belly! Obeisances unto Your belly, the abode of the entire universe! Obeisances unto Your dearmost beloved, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī! And obeisances unto You, O Lord, who display unlimited pastimes!
Song 4: Śrī Jagannāthāṣṭaka
Śrī Jagannāthāṣṭaka
Text 1
kadācit kālindī-taṭa-vipina-saṅgītaka-ravo
mudābhīrī-nārī-vadana-kamalāsvāda-madhupaḥ
ramā-śambhu-brahmāmara-pati-gaṇeśārcita-pado
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

kadācit—sometimes; kālindī-taṭa—on the banks of the Yamunā River; vipina—in the groves; saṅgītaka—of music and singing; ravaḥ—who makes the sounds; mudāwith delight; ābhīrī-nārī—of the cowherd damsels; vadana-kamala—the lotuslike faces; āsvāda—tasting; madhupaḥa bumblebee; ramāby Lakṣmī; śambhu—Śiva; brahmā—Brahmā; amara—of the immortals (the demigods); pati—the lord (Indra); gaṇeśa—and Gaṇeśa; arcita—worshiped; padaḥ—whose lotus feet; jagannāthaḥ svāmī—Lord Jagannātha; nayana-patha—the path of the eyes; gāmī—traveling; bhavatu—may He be; me—my.

Sometimes in great happiness Lord Jagannātha makes a loud concert with His flute in the groves on the banks of the Yamunā. He is like a bumblebee tasting the beautiful lotuslike faces of the cowherd damsels of Vraja, and great personalities such as Lakṣmī, Śiva, Brahmā, Indra, and Gaṇeśa worship His lotus feet. May that Jagannātha Svāmī be the object of my vision.
Text 2
bhuje savye veṇuṁ śirasi śikhi-puccham kaṭi-taṭe
dukūlaṁ netrānte sahacara-kaṭākṣaṁ vidadhate
sadā śrīmad-vṛndāvana-vasati-līlā-paricayo
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

bhuje—in His hand; savye—left; veṇum—His flute; śirasi—upon His head; śikhi-piccham—a peacock feather; kaṭi-taṭe—around His hips; dukūlam—fine silken cloth; netra-ante—from the corners of His eyes; saha-cara—upon His loving companions; kaṭā-akṣam—sidelong glances; vidadhate—He casts; sadā—perpetually; śrīmat-vṛndāvana-vasati—living in Śrī Vṛndāvana; līlā-paricayaḥ—fond of the pastimes.

In His left hand Lord Jagannātha holds a flute, on His head He wears peacock feathers, and on His hips He wears fine yellow silken cloth. From the corners of His eyes He bestows sidelong glances upon His loving devotees, and He always reveals Himself through His pastimes in His divine abode of Vṛndāvana. May that Jagannātha Svāmī be the object of my vision.
Text 3
mahāmbhodhes tīre kanaka-rucire nīla-śikhare
vasan prāsādāntaḥ sahaja-balabhadreṇa balinā
subhadrā-madhya-sthaḥ sakala-sura-sevāvasara-do
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu mee

mahā-ambhodeḥ—of the great ocean; tīre—on the shore; kanaka—golden; rucire—with an effulgence; nīla—of blue sapphire; śikhare—on the hill; vasan—residing; prāsāda antaḥ—in a large palace; sahaja—with His brother; balabhadreṇa—Balabhadra; balinā—the powerful one; subhadrā—His sister Subhadrā; madhya-sthaḥ—situated between; sakala—to all; sura—godly souls; sevā-avasara—opportunities to render devotional services; daḥ—bestowing.

On the shore of the great ocean, within a large palace atop the brilliant, golden Nīlācala Hill, Lord Jagannātha resides with His powerful brother Balabhadra and His sister Subhadrā, who sits between Them. May that Jagannātha Svāmī, who bestows the opportunity for devotional service upon all godly souls, be the object of my vision.
Text 4
kṛpā-pārāvāraḥ sajala-jalada-śreṇi-ruciro
ramā-vāṇī-rāmaḥ sphurad-amala-paṅkeruha-mukhaḥ
surendrair ārādhyaḥ śruti-gaṇa-śikhā-gīta-carito
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

kṛpā-pārāvāraḥ—an ocean of mercy; sa-jala—full of water; jalada—of rainclouds; śreṇi—like a row; ruciraḥ—whose beautiful complexion; ramā—of goddess Lakṣmī; vāṇī—by the words; rāmaḥ—pleased; sphurat—fully-blown; amala—spotless; paṅkeruha-mukhaḥ—whose lotus face; sura-indraiḥ—by the best of sages; ārādhyaḥ—who is worshiped; śruti-gaṇa-śikhā—by the topmost Upaniṣads; gīta-caritaḥ—whose activities are glorified in song.

Lord Jagannātha is an ocean of mercy and is as beautiful as a row of blackish rain clouds. He is the storehouse of bliss for Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī, and His face resembles a spotless full-blown lotus. The best of demigods and sages worship Him, and the Upaniṣads sing His glories. May that Jagannātha Svāmī be the object of my vision.
Text 5
rathārūḍho gacchan pathi milita-bhūdeva-paṭalaiḥ
stuti-prādurbhāvam prati-padam upākarṇya sadayaḥ
dayā-sindhur bandhuḥ sakala jagatāṁ sindhu-sutayā
jagannāthah svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

ratha-ārūḍhaḥ—having mounted His cart; gacchan—parading along; pathi—by the road; milita—assembled; bhū-deva—of gods on earth (the brāhmaṇas); paṭalaiḥ—by multitudes; stuti-prādurbhāvam—presentation of prayers; prati-padam—at every step; upākarṇya—hearing; sa-dayaḥ—favorably disposed; dayā-sindhuḥ—an ocean of mercy; bandhuḥ—the friend; sakala-jagatām—of all the worlds; sindhu—of the ocean (of nectar);  sutayā—along with the daughter (Lakṣmī).

When Lord Jagannātha moves along the road on His Rathayātrā car, at every step large assemblies of brāhmaṇas loudly chant prayers and sing songs for His pleasure. Hearing their hymns, Lord Jagannātha becomes very favorably disposed toward them. He is the ocean of mercy and the true friend of all the worlds. May that Jagannātha Svāmī, along with His consort Lakṣmī, who was born from the ocean of nectar, be the object of my vision.
Text 6
para-brahmāpīḍaḥ kuvalaya-dalotphulla-nayano
nivāsī nīlādrau nihita-caraṇo 'nanta-śirasi
rasānando rādhā-sarasa-vapur-āliṅgana-sukho
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

para-brahma—of the supreme demigod, Brahmā; āpīḍaḥ—the crown; kuvalaya-dala—like petals of a blue lotus; utphulla—full-blown; nayanaḥ—whose eyes; nivāsī—who resides; nīla-adrau—in the Nīlācala temple that resembles a sapphire hill; nihita-caraṇaḥ—whose lotus feet are placed; ananta-śirasi—upon the heads of Lord Anantadeva; rasa-ānandaḥ—overwhelmed by the flow of loving mellows; rādhā—of Śrī Rādhā; sarasa—like a cool pond; vapuḥ—the body; āliṅgana-sukhaḥ—who becomes happy by embracing.

Lord Jagannātha, whose eyes resemble full-blown lotus petals, is the ornament on Lord Brahmā's head. He resides on Nīlācala Hill with His lotus feet placed on the heads of Anantadeva. Overwhelmed by the mellows of love, He joyfully embraces Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's body, which is like a cool pond. May that Jagannātha Svāmī be the object of my vision.
Text 7
na vai yāce rājyaṁ na ca kanaka-māṇikya-vibhavaṁ
na yāce 'haṁ ramyāṁ sakala jana-kāmyāṁ vara-vadhūm
sadā kāle kāle pramatha-patinā gīta-carito
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

na vai—certainly not; yāce—I pray; rājyam—for a kingdom; na ca—or not; kanaka—of gold; māṇikya—and rubies; vibhavam—wealth; na yāce—do not ask; aham—I; ramyām—beautiful; sakala—by all; jana—men; kāmyām—desired; vara-vadhūm—an excellent wife; sadā—always; kāle kāle—always; pramatha-patinā—by Śiva (the lord of the goblins); gīta-caritaḥ—whose glories are sung.

I do not pray for a kingdom, nor for gold, rubies, or wealth. I do not ask for a beautiful wife, as desired by all men. I simply pray that Jagannātha Svāmī, whose glories Lord Śiva always sings, may be the constant object of my vision.
Text 8
hara tvaṁ saṁsāraṁ druta-taram asāraṁ sura-pate
hara tvaṁ pāpānāṁ vitatiṁ aparāṁ yādava-pate
aho dīne 'nāthe nihita-caraṇo niścitam idam
jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me

hara—please remove; tvam—You; saṁsāram—material existence; drutataram—quickly; asāram—useless; sura-pate—O Lord of the demigods; hara—please remove; tvam—You; pāpānām—of sinful reactions; vitatim—the accumulation; aparām—boundless; yādava-pate—O Lord of the Yadus; aho—ah; dīne—on those who feel themselves humble; anāthe—the helpless; nihita-caraṇaḥ—whose feet are bestowed; niścitam—it is certain; idam—this.

O Lord of the demigods, please quickly remove this useless material existence I am undergoing. O Lord of the Yadus, please destroy this vast, shoreless ocean of sins. Ah, this is certain: Lord Jagannātha bestows His lotus feet upon those who feel themselves fallen and have no shelter in this world but Him. May that Jagannātha Svāmī be the object of my vision.
Text 9
jagannāthāṣṭakaṁ punyaṁ yaḥ paṭhet prayataḥ śuciḥ
sarva-pāpa-viśuddhātmā viṣṇu-lokaṁ sa gacchati

jagannātha-aṣṭakam—eight verses glorifying Lord Jagannātha; puṇyam—auspicious; yaḥ paṭhet—whoever recites; prayataḥ—devoted; śuciḥ—clean; sarva-pāpa—from all sins; viśuddha-ātmā—purified; viṣṇu-lokam—to Lord Viṣṇu’s abode; saḥ—he; gacchati—goes.

That devoted and virtuous soul who recites these eight verses glorifying Lord Jagannātha becomes cleansed of all sins and duly proceeds to Lord Viṣṇu’s abode.
Song 4: Dainya O Prapatti (hari he doyāl mor jaya)
Hari He Doyāl Mor
Dainya O Prapatti
"Humility and Devotional Surrender"
by an anonymous Vaiṣṇava poet
Audio
Text 1
hari he doyāl mor jaya rādhā-nāth
bāro bāro ei-bāro loho nija sāth

hari he—O Hari!; doyāl mor—O my merciful Lord!; jaya rādhā-nāth—all glories to You, the Lord of Rādhā!; bāro bāro—again and again (I have pleaded with You); ei-bāro—but this time; loho—please take me; nija sāth—as Your own.

O Hari! O my merciful Lord! All glories to You, O Lord of Rādhā! Again and again I have pleaded with You, and now I beg You yet again to accept me as Your own.
Text 2
bahu yoni bhrami' nātha! loinu śaraṇ
nija-gue kṛpā koro' adhama-tāraṇ

bahu yoni—through many wombs; bhrami'—after wandering; nātha—O Lord!; loinu śaraṇ—I have taken refuge in You; nija-guṇe—by Your divine power; kṛpā koro'—be merciful; adhama-tāraṇ—and deliver this wretched soul.

O Lord! Hopelessly taking birth over and over, I have now come to You for refuge. Please show Your merciful nature and deliver this wretched soul.
Text 3
jagata-kāraṇa tumi jagata-jīvan
tomā chāḍā kār nāhi he rādhā-ramaṇ

jagata-kāraṇa tumi—You are the cause of the universe; jagata-jīvan—and the life of the universe; tomā chāḍā—without You; kār nāhi—no one has anything; he rādhā-ramaṇ—O lover of Rādhā!

You are the cause of the universe, and its very life. Other than You, O lover of Rādhā, there is no shelter.
Text 4
bhuvana-maṅgala tumi bhuvaner pati
tumi upekhile nātha, ki hoibe gati

bhuvana-maṅgala tumi—You bring about auspiciousness for the world; bhuvaner pati—and You are the master of all the worlds; tumi upekhile—if I neglect You; nātha—O Lord!; ki hoibe gati—what will be my fate?

You bring about auspiciousness for the world, and You are the master of all the worlds as well. O Lord, what will become of me if You forsake me?
Text 5
bhāviyā dekhinu ei jagata-mājhāre
tomā binā keho nāhi e dāse uddhāre

bhāviyā—after having considered it; dekhinu—I have seen; ei jagata-mājhāre—within this world; tomā binā—except for You; keho nāhi—there is no one; e dāse uddhāre—who can deliver this fallen servant.

I have understood, after contemplating my predicament, that within this world there is no one who can deliver this servant but You.
Song 4: Śrī Vraja-dhāma-mahimāmṛta (jaya rādhe, jaya kṛṣṇa, jaya vṛndāvan)
Jaya Rādhe Jaya Kṛṣṇa
Śrī Vraja-dhāma-mahimāmṛta
The Nectarean Glories of Vraja-dhāma
Audio
Text 1
jaya rādhe, jaya kṛṣṇa, jaya vṛndāvan
śrī govinda, gopīnātha, madana-mohan

jaya rādhe jaya kṛṣṇa—all glories to Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; jaya vṛndāvana—glories to the transcendental realm of Vṛndāvana; śrī-govinda gopīnātha madana-mohana—glories to the three presiding Deities of Vṛndāvana : Govinda, Gopīnātha and Madana-mohana.

All glories to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the divine forest of Vṛndāvana. All glories to the three presiding Deities of Vṛndāvana—Śrī Govinda, Gopīnātha, and Madana-mohana.
Text 2
śyama-kunḍa, rādhā-kuṇḍa, giri-govardhan
kālindi jamunā jaya, jaya mahāvan

śyāma-kuṇḍa—glories to the personal lake of śyāma; rādhā-kuṇḍa—glories to the personal lake of Rādhā; giri-govardhan—glories to Govardhana Hill; kālindī yamunā jaya—glories to the Yamunā river, known as Kālindī, the daughter of the Kalinda mountain; jaya mahāvana—glories to the great forest of Mahāvana, the place of Kṛṣṇa's childhood pastimes.

All glories to Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Govardhana Hill, and the Yamunā River (Kālindī). All glories to the great forest known as Mahāvana, where Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma displayed all of Their childhood pastimes.
Text 3
keśī-ghāṭa, baṁśi-baṭa, dwādaśa-kānan
jāhā saba līlā koilo śrī-nanda-nandan

keśī-ghāṭa—glories to Keśī-ghāṭa, where Kṛṣṇa killed the horse demon; vaṁśī-vaṭa—glories to the Vaṁśī-vaṭa tree, where Kṛṣṇa sits and calls the gopīs with His flute; dvādaśa-kānana—glories to the twelve forests of Vraja; yāhā—where; saba—all; līlā—pastimes; koilo—performed; śrī-nanda-nandana—the son of Nanda Mahārāja.

All glories to Keśī-ghāṭa, where Kṛṣṇa killed the Keśī demon. All glories to the Vaṁśī-vata tree, where Kṛṣṇa attracted all the gopīs to come by playing His flute. Glories to all of the twelve forests of Vraja. At these places the son of Nanda, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, performed all of His pastimes.
Text 4
śrī-nanda-jaśodā jaya, jaya gopa-gaṇ
śrīdāmādi jaya, jaya dhenu-vatsa-gaṇ

śrī-nanda-yaśodā jaya—glories to Kṛṣṇa's divine mother and father, Nanda and Yaśodā; jaya gopa-gaṇa—glories to the assembly of cowherd boys; śrīdāmādi jaya—glories to the cowherd boy leaders headed by Śrīdāmā; jaya dhenu-vatsa-gaṇa—glories to the herds of cows and calves.

All glories to Kṛṣṇa's divine father and mother, Nanda and Yaśodā. All glories to the cowherd boys, headed by Śrīdāmā, the older brother of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Anaṅga Mañjarī. All glories to the cows and calves of Vraja.
Text 5
jaya bṛṣabhānu, jaya kīrtidā sundarī
jaya paurṇamāsī, jaya ābhīra-nāgarī

jaya vṛṣabhānu—glories to Rādhā's father; jaya kīrtidā-sundarī—glories to Rādhā's beautiful mother; jaya paurṇamāsī—glories to the elderly Paurṇamāsī, the personality of Yogamāyā; jaya ābhīra-nāgarī—glories to the cowherd women of Vraja.

All glories to Rādhā's divine father and mother, Vṛṣabhānu and the beautiful Kīrtidā. All glories to Paurṇamāsī, the mother of Sāndīpani Muni, grandmother of Madhumaṅgala and Nāndīmukhī, and beloved disciple of Devarṣi Nārada. All glories to the young cowherd maidens of Vraja.
Text 6
jaya jaya gopīśwara vṛndāvana-mājh
jaya jaya kṛṣṇa-sakhā baṭu dwija-rāj

jaya jaya gopīśvara—glories to the presence of Lord Śiva as Gopīśvara Mahādeva; vṛndāvana-mājha—in the midst of Vṛndāvana; jaya jaya kṛṣṇa-sakhā—glories, all glories to the cowherd boyfriend of Kṛṣṇa; baṭu—Śrī Madhumaṅgala; dvija-rāja—the monarch of the twice-born brāhmaṇas. 

All glories, all glories to Gopīśvara Śiva, who resides in Vṛndāvana in order to protect the holy dhāma. All glories, all glories to Kṛṣṇa's funny brahmaṇa friend, Madhumaṅgala.
Text 7
jaya rāma-ghāta, jaya rohiṇī-nandan
jaya jaya vṛndāvana-bāsī jata jan

jaya rāma-ghāṭa—glories to the landing on the Yamunā river where Balarāma sported the rāsa—dance; jaya rohiṇī-nandana—glories to the son of Rohiṇī (Balarāma); jaya jaya vṛndāvana-vāsī—glories, all glories to the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana; yata—all; jana—the people.

All glories to Rāma-ghāṭa, where Lord Balarāma performed His rasa dance. All glories to Lord Balarāma, the son of Rohiṇī. All glories, all glories to all of the residents of Vṛndāvana.
Text 8
jaya dwija-patnī, jaya nāga-kanyā-gaṇ
bhaktite jāhārā pāilo govinda-caraṇ

jaya dvija-patnī—glories to the wives of the Vedic brāhmaṇas; jaya nāgakanyā-gaṇa—glories to the wives of the Kāliya serpent; bhaktite—in devotion; yāhārā—of whom; pāilo—had attained; govinda-caraṇa—the lotus feet of Govinda.

All glories to the wives of the proud Vedic brāhmaṇas. All glories to the wives of the Kāliya serpent. Through pure devotion they all obtained the lotus feet of Lord Govinda.
Text 9
śrī-rasa-maṇḍala jaya, jaya rādhā-śyām
jaya jaya rasa-līlā sarva-manoram

śrī-rāsa-maṇḍala jaya—glories to the circular arena of the rāsa—dance; jaya rādhā-śyāma—glories to Rādhā-śyāma; jaya rāsa-līlā—glories to the rāsa-līlā; sarva-manorama—which captures the minds of all.

All glories to the place where the rasa dance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa was performed. All glories to Rādhā and Śyāma. All glories, all glories to the divine rasa dance, which is the most beautiful of all Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes.
Text 10
jaya jayojjwala-rasa sarva-rasa-sār
parakīyā-bhāve jāhā brajete pracār

jaya jayojjvala-rasa—glories to the ujjvala-rasa, the conjugal mellow; sarva-rasa-sāra—the quintessence of all ecstatic mellows; parakīyā-bhāve—in the mood of paramourship; yāhā—which; brajete pracāra—is manifest only in the realm of Vraja.

All glories, all glories to the mellow of conjugal love, which is the most excellent of all rasas and is propagated in Vraja by Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the form of the divine parakīyā-bhāva [paramour love].
Text 11
śrī-jāhnavā-pāda-padma koriyā smaraṇ
dīna kṛṣṇa-dāsa kohe nāma-saṅkīrtan

śrī-jāhnavā-pāda-padma—the lotus feet of Lord Nityānanda's śakti, Śrī Jāhnavā-devī; koriyā smaraṇa—remembering; dīna—very fallen and lowly; kṛṣṇadāsa—Kṛṣṇadāsa; kohe nāma-saṅkīrtana—sings the names of the Lord.

Remembering the lotus feet of Lord Nityānanda's consort, Śrī Jāhnavā Devī, this very fallen and lowly servant of Kṛṣṇa sings the saṅkīrtana of the holy name.
Song 4: Jaya Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Gīti (jaya rādhā-mādhava rādhā-mādhava rādhe)
Jaya Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Gīti
Audio
Text 1
jaya rādhā-mādhava rādhā-mādhava rādhe
(jayadever prāṇa-dhana he)

All glories to Rādhā and Mādhava, the treasure of Jayadeva Gosvāmī's heart!
Text 2
jaya rādhā-madana-gopāl rādhā-madana-gopāl rādhe
(sītā-nāther prāṇa-dhana he)

All glories to Rādhā and Madana-gopāla, the treasure of Śrī Advaita Ācārya's heart!
Text 3
jaya rādhā-govinda rādhā-govinda rādhe
(rūpa goswāmīr prāṇa-dhana he)

All glories to Rādhā and Govinda, the treasure of Rūpa Gosvāmī's heart!
Text 4
jaya rādhā-madana-mohan rādhā-madana-mohan rādhe
(sanātaner prāṇa-dhana he)

All glories to Rādhā and Madana-mohana, the treasure of Sanātana Gosvāmī's heart!
Text 5
jaya rādhā-gopīnātha rādhā-gopīnātha rādhe
(madhu paṇḍiter prāṇa-dhana he)

All glories to Rādhā and Gopīnātha, the treasure of Maḍhu Paṇḍita's heart!
Text 6
jaya rādhā-dāmodara rādhā-dāmodara rādhe
jīv goswāmīr prāṇa-dhana he)

All glories to Rādhā and Dāmodara, the treasure of Jīva Gosvāmī's heart!
Text 7
jaya rādhā-ramaṇa rādhā-ramaṇa rādhe
(gopāl bhaṭṭer prāṇa-dhana he)

All glories to Rādhā-ramaṇa, the treasure of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī's heart!
Text 8
jaya rādhā-vinoda rādhā-vinoda rādhe
(lokanāther prāṇa-dhana he)

All glories to Rādhā-vinoda, the treasure of Lokanātha Gosvāmī's heart!
Text 9
jaya rādhā-gokulānanda rādhā-gokulānanda rādhe
(viśwanāther prāṇa-dhana he)

All glories to Rādhā and Gokulānanda, the treasure of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's heart!
Text 10
jaya rādhā-giridhārī rādhā-giridhārī rādhe
(dās goswāmīr prāṇa-dhana he)

 All glories to Rādhā and Giridhārī, the treasure of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's heart!
Text 11
jaya rādhā-śyāmasundar rādhā-śyāmasundar rādhe
(śyāmānander prāṇa-dhana he)

 All glories to Rādhā and Śyāmasundara, the treasure of Śyāmānanda Gosvāmī's heart!
Text 12
jaya rādhā-baṅka-bihārī rādhā-baṅka-bihārī rādhe
(haridāser prāṇa-dhana he)

 All glories to Rādhā and Baṅka-vihārī, the treasure of Haridāsa Svāmī's heart!
Text 13
jaya rādhā-kānta rādhā-kānta rādhe
(vakreśwarer prāṇa-dhana he)

 All glories to Rādhā-kānta, the treasure of Vakreśvara Paṇḍita's heart!
Text 14
jaya gāndharvikā-giridhārī gāndharvikā-giridhārī rādhe
(saraswatīr prāṇa-dhana he)

 All glories to Gāndharvikā and Giridhārī, the treasure of Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's heart!
Song 4: Nitāi Guṇa Maṇi
Nitāi Guṇa Maṇi
Nityānanda, the Jewel of Virtues
(from the Caitanya-mañgala, by Locana dāsa Ṭhākura)
Audio
Text 1
nitāi guṇa-maṇi āmār nitāi guṇa-maṇi
āniyā premer vanyā bhāsāilo avanī

nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; guṇa-maṇi—the jewel of all good qualities; āmāra—my; nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; guṇa-maṇi—the jewel of all good qualities; āniyābringing; premera vanyāthe flood of divine ecstatic love; bhāsāila—has drowned; avanīthe world.

My Lord Nityānanda, the jewel of all virtues, my Lord Nityānanda, the jewel of all virtues, has brought the flood of ecstatic love of God that has drowned the entire world.
Text 2
premer vanyā loiyā nitāi āilā gauḍa-deśe
ḍubilo bhakata-gaṇa dīna hīna bhāse

premera vanyāthe flood of divine ecstatic love; laiyābringing; nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; āilāreturned; gauḍa-deśe—to Bengal; ḍubilo—drowned; bhakata-gaṇa—the assembly of devotees; dīna hīna—the fallen nondevotees; bhāse—remained floating.

Bringing this overwhelming deluge of prema when He returned to Bengal from Jagannātha Purī on Lord Caitanya's order, Nitāi has inundated the assembly of devotees. The fallen nondevotees did not drown, however, but remained floating on that ecstatic ocean.
Text 3
dīna hīna patita pāmara nāhi bāche
brahmār durlabha prema sabākāre jāce

dīna hīna—those who are sinful and destitute; patita—fallen; pāmara—wretched; nāhi—not; bāche—desiring; brahmāra durlabha—unattainable even for Lord Brahmā; prema—ecstatic love; sabākāre—unto everyone; yāce—He (Lord Nityānanda) offers.

This exalted prema, which is difficult even for Lord Brahmā to attain, was freely offered by Lord Nityānanda even to the fallen and wretched souls who did not desire it.
Text 4
ābaddha karuṇā-sindhu niṭāi kāṭiyā muhān
ghare ghare bule prema-amiyār bān

locana bale—the author Locana Dāsa says; mora—my; nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; yebāwhoever; nā bhajilo—has not worshiped; jāniyāeven knowing; śuniyāand hearing about it; sei—that person; ātma-ghātīhis own killer; hoilo—becomes.

The ocean of mercy had formerly been sealed tight, but Nitāi cut a channel in its boundary to allow the great flooding waves of nectarean prema to splash from house to house.
Text 5
locan bole mor nitāi jebā nā bhajilo
jāniyā śuniyā sei ātma-ghātī hoilo

locana bale—the author Locana Dāsa says; mora—my; nitāi—Lord Nityānanda; yebāwhoever; nā bhajilo—has not worshiped; jāniyāeven knowing; śuniyāand hearing about it; sei—that person; ātma-ghātīhis own killer; hoilo—becomes.

Locana Dāsa says, “By neglecting to worship my Nitāi or take advantage of this excellent opportunity He offers, a person knowingly commits suicide.”
Song 4: Śrī Tulasī-ārati (namo namaḥ tulasi mahārāṇī)
Śrī Tulasī-ārati
by Candraśekhara Kavi
Text 1
namo namaḥ tulasi mahārāṇī,
vṛnde mahārāṇī namo namaḥ
namo re namo re meiyā namo nārāyaṇi

namo namaḥ—I offer my obeisances to you again and again; tulasi mahārāṇi—O Tulasī Mahārāṇī!; vṛnde—O Vṛndā!; mahārāṇi—O grand Queen!; namo namaḥ—I offer my obeisances to you again and again; namo re—my obeisances unto you!; namo re—my obeisances unto you!; meiyā—O mother!; namo nārāyaṇi—O Nārāyaṇī, wife of Lord Nārāyaṇa!

O Tulasī Mahārāṇī! O Vṛndā! O mother of devotion! O Nārāyaṇi, I offer my obeisances to you again and again.
Text 2
jāko daraśe, paraśe agha-nāśa-i
mahimā beda-purāṇe bākhāni

yāṅko daraśe—whoever sees you; paraśe—or touches you; agha-nāśa-i—all sins are destroyed; mahimā—your glories; veda-purāṇe—in the Vedas and Purāṇas; vākhāni—are described.

One who sees you or even touches you has all his sins destroyed. The Vedas and Purāṇas describe your glories.
Text 3
jāko patra, mañjarī komala
śrī-pati-caraṇa-kamale lapaṭāni
dhanya tulasi meiyā, purāṇa tapa kiye,
śrī-śālagrāma-mahā-pāṭarāṇī

yāṅko—whose; patra—leaves; mañjarī komala—and soft mañjarīs; śrī-pati—of Lord Nārāyaṇa, the husband of Lakṣmī; caraṇa-kamale—at the lotus feet; lapaṭāni—are entwined; dhanya tulasi meiyā—O blessed mother Tulasī!; pūraṇa—you successfully completed; tapa kiye—performing austerities; śrī-śālagrāma—of Śrī śālagrāma-śīlā; mahā-pāṭarāṇī—and have thus become the chief consort and queen.

Your leaves and soft new blossoms are entwined at the lotus feet of Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Lakṣmī. O blessed mother Tulasī, you performed successful austerities and have thus become the chief consort and queen of Śrī Śālagrāma-śilā.
Text 4
dhūpa, dīpa, naivedya, ārati,
phulanā kiye varakhā varakhāni
chāppānna bhoga, chatriśa byañjana,
binā tulasī prabhu eka nāhi māni

dhūpa—incense; dīpa—a ghee lamp; naivedya—edibles; ārati—the ārati ceremony; phulanā kiye—offering to you; varakhā—you shower; varakhāni—your rain of mercy; chāppānna bhoga—the fifty-six varieties of cooked food; chatriśa byañjana—or the thirty-six different curries; vinā tulasī—without tulasī leaves; prabhu—the Lord; eka nāhi māni—does not care for even one of them.

You engladden and shower your rain of mercy upon one who offers you some incense, a ghee lamp, edibles, and ārati. The Lord does not care for even one of fifty-six varieties of cooked food or thirty-six different curries offered without tulasī leaves.
Text 5
śiva-śuka-nārada, āur brahmādiko,
ḍhūrata phirata mahā-muni jñānī
candrasekhara meiyā, terā jaśa gāowe
bhakati-dāna dījiye mahārāṇī

śiva-śuka-nārada—Lord Śiva, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Devarṣi Nārada; aur—and; brahmādiko—demigods headed by Lord Brahmā; ḍh rata phirata—are circumambulating you; mahā-muni jñānī—and all the wise jñānīs and great munis; candraśekhara—this Candraśekhara; meiyā—O mother!; terā yaśa—your glories; gāowe—thus sings; bhakati-dāna—the gift of pure devotion; dijiye—please bestow upon me; mahārāṇi—O Mahārāṇī!

Lord Śiva, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Devarṣi Nārada, and all the jñānīs and great munis, headed by Lord Brahmā, are circumambulating you. O mother! O Mahārāṇī, Candraśekhara thus sings your glories. Please bestow upon him the gift of pure devotion.
Song 4: Śrī Tulasī-kīrtana (namo namaḥ tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasi)
Śrī Tulasī-kīrtana
Audio
Text 1
namo namaḥ tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasi namo namaḥ
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sevā pābo ei abilāṣī

(refrain) namo namaḥ—bowing again and again; tulasī—O Tulasī!; kṛṣṇa-preyasī—O beloved of Kṛṣṇa!; namo namaḥ—repeated obeisances; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sevā—the service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; pābo—I will obtain; ei—this; abhilāṣī—I am desirous.

O Tulasī, beloved of Kṛṣṇa, I bow before you again and again. My desire is to obtain the service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Text 2
ye tomāra śaraṇa loy, tara vāñchā pūrṇa hoy
kṛpā kori' koro tāre vṛndāvana-vāsi

ye—whoever; tomāra—your; śaraṇa loy—takes shelter; tāra—his; vāñchā—desires; pūrṇa hoy—are fulfilled; kṛpā kori'—being merciful; koro—you make; tāre—him; vṛndāvana-vāsī—a resident of Vṛndāvana.

Whoever takes shelter of you has his wishes fulfilled. Bestowing your mercy on him, you make him a resident of Vṛndāvana.
Text 3
mora ei abhilāṣa, vilāsa kuñje dio vāsa
nayana heribo sadā yugala-rūpa-rāśi

mora—my; ei—this; abhilāṣ—desire; vilās kuñje—in the pleasure-groves; dio—please give; vās—a residence; nayane—with my eyes; heribo—I will behold; sadā—always; yugala-rūpa-rāśī—the waves of the Divine Couple's beauty.

My desire is that you will also give me a residence in the pleasure groves of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Thus within my vision I will always behold the beautiful pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Text 4
ei nivedana dhara, sakhīra anugata koro
sevā-adhikāra diye koro nīja dāsī

ei nivedana—this request; dharo—please keep; sakhīra—of one of the cowherd damsels; anugata koro—make me a follower; sevā-adhikāra—the privilege of devotional service; diye—bestowing; koro—please make; nija dāsī—your own maidservant.

I beg you to make me a follower of the cowherd damsels of Vraja. Please give me the privilege of devotional service and make me your own maidservant.
Text 5
dīna kṛṣṇa-dāse koy, ei yena mora hoy
śrī-rādhā-govinda-preme sadā yena bhāsi

dīna kṛṣṇa-dāse—the fallen and lowly servant of Kṛṣṇa (named Kṛṣṇadāsa); koy—prays; ei—this; yena—just like; mora hoy—is mine; śrī-rādhā-govinda-preme—in the ecstatic love for Śrī Rādhā and Govinda; sadā—always; yena—just like; bhāsi—swimming.

This very fallen and lowly servant of Kṛṣṇa prays, "May I always swim in the love of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Govinda."
Song 4: Śrī Tulasī Praṇāma (vṛndāyai tulasī-devyai)
Śrī Tulasī Praṇāma
Audio
Text 1
vṛndāyai tulasī-devyai
priyāyai keśavasya ca
viṣṇu-bhakti-prade devi
satyavatyai namo namaḥ

vṛndāyai—unto Vṛndā; tulasī-devyai—unto Tulasī Devī; priyāyai- who is dear; keśavasya—to Lord Keśava; ca—and; viṣṇu-bhakti—devotional service to Lord Viṣṇu; prade—who bestows; devi—O goddess; satyavatyai—unto Satyavatī; namaḥ namaḥ—repeated obeisances.

I offer my repeated obeisances unto Vṛndā, Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī, who is very dear to Lord Keśava. O goddess, you bestow devotional service to Kṛṣṇa, and you possess the highest truth.
Song 4: Śrī Tulasī Pradakṣiṇa Mantra (yāni kāni ca pāpāni)
Śrī Tulasī Pradakṣiṇa Mantra
Audio
Text 1
yāni kāni ca pāpāni
brahma-hatyādikāni ca
tāni tāni praṇaśyanti
pradakṣiṇaḥ pade pade

yāni kāni—whatever; ca—and; pāpāni—sins; brahma-hatya—killing of a brāhmaṇa; ādikāni—and so on; ca—also; tāni tāni—all of them; praṇaśyanti—are destroyed; pradakṣiṇaḥ—(by) the circumambulation (of Tulasī Devī); pade pade—at every step.

Those who circumambulate Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī step by step destroy whatever sins they have committed, even the killing of a brāhmaṇa.
Song 4: Śrī Nṛsiṁha Praṇāma (namas te narasiṁhāya)
Śrī Nṛsiṁha Praṇāma
Audio
Text 1
namas te narasiṁhāya
prahlādāhlāda-dāyine
hiraṇyakaśipor vakṣaḥ-
śilā-ṭaṅka-nakhālaye

namaḥ—obeisances; te—unto You; nara-siṁhāya—unto Lord Narasiṁha; prahlāda—(to) Prahlāda Mahārāja; āhlāda—(of) joy; dāyine—the giver; hiraṇyakaśipoḥ—of Hiraṇyakaśipu; vakṣaḥ—chest; śilā—(on) the stonelike; ṭaṅka—chisels; nakha-ālaye—whose nails.

I offer my obeisances to Lord Narasiṁha who gives joy to Prahlāda Mahārāja and whose nails are like chisels on the stonelike chest of the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu.
Text 2
ito nṛsiṁhaḥ parato nṛsiṁho
yato yato yāmi tato nṛsiṁhaḥ
bahir nṛsiṁho hṛdaye nṛsiṁho
nṛsiṁham ādiṁ śaraṇaṁ prapadye

itaḥ—here; nṛsiṁhaḥ—Lord Nṛsiṁha; parataḥ—there; nṛsiṁhaḥ—Lord Nṛsiṁha; yataḥ yataḥ—wherever; yāmi—I go; tataḥ—there; nṛsiṁhaḥ—Lord Nṛsiṁha; bahiḥ—externally; nṛsiṁhaḥ—Lord Nṛsiṁha; hṛdaye—in the heart; nṛsiṁhaḥ—Lord Nṛsiṁha; nṛsiṁham—to Lord Nṛsiṁha; ādim—the origin; śaraṇam—the supreme refuge; prapadye—I surrender.

Lord Nṛsiṁha is here and also there. Wherever I go Lord Nṛsiṁha is there. He is in the heart and is outside as well. I surrender to Lord Nṛsiṁha, the origin of all things and the supreme refuge.
Song 4: Prayer to Lord Nṛsiṁha (tava kara-kamala-vare nakham)
Prayer to Lord Nṛsiṁha
by Jayadeva Gosvāmī
(from Śrī Daśāvatāra-stotra)
Audio
Text 1
tava kara-kamala-vare nakham adbhuta-śṛṅgaṁ
dalita-hiraṇyakaśipu-tanu-bhṛṅgam
keśava dhṛta-narahari-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare

tava—Your; kara-kamala-vare—upon the beautiful lotus hands; nakham—the nails; adbhuta-śṛṅgam—wonderfully sharp tips; dalita—ripped apart; hiraṇyakaśipu-tanu—the body of the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu; bhṛṅgam—the wasp; keśava—O Lord Keśava!; dhṛta-narahari-rūpa—who assumed the form of Narahari; jaya—all glories; jagat-īśa hare—O Hari, Lord of the universe!

O Keśava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari who have assumed the form of a half-man, half-lion! All glories to You! With the wonderfully sharp nails on Your beautiful lotus hands You have ripped apart the wasplike body of Hiraṇyakaśipu.

All glories to Lord Nṛsiṁha
iThe previous  of the refrain was "I emphatically say to you, O brothers, you will obtain your good fortune from the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa only when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī becomes pleased with you." The main problem with this , produced not by Śrīla Prabhupāda but by one of his disciples, is that it missed the point that Śrīla Prabhupāda is addressing Kṛṣṇa, not "brothers." Kṛṣṇa tava puṇya habe bhāi means "O brother, Kṛṣṇa, You will achieve piety." This primary mistake resulted in a fundamentally flawed , and therefore we felt it was important to fix it.


iiThe six passions are those pertaining to words, the mind, anger, the tongue, the stomach and the genitals. 
iiiThe six faults are overeating, attachment to material things, inability to follow regulative principles, sense gratification, useless idle talk, and impure habits. 
ivThe six positive qualities are enthusiasm in practicing devotional service, firm faith in devotional processes, a strong desire to attain prema-bhakti, a favorable service attitude, avoidance of non-devotees, and appreciation of the company of devotees. 
vThe six methods of association are to go to an assembly of devotees, to invite devotees into one's home, to discuss and hear devotional topics, to take the mahā-prasāda of devotees and to offer mahā-prasāda to devotees.
viKṛṣṇa's five flower arrows are His form, sound, taste, smell, and touch.
viiCakoras subsist only upon moonlight.
viiiThe following  is recited every morning in English-speaking ISKCON centers throughout the world. The  in the main body of the VedaBase is more literal

1) The lotus feet of our spiritual master are the only way by which we can attain pure devotional service. I bow to his lotus feet with great awe and reverence. By his grace one can cross the ocean of material suffering and obtain the mercy of Kṛṣṇa.
2) My only wish is to have my consciousness purified by the words emanating from his lotus mouth. Attachment to his lotus feet is the perfection that fulfills all desires.
3) He opens my darkened eyes and fills my heart with transcendental knowledge. He is my Lord birth after birth. From him ecstatic prema emanates; by him ignorance is destroyed. The Vedic scriptures sing of his character.
4) Our spiritual master is the ocean of mercy, the friend of the poor, and the lord and master of the devotees. O master! Be merciful unto us. Give us the shade of your lotus feet. Your fame is spread all over the three worlds.

ixRūpa Gosvāmī's eternal form as a gopī of Vraja
x  Because this song has been composed by Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, he has placed his name at the end of the song, as is customarily done by Vaiṣṇava poets. In order to glorify Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura and his beloved disciple Śrī A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda as spiritual teachers in the preceptorial succession from Śrī Caitanyadeva, the following verse has been added and may be optionally sung instead of the song's ninth verse.
xi[Following the custom of Vaiṣṇava authors, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has placed his name at the end of this song. To glorify Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī and his beloved disciple Śrīla A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda as spiritual masters in disciplic succession from Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the translators have composed the following verse, which may be substituted for the ninth verse.]
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

   

 

