Folio Archives
The Acaryas' Songs and Poems Glorifying Lord Gauraṅga and Lord Govinda


One
The Ācāryas’ Songs
Glorifying Lord Gaurāṅga

Part 1A Lord Gaura’s Pastimes of Dancing in Saṅkīrtana

Song 1 (Bibhāsa-rāga)

Text 1 (Refrain) mahā-bhuja nācata caitanya rāya
ke jāne kata kata        bhaba śata śata
          soṇāra baraṇa gora rāya
Text 2 preme ḍhara ḍhara          aṅga niramala
          pulaka aṅkura-śobhā
āra ki kahiba       aśeṣa anubhaba
          hera-ite jaga-mana lobhā
Text 3 śuniyā nija guṇa      nāma kīrtana
          bibhora naṭana bibhaṅga
nadīyā-pura loka         pāśarila duḥkha sukha
          bhāsala prema-taraṅga
Text 4 ratana bitaraṇa       prema-rasa barikhaṇa
          akhila bhubana siñcita
caitanya dāsa gāne       atula prema-dāne
          muñi se ha-iluṁ bañcita


     Text 1 (Refrain) His arms long and graceful, Lord Caitanya Rāya dances. How many hundreds and hundreds of devotional ecstasies does He feel? Who has the power to know? Lord Gaura Rāya is splendid like gold.
     Text 2 He sheds tears of ecstatic spiritual love. His limbs are glorious. Splendid like sprouting blades of grass, the hairs of His body stand erect. What more shall I say? When the people of the world see Him, they understand. Their hearts yearn to attain His company.
     Text 3 Hearing the chanting of His own glories and His own holy names, He dances, overcome with ecstasy. Forgetting their pains and pleasures, the people of Nadīyā float in waves of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 4 He freely gives away the jewels of ecstatic spiritual love. He showers a great monsoon of the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. He showers all the worlds. Caitanya dāsa sings: He gives away the peerless gift of ecstatic spiritual love. Only I did not receive that gift. Only I was cheated.

 
Song 2 (Beloyāra-rāga)
 

Text 1 nācata nīke gaura-bara ratana
bhakata kalapa-taru kali mada-mathana
Text 2 gara gara bhābe tanu pulakita saghana
nija-guṇe nigūḍha prema-rase magana
Text 3 bhābe bibhora lora jharu nayanā
nirabadhi hari hari bolata bayanā
Text 4 gaḍi gaḍi bhūme karata kata karuṇā
śrī-pada kusuma su-komala aruṇā
Text 5 aja-bhaba-ādi satata karu bhābanā
karu kabi-śekhara soda seba nā


     Text 1 The jewel of Lord Gaura dances. He is a kalpa-taru tree that fulfills the devotees’ desires. In the Kali-yuga He churns the ocean of spiritual bliss.
     Text 2 He is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. The hairs of His body stand erect. He is plunged into a nectar ocean of confidential ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 3 He is overcome with spiritual love. Tears stream from His eyes. Without stop his mouth chants, “Hari! Hari!”
     Text 4 He falls and faslls to the ground. How He is ovecrome! The graceful, soft, reddish soles of His feet are like flowers.
     Text 5 Brahmā, Śiva, and all the demigods meditate on Him. Alas! Kavi-śekhara cannot taste the sweet nectar of directly serving Him.

 
Song 3 (Beloyāra-rāga)
 

Text 1 dekha śacī-nandana, jagata jībana dhana, anukhaṇa prema-dhana
          jaga-jane yāce
bhābe bibhora bara, gaura-tanu pulakita, saghane baliyā hari
          gorā pahuṁ nāce
Text 2 (Refrain) saba abatāra sāra gorā abatāra
hema baraṇa jini, nirupama tanu-khāni, aruṇa-nayane bahe
          premake dhāra
Text 3 bṛndābana guṇa śuni, luṭhata se dwija-maṇi, bhābe bhare gara gara
          pahuṁ mora hāse
kāśīśwara abhirāma, paṇḍita puruṣottama, guṇa gāna karatahi
          narahari dāse


     Text 1 Look at Śacī’s son! He is the life and treasure of all the worlds. At every moment He begs the world’s people to accept His gift of the great treasure of ecstatic spiritual love. He is overcome withecstatic spiritual love. The hairs on His fair body staned erect. Again and again He chants, “Hari!” Lord Gaura dances.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Lord Gaura has descended to this world. He is thebest of all avatāras. His peerless form defeats the splendor of gold. Flooding rivers of ecstatic spiritual love stream as tears from His reddened eyes.
     Text 3 Hearing the glories of Vṛndāvana, He rolls on the ground. Lord Gaura, the jewel of the brāhmaṇas, laughs in ecstasy. Kāśīśvara, Abhirāma, nnd Puruṣottama Paṇḍita stay at His side. Thus Narahari dāsa sings His glories.

 
Song 4 (Tuḍī-rāga)
 

Text 1 gorā nāce prema binodiyā
akhila-bhubana-pati bihare nadīyā
Text 2 dig bidig nā jāne gorā nācite nācite
cānda-mukhe hari bole kāndite kāndite
Text 3 golokera prema-dhana jībe bilā-iyā
saṅkīrtane nāce gorā hari bola baliyā
Text 4 preme gara gara aṅga mukhe mṛdu hāsa
se rase bañcita bhela balarāma dāsa


     Text 1 Enjoying pastimes of spiritual love, Lord Gaura dances. He who is the ruler of all the worlds enjoys pastimes in Nadīyā.
     Text 2 Lord Gaura dances and dances. He does not know one direction from another. The moon of His mouth chants, “Hari!” He weeps and weeps.
     Text 3 The treasur eof ecstatic spiritual love, a treasure He brought down from the spiritual world of Goloka, He freely distributes to everyone. Chanting, “Haribol!”, Lord Gaura dances in saṅkīrtana.
     Text 4 He is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. A gentle smile graces His face. Alas! Balarāma dāsa was cheated of the chance to taste the nectar of serving Him.

 
Song 5 (Paṭha-mañjarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 nācaye caitanya cintāmaṇi
buka bahi dhārā mukutā gānthani
Text 2 preme gada gada haiyā dharaṇī loṭāya
huhuṅkāra diyā khene uṭhiyā dāṇḍāya
Text 3 ghana ghana dena pāka ūrdhwa-bāhu kari
patita-janāre pahuṁ bolāya hari hari
Text 4 hari-nāma kare gāna jape anukṣaṇa
bujhite nā pāre keha birala lakṣaṇa
Text 5 apāra mahimā-guṇa jaga-jane gāya
basu rāmānanda tāhe prema-dhana cāya


     Text 1 Cintāmaṇi-jewel Lord Gaura dances. A flood of tears streams down His chest, tears like a string of pearls.
     Text 2 Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, He speaks broken words in a choked voice. He rolls on the ground. He jumps and roars.
     Text 3 Raising His arms, He dances in a circle. He makes the fallen sinners chant, “Hari! Hari!”
     Text 4 At every moment He does kīrtana or japa of Lord Hari’s holy names. No one has the power to understand His symptoms of rare ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 5 The people of this world sing songs praising the shoreless ocean of His transcendental glories. Rāmānanda Vasu yearns to attain the treasure of ecstatic spiritual love He gives away.

 
Song 6 (Bibhāsa-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) āre mora nācata gaura-kiśora
hiraṇa-kiraṇa jini       o tanu sundara
          daśa-diśa karala ujora
Text 2 śārada-cānda jini         jhalamala badanahi
          rocana tilaka su-bhāla
kuñcita cāru        cikura tahi lolata
          kamale kiye ali-jāla
Text 3 nāsā tila-phula       bimaba adhara tala
          cuyata bindu bindu ghāma
taruṇa aruṇa        sarasija jini locana
          dhārā bahe abirāma
Text 4 gānthiyā āpana guṇa        parakāśi kīrtana
          gā-ota sahacara-bṛnde
khola karatāla      yatana kari sirajila
          pāṣaṇḍa dalana anubandhe
Text 5 abanīte adabhuta        prabhu śacī-nandana
          patita-pābana abatāra
dīna-hīna mūḍha-mati          rāmānanda dāsa ati
          pahuṁ more kara bhaba-pāra


     Text 1 (Refrain) Ah!! My Lord Gaura-kiśora dances! Defeating the splendor of gold, His glorious form fills the ten directions with light.
     Text 2 Defeating the autumn moon, His graceful rocana-tilaka-decorated forehead glistens with splendor. Is the curly black hair on His head, hair tossed to and fro, actually a swarm of black bees around a yellow lotus flower?
     Text 3 His nose is a sesame flower. His lips are bimba fruits. He covered with drop after drop of perspiration. Defeating the new red lotus flowers, His eyes are the source of flooding rivers of tears, rivers that flow without stop.
     Text 4 Surrounded by His companion s, in the kīrtana He sinsg the glories of a person who is actually His own self. The kholas and karatālas play. Now the sinners’ sins are broken into pieces.
     Text 5 Now the earth is filled with wonder. Śacī’s son, who purifies the fallen, has now descended to this world. Now all the fools and fallen sinners, including even Rāmānanda dāsa, Lord Gaura has carried to the farther shore of the ocean of repeated births and deaths.

 
Song 7 (Gāndhāra-rāga)
 

Text 1 bhābe bharala hema tanu anupama re, ahar-niśi nija-rase bhora
nayana-yugale, prema-jale jhara jhara re, bhuja tuli hari hari bola
Text 2 nācata gaura-kiśora mora pahuṁ re, abhinaba nabadwīpa-cānda
jītala nīpa-phula, pulaka mukula re, prati aṅge manamatha phānda 
Text 3 bhāba-bhare helana, bhāba-bhare dolana, prati aṅge bhāba bithāri
rasa-bhare gara gara, cala-i khala-i re, gobinda dāsa balihāri


     Text 1 Filled with spiritual love, Lord Gaura’s golden form is beyond compare. Day and night He is overcome wby tasting the nectar of spiritual love. Tears of love stream from His eyes. Raising His arms, He chants, “Hari! Hari!”
     Text 2 My Lord Gaura-kiśora dances. He is a new moon shining in Navadvīpa. Standing erect, the hairs of His body defeat the kadamba flowers. His every limb is Kāmadeva’s trap.
     Text 3 Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, He sways to and fro. His every limbs is filled with spiritual love. Overcome with tasting rthe nectar of spiritual love, He stumbles as He walks. Govinda dāsa completely surrenders unto Him.

 
Song 8 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 nācaye gaurāṅga pahuṁ sahacara saṅga
śyāma-tanu gaura bhela basana suraṅga
Text 2 pūraba dohana-bhāṇḍa anubhabi śeṣe
karaṅga la-ila gorā se-i abhilāṣe
Text 3 chāḍi cūḍā śikhi-puccha kaila keśa-hīna
pīta basana chāḍi parila kaupīna
Text 4 ha-ilena daṇḍa-dhārī chāḍiyā baṁśarī
yadu kahe kṛṣṇa ebe ha-ila gaura-hari


     Text 1 Lord Gaurāṅga dances with His associates. Dark Lord Kṛṣṇa has now become fair Lord Gaura clothed in glorious saffron garments.
     Text 2 He who in the past carried a milk-pail now wishes to carry a sannyāsī’s waterpot.
     Text 3 He has renounced His hair crowned with a peacock-feather. Now His head is shaved. He has renounced His yellow garments. Now He wears a sannyāsī’s kaupīna.
     Text 4 He has renounced his flute. Now He carries a sannyāsī’s daṇḍa. Yadu says: Lord Kṛṣṇa has beocme Lord Gaura-Hari.

 
Song 9 (Soma-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nācata gaura pūraba rase bhora
kanaka dharādhara        garaba bibhañjana
          jhalakata aṅga atanu cita-cora
Text 2 hāsata mṛdu mṛdu      badana chānda chabi
          nāśata ghora kaluṣa āndhiyāra
dhara-ite tāla      tarala pada-paṅkaja
          kampa-i dharaṇī saha-i nāhi bhāra
Text 3 taruṇa aruṇa-yuga          locana ḍagamaga
          abirala bipula pulaka-kula sāji
garajata saghana         siṁha jini bikrama
          balī kali-kāla bipula bhaye bhāji
Text 4 bhedata gagana        gāne priya parikara
          bāyata khola lalita karatāla
mātala akhila loka       bhaṇa narahari
          bhubana bharala yaśa biṣada biśāla


     Text 1 (Refrain) Overcome by tasting the nectar of His previous pastimes as Lord Kṛṣṇa, Lord Gaura dances. His glistening limbs, limbs that break the golden mountain’s pride, charm Kāmadeva’s heart.
     Text 2 The splendor of His gently gently smiling face destroys the blinding darkness of a host of horrible sins. His rhythmically dancing footsteps make the earth tremble. The earth has no power to hold Him up.
     Text 3 The new red lotus flowers of His eyes always overfloww with tears of ecstatic spiritual love. he hairs of His body stand erect. Eclipsing the lions’ prowess, He roars. Frightened, the powerful age of Kali flees.
     Text 4 Gracefully playing khola and karatālas, His dear companions sing. Their tumultuous music breaks the sky. Now all the worlds are wild with ecstatic spiritual love. Narahari says: Now Lord Gaura’s splendid pure glories fill all the worlds.

 
Song 10 (Deśapāla-rāga)
 

Text 1 nṛtyata gauracandra jana-rañjana, nityānanda bipada-bhaya-bhañjana
kañja-nayana jiti naba naba khañjana, cāhani manamatha garaba hare
jhalakata duhuṁ tanu kanaka dharādhara, naṭana ghaṭana paga dharata dharaṇī para
hāsa milita mukha layata sudhākara, ucari bacana janu amiyā jhare
Text 2 śobhā nirupama bhaṇatana āyata, beṣṭita parikara guṇa-gaṇa gāyata
madhura madhura mṛdu mardala bāyata, dhādhā dhigi dhigi dhikaṭa dhilaṅga
gaṇa saha sura-gaṇa gagana-pantha-gata, ghana ghana sarasa kusuma bara baraṣata
jaya jaya jaya dhwani bhubana biyāpata, narahari kahaba ki prema-taraṅga


     Text 1 Lord Gauracandra, who delights everyone. Lord Nityānanda, weho breaks all fear of any calamity, dances at His side. Their lotus eyes defeat the young young khañjana birds. Their graceful eyes steal away Kāmadeva’s pride. Their forms glisten like two golden mountains. Somehow the earth sustains Their dancing footsteps. The smiling enctyar moons of Theor faces meet. Their words are like flowing streams of sweet nectar.
     Text 2 Their words are glorious without peer. They are surrounded by companions who sing of Their glories. Sweetly sweetly the musical instruments are gently sounded. “Dhādhā dhigi dhigi dhikaṭa dhilaṅga!”, the drums declare. Assembling in the pathway of the sky, the demigods and their associates shower flowers. Sounds of “Jaya! Jaya! Jaya!” fills the worlds. Will Narahari ever be able to describe the waves of ecstatic spiritual love that flooded everything at that time?

 
Song 11 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) āju ki ānanda saṅkīrtane
nāce gaura nityānanda         parama ānanda-kanda
          priya pāriṣada-bṛnda sane
Text 2 nāce bole bhāla bhāla      bāje khola karatāla
          sabe mahā bihwola premāya
nadīrā prabāha pārā      sabāra nayane dhārā
          keha keha paḍe kāra gāya
Text 3 keha bā pulaka-bhare       huṅkāra garjana kare
          kāmpe kega thira haite nāre
keha kāru pāne cāñā         du-i bāhu pasāriyā
          kole kari chāḍite nā pāre
Text 4 keha kāru pāya dhare        pada-dhūli laya śire
          keha bhūme paḍi paḍi yāya
prabhu bhṛtya eka riti        dekhi narahari ati
          ānande prabhura guṇa gāya


     Text 1 (Refrain) How much bliss is now present in this saṅkīrtana! Surrounded by Their dear associates, Lord Gaura and Lord Nityānanda, who are the root of all transcendental bliss, dance.
     Text 2 They dance and call out, “Glory! Glory!” The devotees play kholas and karatālas. Everyone is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. Flooding rivers of tears flow from everyone’s eyes. Some joyfully sing. Some, overcome with ecstasy, fall to the ground.
     Text 3 Soem have bodily hairs that stand erect. Some loudly roar. Some tremble. Some cannot remain peaceful and steady. Some gaze at Lord Gaura. Some extend their arms and hug the other devotees. They will not let go.
     Text 4 Some grasp the devotees’ feet and place the dust on their own head. Some stumble and stumble, falling to the ground as they walk. Gazing at the two Lords as They dance, the servant Narahari joyfully sings the two Lord’s glories.

 
Song 12 (Paṭha-mañjarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 nāce gaurāṅgacānda bibhora bhābete
se-i bhābe gadādhara nācaye bāmete
Text 2 bhāyara soṇāra aṅga bhūme paḍe pāche
tā-i se nitā-i-cānda phire pāche pāche
Text 3 nāce re gaurāṅga āmāra heliyā duliyā
bāje khola karatāla tādhiyā tādhiyā
Text 4 duragata patita dhariyā karu kora
pāmara e narahari o nā rase bhora


     Text 1 Overcome with ecstasy, Lord Gaurāṅgacandra dances. Filled with the same ecstasy, Gadādhara dances at His left.
     Text 2 Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, Lord Gaura stumbles. His golden body falls to the ground. Behind Him Lord Nitāicandra turns and dances.
     Text 3 Swaying to and fro, my Lord Gaurāṅga dances. “Tādhiyā! Tādhiyā!”, the kholas and karatālas declare.
     Text 4 Lord Gaurāṅga grasps the misguided sinners and holds them in His arms. Alas! The wretch Narahari is not overcome by the nectar of these pastimes.

 
Song 13 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nāce śacīra dulāla raṅge
adwaita nitā-i gadādhara śrībāsādi parikara saṅge
Text 2 aṅga-bhaṅgī ki madhura-chānde
pada-bhare mahī-kare ṭhalamala, ke tāhe dhairaja bāndhe
Text 3 nānā tāle diyā karatāli
gobinda mādhaba bāsu yaśa gāya caudike śobhaye bhāli 
Text 4 gorā canda-mukhe hari bole
jagā-i mādhā-i heri bāhu prasāri karaye kole
Text 5 gorācandera paraśa pāñā
jagā-i mādhā-i nāce bhuja tuli bhābete bibhola haiñā
Text 6 dohe loṭāya dharaṇī-tale
kāmpe tanu anupama pulakita titaye āṅkhera jale
Text 7 gorā-karuṇā prakāśa dekhi
nāce sura-gaṇa gaganete rahi saghane juḍāya āṅkhi
Text 8 ke nā dhāya se karuṇā-āśe
jaya jaya dhwani abanī bharala bhaṇe ghanaśyāma-dāse


     Text 1 (Refrain) Surrounded by Lord Advaita, Lord Nitāi, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa and a host of other associates, Śacī’s son dances.
     Text 2 His limbs move with gracedful sweetness. His restless dancing feet touch the surface of the earth. Who is peaceful and quiet now?
     Text 3 The karatālas play many different rhythms. Govinda, Mādhava, and Vāsu sing the Lord’s glories. The four directions are filled with glory.
     Text 4 From the moon of Lord Gaura’s mouth come calls of “Hari!”  Seeing Jagāi and Mādhāi, Lord Gaura hugs them in His arms.
     Text 5 By Lord Gauracandra’s touch, Jagāi and Mādhāi are filled with ecstatic spiritual love. Raising their arms, they dance. 
     Text 6 Then they roll on the ground. They tremble. The hairs of their bodies stand erect. Tears stream from their eyes.
     Text 7 Seeing what Lord Gaura’s mercy has brought, the demigods dance in the sky. Their eyes are filled with cooling bliss.
     Text 8 Who will not run to get Lord Gaura’s mercy? The whole world is filled with sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!” This Ghanaśyāma dāsa says.

 
Song 14 (Belābalī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nācata gauracandra naṭa-bhūpa
manamatha lākha garaba-bhara-bhañjana, akhila-bhubana-jana-rañjana rūpa
Text 2 abirata atula bhāba-bhare gara gara, garajata ati adabhuta ruci-kārī
maṅgalamaya pada dharata dharaṇī para, karata bhaṅgī bhuja-yugala pasāri
Text 3 hāsata madhura adhara mṛdu labaṇi, śarada-cānda jini, badana bilāsa
ṭalamala aruṇa kamala-dala-locana, kauna karaha kata rasa parakāśa
Text 4 gāyata madhura bhakata-gaṇa naba naba, kinnara-nikara darapa karu cūra
uthalala prema-sindhu mahī bhāsala, narahari kumati paraśa rahu dūra


     Text 1 (Refrain) Lord Gauracandra, the king of dancers, dances. His graceful form delights the hearts of all the worlds. He breaks into pieces the pride of millions of Kāmadevas.
     Text 2 Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, He roars. He is wonderfully splendid and gloroous. The earth now holds up His auspicious feet. His long arms are graceful.
     Text 3 The smile on His lips is sweet and graceful. His glorious face defeats the autumn moon. His red-lotus-petal eyes are restless. How much nectar of ecstatic spiritual love shines in them?
     Text 4 The devotees sing newer and newer sweet songs, songs that rob the Kinnaras of their pride. The ocean of ecstatic spiritual love now floods all the worlds. Everyone floats in that ocean. Only wicked-hearted Narahari does not float. That ocean never touched him. It stayed far away.

 
Song 15 (Ghaṇṭāraba-rāga)
 

Text 1 nācata gaura nikhila naṭa-paṇḍita nirupama bhaṅgī madana-mada hara-i
pracura caṇḍakara-darapari-bhañjana, aṅga-kiraṇe diga-bidiga ujara-i
Text 2 unamata atula siṁha jini garajana, śuna-i balī kali-bāraṇa ḍara-i
ghana ghana lampha lalita ati cañcala, caraṇa-ghāte kṣiti ṭalamala kara-i
Text 3 kinnara garaba kharaba karu parikara, gāya ulase amiya raba jhara-i
bāyata bahu-bidha khola khamaka dhuni, paraśata gagana kauna dhṛti dhara-i
Text 4 atula pratāpa kāmpi durajana-gaṇa, leya-i śaraṇa caraṇa-tale paḍa-i
narahari pahuṅka kīriti rahu jaga-bhara, parama dulaha dhana niyata bitara-i


     Text 1 Lord Gaura, the most learned paṇḍita of dancing, garcefully dances with peerless movements that take away Kāmadeva’s pride. The effulgence of Lord Gaura’s limbs, an effulgence that breaks the sun’s pride into pieces, fills the directions with light.
     Text 2 His roar defeats the peerless wildly angry lions. Hearing that roar, powerful Kali-yuga is stunned with fear. In His restless dancing He leaps again and again. The weight of His steps makes the earth tremble.
     Text 3 His companions jopyfully sing songs like nectar, songs that shrink the Kinnaras’ pride. The khola and khamaka drums sweetly sound in many ways. Their sweet sounds touch the sky. Why can stay peaceful and unmoved?
     Text 4 Trembling in fear, the powerful demons take shelter of Lord Gaura’s feet. Narahari’s master fills the worlds with the sound of kīrtana. The most rare treasure He freely gives to this world as a gift.

 
Song 16 (Gurjarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 āju ki ānanda nadīyā-nagare, jagā-i mādhā-i dohe dekhibāre
     dhāya cāri-dike ki nārī puruṣa, paraspara kahe kata nā kathā
keha kahe ati biralete raiyā, ai dekha dekha duhuṁ pāne cā-iyā
     sūrujera sama teja ebe bhela, se pāpa-śarīra gela bā kothā
Text 2 keha kahe aha mari mari mari, bhābe gara gara baise beri beri
     kāndi uṭhe chūṭe āṅkhi bāri-dhārā, nibārite nāre nā dhare dhṛti
keha kahe hena dekha nirupama, pulakita tanu kāmpe ghana ghana
     dhūlaya dhūsara dharaṇīte paḍi, gaḍi yāya kichu nāhika smṛti
Text 3 keha kahe ki bā gorā mukha śaśī, pāne cāhe jāni kata sukhe bhāsi
     hāsi sudhā-pāne unamata haiyā, loṭā-iyā paḍe caraṇa-tale
keha kahe dekha nitā-i-cāndere, cāhi hiyā mājhe kata kheda kare
     du-khāni caraṇa paraśiyā kare, kare abhiṣeka āṅkhera jale
Text 4 keha kahe dekha adwaita tapasī, gadādhara śrībāsādi pāśe basi
     atula ulase phuli phuli phire, la-iyā sabāra caraṇa-dhūli
keha keha duhuṁ kātara-antare, eka bhite rahi dante tṛṇa dhare
     narahari pahuṁ parikara saha kara kṛpā kahe du-bāhu tuli


     Text 1 What bliss has come to Nadīyā-nagara! From the four directiuons the men and women run to see Jagai and Madhai. What do they not say amongst themselves? Privately someone says, “Look! Look! They are effulgent like the sun! Where went their bodies made of so many sins?”
     Text 2 Someone else says, “Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! They are overcome with the ecstasy of spiritual love! They weep. Flooding rivers of tears flow from their eyes. They have no power to restrain themselves.” Someone else says, “Look! They tremble. The hairs on their bodies stand erect. They fall and roll on the ground. Their bodies are covered with dust. Now they are unconscious.”
     Text 3 Someone else says, “In how much bliss do they float as they gaze at Lord Gaura’s moonlike face? The nectar of Lord Gaura’s smile makes them wild with bliss. Rolling on the ground, they fall before Lord Gaura’s feet.” Someone else says, “Look! How much anguish do they feel when they see Lord Nitāicandra? They touch His feet. They bathe His feet with the tears from their eyes.”
     Text 4 Someone else says, “Blossoming with bliss, they approach Tapasvī Advaita, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa and many others. From every one of them they take the dust of their feet.” Someone else says, “Repentent at heart, holding a blade of straw between their teeth, and extending their arms, they approach the associates of Narahari’s master and beg, “Please give mercy to us.”

 
Song 17 (Megha-mallāra-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nācata gaura naṭana paṇḍita-bara
kuṅkuma-dāminī-dāma-damana tanu, maṇḍita nirupama bipula pulaka-bhara
Text 2 aruṇa adhara mṛdu cānda-badana lasa, daśana kunda lahu hāsa amiyā jhara
nayana-khañja jana-rañjana rasamaya, cāhani kata śata madana-garaba-hara
Text 3 kanaka-mṛṇāla-nindi bhuja-yuga tuli, bolata hari hari antara gara gara
maṅgalamaya komala su-lalita pada, bibidha bhaṅgī sāñe dharaye dharaṇī-para
Text 4 bāja jhañjha su-khamaka khola kata, gāyata madhura madhura sura-parikara
bitarata prema-ratana dhana jaga-bhari, bañcita ku-mati e narahari pāmara 


     Text 1 (Refrain) Lord Gaura, the great paṇḍita of dancing, dances. His form eclipses the splendor of kuṅkuma and lightning. His peerless ornament is the hairs of His body standing erect in ecstasy.
     Text 2 His lips are red. The moon of His graceful face glistens. His teeth are jasmine flowers. His gentle smile is a cascading stream of nectar. His nectar-filled lotus eyes delight the people. From how many hundreds of Kāmadevas does He remove the pride?
     Text 3 He raises His two arms, arms that rebuke the golden lotus stems. He chants, “Hari! Hari!” His heart is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. His soft and graceful feet are filled with all auspiciousness. Serving in many ways, the earth upholds His feet.
     Text 4 How many rhythms do the kholas and khamakas play? The Lord’s divine associates sing sweet sweet songs. Lord Gaura freely gives the world the precious gift of ecstatic spiritual world. He fills the world with that gift. Only the wicked-hearted wretch Narahari did not receive that gift. Only he was cheated.

 
Song 18 (Debakiri-rāga)
 

Text 1 bali-kali-matta-mataṅgaja-maradana, gaura-siṁha nācata nadīyāya
jaya jaya raba saba bhubana biyāpita, nikhila loka mili caudhike dhāya
Text 2 gāyata parama prabala priya parikara, kinnara duragama tāla taraṅga
bājata muraja mṛdaṅga dṛmiki dṛmi dāndā drimikaṭa dhikaṭa dhilaṅga
Text 3 kampa-i dharaṇī dharata pada-paṅkaja, ḍagamagi aṅga-bhaṅgī anupāma
locana taru aruṇa ruci ganja-i, cāhani cāru camake kata kāma
Text 4 śaśadhara-nikara nindi mukha madhurima, hāsata lahu lahu amiñā ugāri
prema bitari narahari pahuṁ pāmare, kara-i kore bhuja-yuga pasāri


     Text 1 Crushing the powerful wild elephant of Kali-yuga, Nadīyā’s lion of Lord Gaura dances. Sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!” fill the worlds. From the four directions everyone runs to Him.
     Text 2 Lord Gaura sings with His dear companions. Waves of rhythms, rhythms even the Kinnaras cannot play, flow. “Dṛmiki dṛmi dāndā drimikaṭa dhikaṭa dhilaṅga!”, the murajas and mṛdaṅgas declare.
     Text 3 With the touch of Lord Gaura’s lotus feet, the earth trembles. Lord Gaura’s body moves with peerless grace. He is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. Gazing at His glorious reddish eyes, how many Kāmadevas are filled with wonder?
     Text 4 His charming face rebukes a host of moons. His gentle gentle smiles are flowing streams of nectar. To the fallen sinners Narahari’s master gives the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. With His arms He hugs them.

 
Song 19 (Naṭa-Nārāyaṇa-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nācata gaura parama sukha-sadanā
abirala bipula pulaka kula jhalamala, su-lalita aṅga madana-mada-kadanā
Text 2 ṭalamala amala kamala-dala-locana, cāhani karuṇā aruṇa-ruci rucire
nirasi śarada-śaśī hāsite lapana lasa, daśana su-cikaṇa hara cita acire
Text 3 gaja-bara-garaba-haraṇa gati naba naba, dhara-ite caraṇa dharaṇī ati muditā
gada gada hṛdaya badata ghana hari hari, nirupama bhāba bibhaba bhara uditā
Text 4 unamata atula ratana-dhana-bitaraṇe, harala bipada yaśa bharala e bhubane
pūrila sakala manoratha ithe bañcita, narahari biphala janama dhika jībane


     Text 1 (Refrain) Lord Gaura, the abode of all bliss, dances. The hairs of His body stand erect. His graceful effulgent form crushes Kāmadeva’s pride.
     Text 2 With glistening reddish lotus-petal eyes He casts glances of mercy. His smiling face eclipses the autumn moon. His words are glorious. His splendid teeth charm the heart.
     Text 3 His graceful motion rob the graceful epelahnts of their pride. The earth feels newer and newer bliss to be able to uphold His feet. His heart overcome with ecstatic spireitual love, He says, “Hari! Hari!” in a choked voice. He manifests the symptoms of ecstasy.
     Text 4 Wild with bliss, He freely gives away the precious jewels of spiritual love. He removes all calamities. The worlds are filled with His glories. He fulfills everyone’s desire. Only Narahari’s desire is not fulfilled. Narahari’s birth and life in this world is fruitless and pathetic. 

 
Song 20 (Naṭa-rāga)
 

Text 1 nācata śacī-tanaya gaura-mādhurī mana mohe
kanakācala dalana dehe pulakābalī śobhe
Text 2 jhalamala bidhu-badana amiyā baraṣata mṛdu-hāse
cañcala nayanāñcale kata kata rasa parakāśe
Text 3 pada-tale dharu tāla jhanana, nūpura ghana bāje
abhinaba bahu bhaṅgī nirakhi, manamatha maru lāje
Text 4 gāyata guṇa jaga-jana nimagana sukha prabāhe
bañcita narahari dīna-hīna, dahe bhaba-daba-dāhe


     Text 1 Śacī’s charming fair son dances. He charms every heart. His form eclipses the golden mountain’s splendor. The hairs of His body stand erect.
     Text 2 The effulgent moon of His gently smiling face showers nectar. How much glistening nectar flows from the corners of His restless eyes?
     Text 3 The soles of His feet mark the rhythms in the dance. His anklets jangle. Seeing His ever-new graceful motions, Kāmadeva is ashamed.
     Text 4 Plunged in a flowing river of bliss, the people of the world sing His glories. Narahari has been cheated of singing those glories. Poor wretched Narahari burns in the flames of repeated birth and death.

 
Song 21 (Naṭī—rāga)
 

Text 1 kibā khola karatāla bāje
cāri pāśe parikara sāje
Text 2 āju gāyata madhura līlā
śuni darabaye dāru-śilā
Text 3 (Refrain) raṅge nācaye sundara gorā
ke bā jāne ki bā bhābe bhora
Text 4 naba pulaka-balita tanu
śohe kanaka-panaśa janu
Text 5 surasarita-prabāha pārā
duṭī nayane bahaye dhārā
Text 6 ghana ghana bhuja-yuga tuli
garajaye hari hari bali
Text 7 ati patita pāmare heri
dhari kore kare beri beri
Text 8 prema-dhana de-i jane jane
chāḍi eka narahari dīne


     Text 1 The kholas and karatālas sound. The Lord’s associates are on all four sides.
     Text 2 Now the devotees sing sweet songs of the Lord’s pastimes. Hearing these songs even the stones and dry wood melt in ecstasy.
     Text 3 (Refrain) Handsome Lord Gaura dances in the dancing-circle. What ecstasy fills Him? Who can know?
     Text 4 The hairs of His body stand erect. His body glistens like gold.
     Text 5 From His eyes flow a flooding Gaṅgā of tears.
     Text 6 Raising His arms, He roars, “Hari! Hari!”
     Text 7 Seeing a fallen sinner, He hugs him again and again.
     Text 8 To person after person He gives the treasure of ecstatic spiritual love. Only to poor Narahari He does not give that treasure.

 
Song 22 (Barāṭi-rāga or Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 bhubana-mohana gorācānda
akhila lokera mano-phānda
Text 2 nāce pahuṁ premera ābeśe
aruṇa-nayana jale bhāse
Text 3 bhuja tuli hari hari bole
patita dhariyā kare kole
Text 4 nija rase sabhāya bhāsāya
cāri pāśe pāriṣada gāya
Text 5 su-komala aṅga āchāḍiyā
gaḍi yāya dhulāya paḍiyā
Text 6 dekhi sakala jība kānde
narahari hiyā nāhi bāndhe


     Text 1 Lord Gauracandra charms all the worlds. He is a trap set to catch every heart.
     Text 2 Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, Lord Gaura dances. He floats in the tears that stream from His reddened eyes.
     Text 3 Raising His arms, He chants, “Hari! Hari!” He hugs the fallen souls.
     Text 4 He floats in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Around Him on four sides, His associates sing.
     Text 5 He stumbles. His delicate body falls to the dust.
     Text 6 Seeing this, every living being weeps. Narahari’s heart cannot contain it’s grief.

 
Song 23 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 āju gorā nagara-kīrtane
sājiyā calaye priya parikara sane
Text 2 aṅgera su-beśa bhāla śobhe
nāce nānā bhaṅgīte bhubana-mana mohe
Text 3 prema bariṣaye anibāra
bahaye ānanda-nadī nadīyā mājhāra
Text 4 deba-gaṇa miśā-i mānuṣe
bariṣe kusuma kata manera hariṣe
Text 5 nagariyā loka saba dhāya
manera mānase gorācānda guṇa gāya
Text 6 mūḍha-gaṇa śuni siṁha-nāda
ha-iyā birasa mana gaṇaye pramāda
Text 7 lākhe lākhe dīpa jwale bhāla
upamā ki abanī gagana kare ālo
Text 8 narahari kahite ki jāne
mātila jagata ke-u dhairaja nā māne


     Text 1 Surrounded by his dear associates, Lord Gaura performs saṅkīrtana in the city.
     Text 2 His well-dressed form is glorious. Dancing in many graceful ways, He charms the hearts of all the world.
     Text 3 Without stop He showers the bliss of ecstatic spiritual love. He makes a river of spiritual bliss flow in Nadīyā.
     Text 4 The demigods stay amongst the human beings. Their hearts are joyful. How many monsoons of flowers do they shower?
     Text 5 The city people run. With all their hearts they sing Lord Gaura’s glories.
     Text 6 Some bewldered people, their hearts withered with fear, think the tumultuous kīrtana is a host of lions roaring. 
     Text 7 Millions and millions of glistening lamps shine. To what shall I compare the light that fills the ground and sky?
     Text 8 What shall Narahari say? He does not know. The whole world has become wild with bliss. Now no one is peaceful at heart.

 
Song 24 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 śacīra dulāla gorā nāce
debera durlabha dhana yāre tāre yāce
Text 2 patitere hariyā dharite nāre aṅga
kṣaṇe kṣaṇe uṭhe kata bhābera taraṅga
Text 3 jhalamala karaye kanaka jini ābhā
bipula pulakābalī balita ki śobhā
Text 4 bhāsaye śrī-mukha buka nayanera jale
duṭī bāhu tuliyā saghana hari bole
Text 5 unamata bhakata phiraye cāri pāśe
jaya jaya kala-raba e bhūmi ākāśe
Text 6 pahuṁ pāne heri keha dhairaja nā bāndhe
narahari o rāṅgā caraṇe paḍi kānde


     Text 1 Lord Gaura, who is Śacī’s son, dances. He begs everyone to please accept the gift He gives, a gift even the demigods cannot attain.
     Text 2 Seeing a fallen sinner, He hugs his body. Moment after moment how many waves of ecstatic spiritual love arise within Him?
     Text 3 His effulgent form defeats the splendor of gold. How glorious is His form, its hairs standing up with bliss! 
     Text 4 His graceful face and chest float in a flood of tears from His eyes. Raising His arms, He calls out, “Hari!”
     Text 5 Wild with bliss, the devotees dance at His four sides. The earth and sky are filled with sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!”
     Text 6 Seeing Lord Gaura, no one can remain peaceful. Falling before Lord Gaura’s reddish feet, Narahari weeps.

 
Song 25 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 nāce gorā guṇa-maṇi        kebala premera khani
          priya parikara cāri pāśa
śobhā aparūpa yena       uḍū gaṇa mājhe yena
          kanaka candramā parakāśa
Text 2 śirīṣa kusuma jini         su-komala tanu-khāni
          pulaka balita manohara
praphulla kamala dūre         badane madana jhure
          hāsi mākhā aruṇa adhara
Text 3 kata nā bhaṅgimā kari      bhuja tuli bole hari
          bariṣa amiyā anibāra
ati sa-karuṇa hiyā       patitere nirakhiyā
          āṅkhi bahe suradhunī dhāra
Text 4 bāje khola karatāla        calana cālani bhāla
          dekhi ke bā nā haya mohita
nā rahila dukha śoka          mātila sakala loka
          narahari e sukha bañcita


     Text 1 Lord Gaura, who has the jewels of all virtues, dances. He is a jewel-mine filled with the jewels of ecstatic spiritual love. Around Him on four sides are His dear companions. His glory is wonderful. He is like a golden moon surrounded by a host of stars.
     Text 2 His delicate form defeats the śirīṣa flower. His bodily hairs stand erect. His form charms every heart. He makes the blossoming lotus flowers’ pride flee far away. His smiling face and reddish lips make Kāmadeva feel humble and unworthy. 
     Text 3 How many graceful movements does He not manifest as He dances? Raising His arms, He chants, “Hari!” Without stop He showers a great monsoon of nectar. His heart is filled with compassion. When He sees a fallen sinner, a flooding Gaṅgā of compassionate tears streams from His eyes.
     Text 4 The kholas and karatālas sound. Lord Gaura gracefully dances as He walks. Seeing Him, who would not become enchanted? Everyone is now wild with bliss. Sadness and suffering do not stay with anyone now. Alas! Narahari was somehow cheated of all that bliss.

 
Song 26 (Megha-rāga)
 

Text 1 gorā baḍa dayāra ṭhākura
saṅkīrtana-meghe prema bariṣe pracura
Text 2 parikara mājhe sāje bhāla
aparūpa rūpete bhubana kare ālo
Text 3 nācaye kata nā bhaṅgī kari
kebā bā dharibe hiyā se mādhurī heri
Text 4 bāye karatāla mṛdaṅga
gāya-e madhura gīta amiyā taraṅga
Text 5 keha hāse keha keha kānde
bhūme gaḍi yāya keha thire nāhi bāndhe
Text 6 jaya-dhwani e bhūmi ākāśa
mātila pāmara hīna narahari dāsa


     Text 1 Supremely merciful Lord Gaura now makes the clouds of saṅkīrtana shower a great monsoon of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 2 In the center of a host of associates, He is glorious. Hiw wonderful form fills all the worlds with light.
     Text 3 How many graceful motions does He manifest as He dances? Seeing His graceful dancing, what person can keep his heart peaceful?
     Text 4 Karatālas and mṛdaṅgas sound. Sweet songs are sung, songs like waves of nectar.
     Text 5 Someone laughs. Another weeps. Another falls to the ground. No one is peaceful.
     Text 6 The earth and sky are filled with sounds of, “Jaya!” Even the fallen wretch Narahari dāsa is wild with bliss.

 
Song 27 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 nācata naṭa-bara gaura-kiśora
abhinaba bhaṅgī bhubana karu bhora
Text 2 jhalamala aṅga-kiraṇa anupāma
hera-ite mūrachata kata kata kāma
Text 3 ṭalamala locana-yugala biśāla
dolate kaṇṭhe balita bana-māla
Text 4 jharata amiyā bidhu-baraṇa ujora
pība-i nayana bhari bhakata-cakora
Text 5 ghana ghana bolaye madhura hari-nāma
śuna-ite ko na roya-i abirāma
Text 6 pāmara patita prema-rase māti
nā darabe kaṭhina e narahari chāti


     Text 1 Lord Gaura-kiśora, the best of dancers, dances. His graceful new movements make the worlds wild with bliss.
     Text 2 Seeing the peerless splendor of His glistening limbs, How many Kāmadevas are overcome with enchantment?
     Text 3 His large eyes are restless. His forest-garland sways to and fro on His chest.
     Text 4 With their eyes the cakora-bird devotees sip the nectar effulgence of the glistening moon of Lord Gaura.
     Text 5 Sweetly Lord Gaura sings Lord Hari’s holy names. Hearing Him, who will not weep without stop? 
     Text 6 The fallen sinners have now become wild by tasting the sweet nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Alas! Narahari’s hard heart does not melt in the ecstasy of spiritual love.

 
Song 28 (Maṅgala-rāga)
 

Text 1 codige gobinda-dhwani śuni pahuṁ hāse
kampita adhare gorā gada gada bhāṣe
Text 2 bhāli re gaurāṅga nāce yāra saṅge nityānanda
abanī bhāsala preme gāya rāmānanda
Text 3 murāri mukunda āsi hera ā-isa bali
toma sabāra guṇe kānde parāṇa-putalī
Text 4 āra yata bhakta-bṛnda ānande bibhora
basu rāmānanda tāhe lubadha cakora


     Text 1 Hearing the chanting of “Govinda!” come from the four directions, Lord Gaura smiles. He speaks broken words in a choked voice. His lips tremble.
     Text 2 Ah! Lord Gaurāṅga dances with Lord Nityānanda as Rāmānanda sings. The world is flooded with ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 3 Murāri and Mukunda come. Every saintly heart weeps.
     Text 4 The devotees are now overcome with bliss. Like a thirsty cakora bird, Rāmānanda Vasu watches these pastimes.

 
Song 29 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 nadīyā-ākāśe saṅkīrtana-megha sāje
khola karatāla mukhe gabhīra garaje
Text 2 huhuṅkāra bajra-dhwani haya muhur-muhu
barikhaye nāma-nīra ghana du-i pahuṁ
Text 4 nāce gāya pāriṣada thamake thamake
bhābera bijulī tāya saghana camake
Text 5 premera bādale naida śāntipura bhāse
rāya anantera hiyā nā bhulila rase


     Text 1 Filled with deep rumbling sounds of khola and karatāla, the monsoon clouds of saṅkīrtana have come to the sky of Nadīyā.
     Text 2 Thunder and lightning fall again and again. Two clouds, Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda, shower a great monsoon of holy names. 
     Text 3 Halting and halting, the two Lords sing and dance with Their associates. Lightning flashes of ecstatic spiritual love fill everyone with wonder.
     Text 4 A monsoon of ecstatic spiritual love brings great floods. All of Śāntipura floats in those waters. Alas! Ananta Rāya’s heart was not swept away by those flooding nectar waters.

 
Song 30 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 saṅkīrtana chale      gaura nitā-i
          nagare bahira haila
jagā-i mādhā-i      yathā basiyāche
          tathā upanīta bhela
Text 2 khola karatāla        biṣama jañjāla
          bhābila se dona bhā-i
māribāra tare       surā-bhāṇḍa kare
          calila paścāt dhā-i
Text 3 prabhu nityānanda          haridāsa āra
          dāṇḍā-ila hasta meli
surā-bhāṇḍa kāndhā       hātete āchila
          mādhā-i mārila pheli
Text 4 nitā-i lalāṭe         se kāndhā lagila
          chūṭila śoṇita nadī
tabu abadhūta       kahe bhā-i āya
          taribi e bhaba yadi
Text 5 āya de-i kola         bola hari bola
          aya re mādhā-i bhā-i
śyāma-dāsa kahe          emana dayāla
          kona kāle dekhi na-i


     Text 1 On the pretext of performing saṅkīrtana, Lord Gaura and Lord Nitāi brought the chanting-party out of the city, brought it to the place where Jagāi and Mādhāi stayed.
     Text 2 The tumultuous sounds of the kholas and karatālas aroused the two brothers, Jagāi and Mādhāi. Throwing broken pieces of clay wine-pots, they attacked the devotees. The devotees fled. The brothers gave chase.
     Text 3 Haridāsa and Lord Nityānanda stood with folded hands. With His own hands, Mādhāi had attacked them with broken pieces of wine-pots.
     4 and Text 5 Struck by a piece of pottery, from Lord Nitāi’s forehead a stream of blood flowed. Then Avadhūta Lord Nityānanda says, “O brother Mādhāi, if you wish to be delivered from this world of birth and death, then please embrace the chanting of the holy names. Please chant, `Haribol!’ “ Śyāma dāsa says: Never have I seen anyone more merciful than Lord Gaura and Lord Nityānanda.

 
Song 31 (Rāmakeli-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nabadwīpe śuni siṁha-nāda
sājala baiṣṇaba-gaṇa          kari hari-saṅkīrtana
          mūḍha-mati gaṇila pramāda
Text 2 gauracandra mahārathi          nityānanda sārathi
          adwaita yuddhe āgu-yāna
prema-ḍore phāṁsa kari        bāndhila aneka ari
          nirantara garje hari-nāma
Text 3 śrī-caitanya kare raṇa          kali-gaje ārohana
          pāṣaṇḍa dalana bīra-rāṇā
kali-jība tarā-ite       ā-ila prabhu abanīte
          caudike cāpiyā dila thānā
Text 4 uttama adhama jana         sabe pā-ila prema-dhana
          nitā-i-caitanya-kṛpā-leśe
sammukhe śamana dekhi         kṛṣṇa-dāsa baḍa dukhī
          nā pā-iyā premera uddeśe


     Text 1 (Refrain) Hearing the Vaiṣṇavas loudly chant Lord Hari’s holy names in saṅkīrtana, the bewildered people think a host of roaring lions has come to Navadvīpa.
     Text 2 The great mahārathi warrior Lord Gauracandra and the great sārathi warriors Lord Nityānanda and Lord Advaita now charge into battle. Throwing the noose of ecstatic spiritual love, They catpure many enemy soldiers, capture them and tie them up. Without stop They roar with the battle cry of Lord Hari’s holy names.
     Text 3 Riding on the elephant to fight Kali-yuga, Lord Caitanya, the king of heroes, charges into battle and cuts many sins into pieces. To rescue the fallen souls held hostage by Kali-yuga, Lord Caitanya came to this earth. Now He conquers everywhere in the four directions.
     Text 4 By even a small particle of Lord Caitanya’s and Lord Nitāi’s mercy, everyone, from the highest to the lowest, now has within his grasp the great treasure of ecstatic spiritual love. Even though He has seen the Lord thus conquer all enemies, Kṛṣṇa dāsa is still unhappy. Alas! Kṛṣṇa dāsa could not get that treasure of spiritual love.

 
Song 32 (Maṅgala-rāga)
 

Text 1 hari hari maṅgala          bharata kṣiti-maṇḍala
          rasamaya ratana pasāra
nija-guṇa-kīrtana        prema-ratana dhana
          anukhaṇa karu paracāra
Text 2 (Refrain) nācata naṭa-bara gaura-kiśora
anukhaṇa bhābe      bibhābita antare
          prema sukhera nāhi ora
Text 3 kundana kanaya        birājita kalebara
          bihi se karala niramāṇa
mūrachita manamatha      aṅgahi aṅga kata
          rūpa dekhi harala geyāna
Text 4 yākara bhajana        śiba caturānana
          karu mana marama sandhāna
hena nāma hāra      yatana kari gāntha-i
          patita-janere kare dāna
Text 5 andhakāra kūpe        magana dekhiyā jība
          nabadwīpe pahuṁ parakāśa
prema-ratana dhana       jaga bhari bitaraṇa
          bañcita balarāma dāsa


     Text 1 The circle of the earth He fills with the auspicious sounds of “Hari! Hari!” He gives away a delightful nectar-jewel. Moment after moment He talks about chanting the Lord’s glories and about the precious jewel of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Lord Gaura-kiśora, the best of dancers, dances. At every moment He feels the ecstasy of spiritual love. At every moment He manifests the outward signs of those ecstasies. His ecstasy of love has no limit.
     Text 3 Destiny has given Him a body that glistens like splendid gold. Seeing His glorious form, Kāmadeva is overcome and falls unconscious.
     Text 4 Śiva and Brahmā worship Him. In their hearts they search for Him. Lord Gaura makes a necklace of the holy names and gives that necklace to the fallen souls.
     Text 5 Seeing the fallen souls drowning in a dark blind well, Lord Gaura has come to Navadvīpa to rescue them. To everyone in the world He gives His gift of the jewels of ecstatic spiritual love. Only Balarāma dāsa did not receive that gift. Only he was cheated of it.

 
Song 33 (Maṅgala-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) śrībāsa-aṅgane        binoda bandhane
          nācata gaurāṅga rāya
manuja daibata      puruṣa yoṣita
          sabā-i dekhibāra dhāya
Text 2 bhakata-maṇḍala       gāyata maṅgala
          bājata khola karatāla
mājhe unamata       nitā-i nācata
          bhā-iyāra bhābe mātoyāla
Text 3 garaje puna puna      lamphe ghana ghana
          malla-beśa dhari nāca-i
aruṇa-locane        prema barikhaye
          abanī-maṇḍala siñca-i
Text 4 dharaṇī-maṇḍala       preme bādala
          karala abadhuta cānda
nā jāne daśa cāri        sabā-i nara nārī
          bhubana rūpa keri kānde
Text 5 śāntipura-nātha       garaje abirata
          dekhiyā premera bikāra
dhariyā śrī-caraṇa       karaye rodana
          paṇḍita śrībāsa udāra
Text 6 mukunda kutūhali      kāndaye phuli phuli
          dhariya gadādhara kora
nayane bahe prema       ṭhākura abhirāma
          saghane bhā-iyā bhā-iyā bola
Text 7 nā jāne dibā-niśi          prema-rase bhāsi
          sakala sahacara-bṛnda
bṛndābana dāsa        prema parakāśa
          nitā-i caraṇārabinda

     Text 1 (Refrain) In Śrīvāsa’s courtyard Lord Gaurāṅga Rāya enjoys pastimes of dancing. Humans, demigods, men, and women all run to see Him.
     Text 2 The circle of devotees sings auspicious songs. The kholas and karatālas sound. In the midst of that circle Lord Nitāi dances. He is wild with the ecstasy of spiritual love.
     Text 3 Again and again He roars. Again and again He leaps. He dances like a wrestler or an athlete. From His reddened eyes a monsoon shower of tears of ecstatic love falls on the circle of the earth.
     Text 4 In this way Lord Nitāi, the moon of avadhūtas covered the earth’s circle with a flood of ecstatic spiritual love. No one could see the ten directions. Seeing what had come of the earth, every man and woman wept.
     Text 5 Seeing how the world had become wild in the ecstasy of spiritual love, Lord Advaita hapily roared. Grasping Lord Nitāi’s feet, noble Śrivāsa wept.
     Text 6 Mukunda joyfully shouted. Then he wept. Then he hugged Gadādhara. From Abhirāma Ṭhākura’s eyes flowed streams of tears, tears of spiritual love. Again and again he called out, [.sy 168}My brothers! My brothers!”
     Text 7 No one knew whether it was day or night. All of the Lord’s companions floated in a nectar-ocean of spiritual love. Vṛndāvana dāsa says: In this way the ecstasy of spiritual love was manifest from Lord Nitāi’s lotus feet.

 
Part 1B Lord Gaura’s Ecstasy

 
Song 34 (Bālā-rāga or Dhānaśī -rāga)
 

Text 1 ā-ota pirīti        mūratimaya sāgara
          aparūpa pahuṁ dwija-rāja
naba naba bhakata        bhakati naba ratana su
          yācata naṭana samāja
Text 2 (Refrain) bhāli bhāli nadīyā bihāra
sakala baikuṇṭha         bṛndābana sampada
          sakala sukha sāra
Text 3 dhani dhani ati dhani      aba bhela suradhunī
          ānande bahe rasa-dhāra
snāna pāna āba      gāha āliṅgana
          saṅgama kata kata bāra
Text 4 prati pura mandira         prati taru kula tala
          prati kūla bipina bilāsa
kahe nayanānanda         preme biśwambhara
          sabhākare pūrala āśa


     Text 1 He is the ocean of spiritual love personified. He is the wonderful king of the brāhmaṇas. He is the Lord Hismelf. To the devotees He gives the nine newer and newer jewels of devotional service. In the assembly of dancers He begs everyone to accept those jewels.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Glory, glory to the Lord who enjoys pastimes in Nadīyā! He is the treasure of all the Vaikuṇṭha worlds, the treasure of Vṛndāvana. He is the essence of all bliss.
     Text 3 Glorious glorious glorious is the Gaṅgā, filled with blissful nectar currents. How many times did the Lord bathe in it, drink its waters, dive into it, embrace it, and stay in its company?
     Text 4 In every city-house there, under every tree, and in every forest there the Lord enjoyed pastimes. Nayanānanda says: The desire to become one of Lord Viśvambhara’s associates fills my heart.

 
Song 35 (Bibhāsa-rāga)
 

Text 1 nija nāmāmṛta pahuṁ matta anukṣaṇa
piyāra sabhāre nāma biśeṣa hīna jana
Text 2 ati aruṇita āṅkhi ādha ādha bole
kānde ucca-nāde yāre tāre kare kole
Text 3 (Refrain) aparūpa gaurāṅga bilāsa
khene bole mu-i pahuṁ kṣaṇe bole dāsa
Text 4 khene matta-siṁha gati khene bhāba stambha
khene dharu dharaṇī pā-iyā aṅga saṅga
Text 5 khene mālasāṭa mare aṭṭa aṭṭa hāse
kheneke rodana khene gada gada bhāṣe
Text 6 khene dekhi śyāmasundara tiribhaṅga
kānu dāsa kahe kebā bujhe onā-raṅga


     Text 1 At every moment tasting the nectar of the holy name, Lord Gaura has become wild with bliss. Even the least of His dear companions He calls by name.
     Text 2 His eyes are reddened. With a choked voice He speaks half half words. He loudly weeps. He hugs His companions.
     Text 3 (Refrain) Lord Gaurāṅga’s pastimes are filled with wonders. Sometimes He declares, “I am the Lord Himself.”, and other times He declares, “I am the Lord’s servant.”
     Text 4 Sometimes He is like a wild lion. Other times He is stunned in ecstasy. Sometimes He falls to the ground.
     Text 5 Sometimes He beats His chest and loudly loudly laughs. Sometimes He cries out. Sometimes He speaks broken words in a choked voice.
     Text 6 Sometimes He manifests Lord Kṛṣṇa’s dark and handsome three-fold-bending form. Kānu dāsa says: Who understands these pastimes of the Lord?

 
Song 36 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) gorā mora dayāra abadhi guṇa-nidhi
suradhunī-tīre      nadīyā nagare
          gaurāṅga bihare nirabadhi
Text 2 bhuja-yuga āropiya bhakatera kāndhe
calite nā pāre gorā hari-bola baliyā kānde
Text 3 preme chala chala          nayana-yugala
          kata nadī bahe dhāre
pulaka pūrala       saba kalebara
          dharaṇī dharite nāre
Text 4 saṅge pāriṣada        phire nirantara
          hari hari bola bole
sakhāra kāndhe      bhuja yuga diyā
          helite dulite cale
Text 5 bhubana bhariyā       prema ubhārila
          patita-pābana nāma
śuniyā bharasā      paramānandera
          manete nā laya āna


     Text 1 (Refrain) My Lord Gaura is a great treasure-house of mercy. In the towns of Nadīyā and by the Gaṅgā’s banks Lord Gaurāṅga enjoys pastimes without stop.
     Text 2 Now Lord Gaura has no power to walk. His arms rest around the devotees’ shoulders. Chanting “Haribol!”, He weeps.
     Text 3 How many rivers of tears of love flow from His eyes? The hairs of His body stand erect. Now He has no power to stand on the earth.
     Text 4 Without stop He dances with His associates. “Hari! Haribol!”, He chants. His arms on His friends’ shoulders, He walks with difficulty.
     Text 5 He fills the worlds with the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. His name is Patita-pāvana (the purifier of the fallen). With great faith Paramānanda hears of His glories. No one else stays in Paramānanda’s heart.

 
Song 37 (Gaurī-rāga)
 

Text 1 soṇāra baraṇa gorā prema-binodiyā
prema-jale bhāsā-ola nagara nadīyā
Text 2 parisara buka bāhi paḍe prema-dhārā
nāhi jāne dibā-niśi preme mātoyārā
Text 3 gobindera aṅge pahuṁ aṅga helā-iyā
bṛndābana-guṇa śune magana ha-iyā
Text 4 rādhā rādhā bali pahuṁ paḍe mūrachiyā
śibānanda kānde pahuṁra bhāba nā bujhiyā


     Text 1 Golden-colored Lord Gaura enjoys pastimes of ecstatic spiritual love. He makes Nadīyā’s towns float in a flood of spiritual love.
     Text 2 Tears of spiritual love flow down His chest. Wild in the ecstasy of spiritual love, He does not know if it is day or night.
     Text 3 He leans on Govinda for support. He is plunged in hearing of Vṛndāvana’s glories.
     Text 4 Chanting, “Rādhā! Rādhā!”, He falls unconscious. Śivānanda weeps. Of the Lord’s ecstasies Śivānanda understands nothing at all.

 
Song 38 (Bhāṭiyāri-rāga)
 

Text 1 bhābābeśe gorācānda bibhora ha-iyā
kṣaṇe ḍāke bhā-iyā śrīdāmā baliyā
Text 2 kṣaṇe ḍāke subalere kṣaṇe basudāma
kṣaṇe ḍāke bhā-i mora dādā balarāma
Text 3 dhabalī śāṅalī karaye phūkāra
pūrala pulake aṅga bahe prema-dhāra
Text 4 kālindī yamunā bali prema-jale bhāse
pūraba paḍila mane kahe baṁśī-dāse


     Text 1 Lord Gauracandra is overcome with ercstatic spiritual love. One moment He calls out, “Śrīdāmā! My brother!”
     Text 2 The next moment He calls out, “Subala!” The next moment He calls out, “Vasudāmā!” The next moment He calls out, “Elder brother Balarāma!”
     Text 3 He calls out, “White and black surabhi cows!” The hair so fHis body stand erect. Flooding streams of tears of spiritual love flow down His body.
     Text 4 He calls out, “Kālindī! Yamunā!!” He floats in a flood of ecstatic spiritual love. His heart is rapt in thinking of His previous pastimes as Lord Kṛṣṇa. This Vaṁśī dāsa says.

 
Song 39 (Gāndhāra-rāga)
 

Text 1 hari hari gorā kena kānde
nā jāni ṭhekila pahuṁ kara prema-phānde
Text 2 tejiyā kālindī-tīra kadamba bilāsa
ebe sindhu-tīre kena kibā abhilāṣa
Text 3 ye karila śata koṭi gopī saṅge rāsa
ebe se kāndaye kena kariyā sannyāsa
Text 4 ye āṅkhi bhaṅgīte kata anaṅga mūrache
ebe kata jala-dhārā bahiyā paḍiche
Text 5 ye mohana cūḍā-phānde jagata mohita
se mastaka keśa-śūnya ati biparīta
Text 6 pīta-bāsa chāḍi kena aruṇa basana
kāla-rūpa chāḍi kene gaura baraṇa
Text 7 kahe balarāma dāsa nā jāni kāraṇa
tāhāra kāraṇa kibā yāhāra baraṇa


     Text 1 Alas! Alas! Why does Lord Gaura weep? I do not know. The Lord is now caught in a trap of the ecstasy of spiritual love.
     Text 2 Why did He wish to leave His pastimes in the kadamba grove by the Yamunā’s banks and come to the ocean’s shore?
     Text 3 Why did He who enjoyed the rāsa dance with hunderds and millions of gopīs accept sannyāsa? Why does He now weep?
     Text 4 Why does He whose crooked glances where more enchanting than how many Kāmadevas now weep, how many flooding rivers of tears flowing from His eyes?
     Text 5 Why did He whose graceful hair was a trap that charmed all the worlds shave the hair of His head?
     Text 6 Why did He leave behind His yellow garments and accept the saffron garments of a sannyāsī? Why did He leave behind His dark complexion and suddenly become fair?
     Text 7 Balarāma dāsa says: I do not know the reason why He has done these things. What is the reason He has a fair complexion?

 
Song 40 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 gambhīre bhitare gaura rāya
jāgiyā rajanī pohāya
Text 2 khene khene karaye bilāpa
khene khene royata khene khene kāmpa
Text 3 khene bhite mukha śira ghaṣe
kona nāhi rahu pahuṁ pāśe
Text 4 ghana kānde tuli du-i hāta
kothāya āmāra prāṇa-nātha
Text 5 narahari kahe mora gorā
rā-i-preme ha-iyāche bhorā


     Text 1 Staying in the gambhīra, Lord Gaura Rāya is awake the whole night.
     Text 2 Moment after moment He laments. Moment after moment He weeps. Moment after moment He trembles.
     Text 3 He rubs His face and head against the wall. No one stays at the Lord’s side.
     Text 4 He weeps. Raising His hands, He asks, “Where is the Lord of My life?”
     Text 5 Narahari says: Lord Gaura is overwhelmed by the same kind of love Śrī Rādhā feels.

 
Song 41 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 ro-i ro-i jape gorā kṛṣṇa-nāma-madhu
amiyā jharaye yena bimala bidhu
Text 2 śiba bihi nāhi pāya yāra pade bhaji
taru-tale baiṭhala saba saṅga teji
Text 3 chāḍiyā sakala sukha bhela aśakati
sāta-kumbha kalebara bhāba bibhūti
Text 4 dekhiyā sakala loka anukṣaṇa kānde
bāsudeba ghoṣa hiyā thira nāhi bāndhe


     Text 1 Weeping and weeping, Lord Gaura chants japa. He tastes the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s holy name, nectar like nectar rivers flowing on a spotless transcendental moon.
     Text 2 Even Śiva and Brahmā cannot approach to worship His feet. Leaving all companions, He sits alone under a tree.
     Text 3 He shuns all worthless material pleasures. Matter has no power over Him. His body of seven cubits is filled with a great treasure of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 4 Seeing Him, everyone weeps at every moment. Now Vāsudeva Ghoṣa’s heart cannot be peaceful.

 
Song 42 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 siṁha-dwāra tyaji gorā samudra āḍe dhāya
kothā kṛṣṇa kothā kṛṣṇa sabhāre sudhāya
Text 2 caudike bhakata-gaṇa hari-guṇa gāya
mājhe kanayā giri dhūlāya loṭaya
Text 3 āchāḍiyā paḍe aṅga bhūme gaḍi yāya
dīghala śarīre gorā paḍi mūrachāya
Text 4 uttāna śayana mukhe phena bahi yāya
bāsudeba ghoṣera hiyā bidariyā yāya


     Text 1 Leaving the Siṁha-dvāra gate, Lord Gaura runs toward the ocean. “Where is Kṛṣṇa? Where is Kṛṣṇa?”, He calls.
     Text 2 Surrounding Him on four sides, the devotees sing of Lord Hari’s glories. Lord Gaura has become like a golden mountain rolling about in the dust.
     Text 3 Lord Gaura falls to the ground. His tall body is now unconscious.
     Text 4 He stands. Again He falls. Foam comes from His mouth. Now Vāsudeva Ghoṣa’s heart is ripped into shreds.

 
Song 43 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 cetana pā-iyā gorā-rāya
bhūme paḍi iti uti cāya
Text 2 samukhe swarūpa rāma rāya
dekhi pahuṁ kare hāya hāya
Text 3 kāṁhā mora muralī-badana
ekhāni pā-inu daraśana
Text 4 ohe nātha parama karuṇa
kṛpā kari deha daraśana
Text 5 eta bilāpayare gorācānde
dekhiyā bhakata-gaṇa kānde
Text 6 bāsu ghoṣa kahe mora gorā
kṛṣṇa-preme ha-ila bibhora


     Text 1 Again Lord Gaura Rāya is conscious. Again He falls to the ground. Again He rises. 
     Text 2 Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāmānanda Rāya come before the Lord. Seeing the Lord’s condition, they cry, “Alas! Alas!”
     Text 3 “Where is My Kṛṣṇa, the flute-player? A moment ago I saw him.
     Text 4 “O supremely merciful Lord, please be kind and show Yourself to Me!”
     Text 5 Seeing Lord Gauracandra speak in this way, the devotees weep.
     Text 6 Vāsudeva Ghoṣa says: My Lord Gaura is overcome with ecstatic love for Lord Kṛṣṇa.

 
Song 44 (Pāhiḍā-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) āre āmāra gaura-kiśora
nāhi jāne dibā niśi      kāraṇa bihane hāsi
          manera bharame pahuṁ bhora
Text 2 kṣaṇe uccaḥ-sware gāya       kare pahuṁ ki sudhāya
          kothāya āmāra prāṇa-nātha
kṣaṇe śīte aṅga kampa         kṣaṇe kṣaṇe de-i lampha
          kāṁhā pāṅa yāṅa kāra sātha
Text 3 kṣaṇe ūrdhwa-bāhu kari       nāci bole phiri phiri
          kṣaṇe kṣaṇe karaye bilāpa
kṣaṇe āṅkhi-yuga munde          hā nātha baliyā kānde
          kṣaṇe kṣaṇe karaye santāpa 
Text 4 kahe dāsa narahari         āre mora gaura-hari
          rādhāra pirīte haila hena
aichana kariya cite      kali-yuga uddhārite
          bañcita ha-inu muñi kena


     Text 1 (Refrain) Ah! My Lord Gaura-kiśora does not know if it is day or night. For no reason He laughs. My Lord’s heart is overcome.
     Text 2 One moment He loudly calls, “Where is my Lord? Where is the Lord of My life?” One moment He has chills and His body trembles. Moment after moment He leaps. Where did He go?
     Text 3 One moment He raises His armas, dances, and sings. Then, moment after moment He laments. Another moment He closes His eyes, calls out, “My Lord!”, and weeps. Then, moment after moment He is filled with torment.
     Text 4 Narahari dāsa says: My Lord Gaura-Hari felt the love Rādhā feels. Feeling this love in His heart, He delivered the Kali-yuga. Still, why was I, Narahari, not delivered? Why was I cheated?

 
Song 45 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 sahacara-aṅge gorā aṅga hela-iyā
calite nā pāre khene paḍe mūrachiyā
Text 2 ati durabala deha dharaṇe nā yāya
kṣiti-tale paḍe sahacara mukha cāya
Text 3 kothāya parāṇa-nātha bali khene kānde
pūraba biraha jware thira nāhi bāndhe
Text 4 kene hena haila gorā bujhite nā pāri
jñaṇa dāsa kahe nichani laiyā mari


     Text 1 Holding on to a companion, Lord Gaura has no power to walk. The next moment He faints.
     Text 2 He is very weak. He cannot walk. The next moment He falls to the ground. His companions gaze at His face.
     Text 3 The next moment, saying, “Where is the Lord of My life?”, He weeps. The flames of separation burn in Him. He cannot be peaceful.
     Text 4 Why has Lord Gaura become like this? I do not know. Jñāna dāsa says: Seeing these pastimes, I am overcome.

 
Song 46 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 soṇāra baraṇa         gaura sundara
          pāṇḍura bhaigela deha
śīta bhīta kena          kāmpaye saghana
          soṅari pūraba leha
Text 2 kichu nā kaha-i       dīgha niśwasa-i
          citrera putali pārā
nayana-yugala       bahi paḍe jala
          yena mandākinī dhārā
Text 3 ghāme titi gela       saba kalebara
          nā jāni kemane tāpe
kakhana saṅgīta          kakhana rodana
          kibā kare paralāpe
Text 4 kahe narahari         mora gaura-hari
          cāhaye raṅkera pārā
hari hari bole      bhuja-yuga tole
          marama bujhibe kārā


     Text 1 Lord Gaurasundara’s golden body has become white and pale. Is it from cold or fear that He trembles so? He is rapt in thinking of the object of His love.
     Text 2 He speaks not a word. He sighs long sighs. Stunned, He looks like a motionless painted puppet. From His eyes flow tears, tears like the celestial Gaṅgā.
     Text 3 His body is covered with perspiration. How did He get such a fever? Sometimes He sings. Sometimes He weeps. Sometimes He bitterly laments. 
     Text 4 Narahari says: My Lord Gaura-Hari is overcome. Raising His arms, He chants, “Hari! Hari!” Who understands what is in His heart?

 
Song 47 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 śuna-ite gaurāṅga kheda
majhu buka nahe kāhe bheda
Text 2 ro-i kahaye śuna mā-i
biraha jwarahi jwari yā-i
Text 3 pūṭapāka śata guṇa lekha
majhu tāpa āge so-i rekha
Text 4 kālakūṭa śata guṇa māna
so naha āchuka samāna 
Text 5 bajaraka śata guṇa āgi
se-i iha āge rahuṁ bhāgi
Text 6 hṛdaya nimagana śela
tāsañe adhikahi bhela
Text 7 śata-guṇa bisūci beyādhi
tāsañe iha baḍa ādhi
Text 8 gauraka śuni iha bhāṣa
bhaṇa rādhāmohana dāsa


     Text 1 When I hear of Lord Gaurāṅga’s distress, why does my heart not break into pieces?
     Text 2 He listens. He talks. He weeps. The flames of separation burn and burn.
     Text 3 “The heat of boiling cauldrons multiplied hundreds of times does not equal the fever flames of My sufferings.
     Text 4 “The deadly kālakūṭa poison multiplied hundreds of times does not equal the poison of My separation from My beloved.
     Text 5 “The blows of a thunderbolt multiplied hundreds of times does not equal the blows destiny strikes upon Me.
     Text 6 “A javelin plunged into My heart is not equal to what now wounds me.
     Text 7 “The disease that torments Me is more powerful than any other disease.”
     Text 8 Hearing Lord Gaura speak these words, Rādhāmohana repeats them in this song.

 
Song 48 (Pāhiḍā-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) āre mora gaura-kiśora
sahacara kandhe pahuṁ         bhuja-yuga āropiyā
          nabamī daśāya bhela bhora
Text 2 paḍiyā kṣitira pare        mukhe bākya nāhi sare
          sāhase paraśe nāhi keha
soṇāra gaura-hari        kahe hāya mari mari
          tantuka dosara bhela deha
Text 3 thira nayana kari          mathurā nāma dhari
          ro-aye hā nātha baliyā
basu rāmānanda baṇe      gaurāṅga emana kena
          nā bujhinu kisera lagiyā


     Text 1 (Refrain) Ah! My Lord Gaura-kiśora keeps His two arms on His companions’ shoulders. He seems on the verge of death.
     Text 2 He falls to the ground. No words come from His mouth. No one dares to touch Him. Golden Lord Gaura-Hari says, “Alas! Alas! Alas!” His companions gather around Him.
     Text 3 His gaze is fixed. He calls out, “Mathurā!” He weeps. He calls out, “O My Lord!” Rāmānanda Vasu says: Why has Lord Gaurāṅga become like this? I do not know.

 
Song 49 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 āju biraha-bhābe gaurāṅgasundara
bhūme paḍi kānde bole kāṁhā prāṇeśwara
Text 2 puna mūrachite bhela ati-kṣīṇa swāsa
dekhiyā lokera mane haya baḍa trāsa
Text 3 uca kari bhakata karala hari-bola
śuniyā cetana pā-i āṅkhi jharu lora
Text 4 aichana hera-ite kānde nara-narī
e rādhāmohana maru ya-i balihāri


     Text 1 Overcome with feelings of separation, Lord Gaurāṅgasundara falls to the ground. Weeping, He says, “Where is the Lord of My life?”
     Text 2 He falls unconscious. His breathing is very weak. Seeing this, everyone becomes terrified at heart.
     Text 3 When the devotees loudly sing Lord Hari’s holy names, Lord Gaura hears and regains consciousness. Tears flow from His eyes.
     Text 4 Seeing this, everyone weeps. This Rādhāmohana dāsa surrenders his everything to Lord Gaura.

 
Part 1C Lord Gaura’s Pastimes at Rathayātrā

 
Song 50 (Imana-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) aparūpa ratha āge
nāce gaura-rāya          sabe mili gāya
          yata yata mahā-bhāge
Text 2 bhābete abaśa         ki rāti dibasa
          ābeśe kichu nā jāne
jagannātha-mukha         dekhi mahā-sukha
          nāce gara gara mane
Text 3 khola karatāla        kīrtana rasāla
          ghana ghana hari-bola
jaya jaya dhwani         suramaṇa-maṇi
          gagane uṭhaya rola
Text 4 nīlācala-bāsī         āra nānā deśī
          lokera uthala hiyā
premera pāthāre          sadā-i santāre
          dukhī yadu abhāgiyā


     Text 1 (Refrain) Lord Gaura Rāya dances before the wonderful Ratha. Gathering around Him, the glorious and fortunate devotees sing.
     Text 2 Overcome with ecstasy, He does not know if it is day or night. Gazing at Lord Jagannātha’s face, Lord Gaura is filled with bliss. His heart filled with love, Lord Gaura dances.
     Text 3 The kholas and karatālas sound. The kīrtana is sweet. There are loud calls of “Haribol!” Sounds of [.sy 168}Jaya! Jaya!”, sounds like the jewels of all happinesses, fill the sky.
     Text 4 The people of Nīlācala and other places feel their hearts always swim in the great ocean of ecstatic spiritual love. Even sad and unfortunate Yadu dāsa feels his heart swim in that ocean.

 
Song 51 (Maṅgala-rāga, Kandarpa-tāla)
 

Text 1 caudike mahānta meli       karaye kīrtana-keli
          sāta sampradāya gāya gīta
bāje caturdaśa khola          gagana bhedila rola
          dekhi jagannātha ānandita
Text 2 unamata nityānanda         ācārya adwaitacandra
          paṇḍita śrībāsa haridāsa
e sabhāre saṅge kari          mājhe nāce gaura-hari
          bhakata-maṇḍala cāri-pāśa
Text 3 hari hari bola bole        pada-bhare mahī dole
          nayāne bahaye jala-dhāra
premera taraṅga raṅga         sumeru jiniyā aṅga
          tāhe aṣṭa sāttwika bikāra
Text 4 bhābābeśe gaura rāya       nācite nācite yāya
          dhīre dhīre cale jagannātha
ānanda bismaya mana      dekhi prema-saṅkīratana
          nija parikara-gaṇa sātha
Text 5 dūre gela dukha śoka       premāya bhāsila loka
          sthābara jaṅgama paśu pākhī
ye prema-bilāsa dhāma         yadu kahe anupāma
          ye dekhila se-i tāra sākhī


     Text 1 From the four directions the great souls assemble and enjoy pastimes of kīrtana. Together they sing many songs. From the four directions the sounds of fourteen kholas seem to break the sky. Gazing at Lord Jagannātha, everyone is filled with bliss.
     Text 2 Lord Nityānanda, Lord Advaitacandra Acārya, Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, and Haridāsa Ṭhākura are wild with bliss. In the midst of a circle of devotees, Lord Gaura-Hari dances.
     Text 3 Lord Gaura-Hari chants, ñHari! Haribol!” His dancing footsteps make the earth tremble. A flood of tears streams from His eyes. He plays in the waves of ecstatic spiritual love. His glorious body defeats golden Mount Sumeru. He manifests the eight sāttvika-bhāva ecstasies.
     Text 4 Filled with ecstasy, Lord Gaura dances and dances as He walks. Slowly slowly Lord Jagannātha travels in His ratha. Seeing Lord Gaura-Hari enjoy pastimes of prema-kīrtana with His personal associates, every person feels his heart filled with bliss and wonder.
     Text 5 Suffering and sadness have fled far away. Every moving and unmoving being, including even the birds and beasts, float in an ocean of ecstatic spiritual love. Yadu dāsa says: These pastimes of ecstatic spiritual love have no peer. Anyone who sees them will bear witness to this truth.

 
Song 52 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 āpane nacite yabe prabhura mana haila
sāta sampradāya laye ekatra karila
Text 2 uddaṇḍa nṛtye prabhu chāḍiyā huṅkāra
cakra bhrami bhrame yena ālāta ākāra
Text 3 nṛtye yāṁhā yāṁhā prabhura paḍe pada-tala
sa-sāgara śaila mahī kare ṭalamala
Text 4 stambha-sweda pulakāśru sweda baibarṇya
nānā bhābe bibaśa garba harṣa dainya
Text 5 dekhiyā prabhura nṛtya jagannātha hāse
se ānande bhāsi yāya yadunātha dāse


     Text 1 Lord Gaura’s heart decides to dance. Around Him the devotees gather.
     Text 2 Roaring, Lord Gaura dances without restraint. Dancing in a circle, He seems like a circling firebrand.
     Text 3 Whenever Lord Gaura’s dancing feet touch the ground, the earth and all the oceans and mountains tremble.
     Text 4 Lord Gaura becomes stunned. The hairs of His beody stand erect. He weeps. He perspires. His complexion turns pale. He manifests all the symptoms of ecstasy. He is alternately proud, joyful, and humble.
     Text 5 Seeing Lord Gaura’s ecstatic dancing, Lord Jagannātha smiles. Now Yadunātha dāsa floats in an ocean of bliss.

 
Song 53 (Imana-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) līlā-kārī jagannātha
calite calite       yeye ardha-pathe
          ratha thāme akasmāt
Text 2 surāsura nare         ṭānila rathere
          tabu nā calaye ratha
parichā pūjāri      betra haste kari
          gāli pāḍe kata mata
Text 3 rājāra ādeśe          joḍe du-i pāśe
          śata śata kari-bara
tane ratha bale          tathāpi nā cale
          eka pada ratha-bara
Text 4 tabe gora-rāya        ratha pāche yāya
          śirete ṭheliche ratha
bāyura begete       nimeṣa mājhete
          calila yojana śata
Text 5 jaya gaura bali       du-i bāhu tuli
          kare rola yātri-gaṇa
duṁhāra prabhābe         kari anubhaba
          yadura bismita mana


     Text 1 (Refrain) Lord Jagannātha is playful. Moving and moving, His ratha suddenly stops when half the path is traversed.
     Text 2 The demigods, demons, and humans pull, but the ratha does not move. Stick in hand, how many times does the pūjāri fall to the ground?
     Text 3 By the king’s order, hundreds and hundreds of elephants are yoked on both sides. The elephants pull with all their might, but the ratha does not move even a single footstep.
     Text 4 Going behind, Lord Gaura Rāya places His head against the ratha and pushes. The ratha suddenly goes with the speed of the wind. In an eyeblink it seems to have traveled 800 miles.
     Text 5 Raising their arms, the devotees at the Rathayātrā call out, “Jaya Gaura!” Personally seeing the transcendental power of both Lord Jagannātha and Lord Gaura, this Yadu dāsa feels his heart struck with wonder.

 
Song 54 (Rāmakeli-rāga)
 

Text 1 caitanya nitā-i āre dona bhā-i nāce re
khola karatāla      pañcama rasāla
          tā thaiyā tā thaiyā bāje re
Text 2 soṇāra kamala         kare ṭalamala
          prema-sudhā-sindhu mājhe re
uttama adhama       dīna-hīna jana
          e ḍhe-u sabhāre bāje re
Text 3 sāta sampradāya       ati ubharāya
          jagannātha gāya re
sabhāya dekhiche       sarbatra nāciche
          eka-kāle gorā-rāya
Text 4 apūrba aiśwarya       apūrba mādhurya
          prakaṭita e līlāya re
yadunātha dāse      premānande bhāse
          pahuṁ kṛpā-laba cāya re


     Text 1 Ah! The two brothers, Gaura and Nitāi, dance! Sweetly playing the fifth note, the kholas and karatālas declare, “Tā thaiyā! Tā thaiyā!”
     Text 2 Gaura and Nitāi are like two golden lotus flowers tossed to an fro in the nectar ocean of ecstatic spiritual love. The waves of that ocean now splash against every person, against the high, thr low, the poor, and the sinner.
     Text 3 The devotees sing a great tumult of songs glorifying Lord Jagannātha. Seeing the devotees, Lord Gaura Rāya dances.
     Text 4 Lord Gaura’s pastimes manifest wonderful opulence and wonderful sweetness. Yadunātha dāsa now floats in an ocean of spiritual bliss and love. Yadunātha yearns to attain a small particle of the Lord’s mercy.

 
Part 1D Lord Nityānanda

 
Song 55 (Bhāṭiyāri-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) āre mora nitā-i nāyara
saṁsāra sāyara      jībera jībana
          nitā-i mora sukhera sāyara
Text 2 abanī-maṇḍale         ā-ila nitā-i
          dhari abadhūta-beśa
padmābatī-nandana        basu jāhnabāra jībana
          caitanya līlaye biśeṣa
Text 3 rāma-abatāre          anuja āchila
          lakṣmaṇa baliyā nāma
kṛṣṇa-abatāre       gokula-nagare
          jyeṣṭha bhā-i balarāma
Text 4 gaura-abatāre         nadīyā bihare
          dhari nityānanda nāma
dīna-hīna yata      uddharila kata
          bañcita dāsa ātmārāma


     Text 1 (Refrain) My Lord Nitāi is the captain of the ferry-boat that traverses the ocean of birth and death. Lord Nitāi is the life of the jīvas. For me He is an ocean of bliss.
     Text 2 Accepting the garments of an avadhūta, Lord Nitāi came to the circle of this earth. He is Padmāvatī’s son. He is Jāhnavā’s life. He enjoys glorious pastimes with Lord Caitanya.
     Text 3 When Lord Rāmacandra descended to this world, Lord Nitāi was Rāma’s younger brother Lakṣmaṇa. When Lord Kṛṣṇa descended to this world, Lord Nitāi was Kṛṣṇa’s elder brother Balarāma in Gokula-nagara.
     Text 4 When Lord Gaura descended to this world, Lord Nitāi accepted the name Nityānanda. Then He enjoyed pastimes with Lord Gaura in Nadīyā. How many poor fallen sinners did Lord Nitāi deliver? Alas! He did not deliver Atmārāma dāsa. Atmārāma dāsa was cheated.

 
Song 56 (Beloyāra-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) jaya jaga-tāraṇa-kāraṇa-dhāma
ānanda-kanda nityānanda nāma
Text 2 ḍagamaga locana      kamala ḍhulāyata
          sahaje athira gati diṭhi matoyāra
bhā-iyā abhirāma bali         ghana ghana garaja-i
          gaura prema bhare cala-i nā pāra
Text 3 gada gada ādha        madhura bacanāmṛta
          lahu lahu hāsa bikaśita gaṇḍa
pāṣaṇḍa-khaṇḍana         śrī-bhuja-maṇḍana
          kanayā-khacita abalambana-daṇḍa
Text 4 kali-yuga kāla        bhujaṅgama daṁśala
          dagadhala thābara jaṅgama pekhi
prema-sudhā-rasa         jaga-bhari barikhala
          dāsa gobinda kāhe upekhi


     Text 1 (Refrain) Glory to He who bears the name Nityānanda! He is the root of all bliss. He delivers the worlds.
     Text 2 Tears flow from His eyes. He sways to and fro like a lotus flower in the breeze. His steps are restless. His eyes are wild. “Brother Abhirāma!” He roars. Overcome with ecstatic love for Lord Gaura, He has no power even to walk.
     Text 3 His broken words are the sweetest nectar. A gentle smile blossoms on His cheeks. He is adorned with graceful arms that crush the offenders. He holds a great golden mace.
     Text 4 Seeing the moving and unmoving beings all bitten by the black snake of Kali-yuga and now burning in the flames of its poison, He showered the worlds with the antidote, with a monsoon of the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Why, then, did He not give that antidote to Govinda dāsa?

 
Song 57 (Sindhuḍā-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya jaya nityānanda rohiṇī-kumāra
patita uddhāra lāgi su-bāhu pasāra
Text 2 gada gada madhura madhura ādha bola
pare dekhe gare preme dhari deya khola
Text 3 ḍagamaga locana ghoraye nirantara
soṇāra kamale yena phiraye bhramara
Text 4 dayāra ṭhākura nitā-i para duḥkha jāne
hari-nāmera mālā gānthi dila jane jane
Text 5 pāpī pāṣaṇḍī yata karila dalane
dīna hīna jane kaila prema bitaraṇe
Text 6 āhā re gaurāṅga bali paḍe bhūmi-tale
śarīra bhijila nitā-ira nayanera jale
Text 7 bṛndābana dāsa mane e-i bicarila
dharaṇī upare kibā sumeru paḍila


     Text 1 Glory, glory to Lord Nityānanda. He is Lord Balarāma Himself. To deliver the fallen sinners He extends His two arms.
     Text 2 His half words spoken in a choked voice are the sweetest nectar. Whomever He sees He hugs in the ecstasy of spiritual love.
     Text 3 His eyes are always restless. They are like two black bees flying among golden lotus flowers.
     Text 4 Lord Nitāi is the master of mercy. Seeing the people tormented by troubles, He strings for them a necklace of Lord Hari’s holy names. To person after person He gives that necklace.
     Text 5 The arreogant blasphemers and sinners He rips into shreds. To the poor fallen people He gives the gift of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 6 Calling out, “O! O Gaurāṅga!”, He falls to the ground. His whole body is soaked with tears.
     Text 7 In his heart Vṛndāvana dāsa thinks: Now Lord Nityānanda is like a golden Mount Sumeru fallen to the ground.

 
Song 58 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya re jaya re jaya nityānanda rāya
paṇḍita rāghaba ghare bihare sadāya
Text 2 pāriṣada sakale dekhaye parateka
ṭhākura paṇḍita se karena abhiṣeka
Text 3 nityānanda-rūpa yena madana samāna
dīghala nayana bhāṅa prasanna bayāna
Text 4 nānā ābharaṇa aṅge jhalamala kare
ājānu-lambita bāhu ati śobhā dhare
Text 5 aruṇa kiraṇa jāni du-khāni caraṇa
hṛdaya kariyā kahe dāsa bṛndābana


     Text 1 Glory, glory, glory to Lord Nityānanda Rāya! He enjoys pastimes in Rāghava Paṇḍita’s home.
     Text 2 To the assembled devotees the Lord reveals His transcendental glories. The saintly paṇḍita performs Lord Nityānanda’s abhiṣeka.
     Text 3 Lord Nityānanda’s form is glorious like Kāmadeva. His eyes and eyebrows are large. His face is cheerful.
     Text 4 Many different ornaments glisten on His body. His arms reach to His knees. He is graceful and glorious.
     Text 5 Pressing to his heart the reddish soles of Lord Nityānanda’s feet, Vṛndāvana dāsa sings this song.

 
Song 59 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 bande prabhu nityānanda         kebala ānanda-kanda
          jhalamala ābharaṇa sāje
du-i dike śruti-mūle          makara kuṇḍala dole
          gale eka kaustubha birāje
Text 2 su-balita bhuja-daṇḍa      jini kari-bara śuṇḍa
          tāhāte śobhaye hema-daṇḍa
aruṇa ambara gāya        siṁhera gamane dhāya
          dekhi kampe asura pāṣaṇḍa
Text 3 aṅga dekhi śuddha-barṇa         duṭī āṅkhi padma parṇa
          tāhāte jharaye makaranda
hema-giri bahe yena      suradhunī bahe hena
          dekhi suralokera ānanda
Text 4 sarbāṅge pulaka-chaṭā      yena kadambera ghaṭā
          lamphe kamphe haya basumatī
bīra-dāpa mālasāṭe       śabade brahmāṇḍa phāṭe
          dekhi brahmaloke kare stuti
Text 5 caitanyera prema-ratna          jībere kariyā yatna
          dila pahuṁ parama ānande
kahe bṛndābana dāse      āpanāra karma-doṣe
          nā bhajilāma nitā-i-pada-dwandwe


     Text 1 I bow down before Lord Nityānanda. He is the root of transcendental bliss. He is decorated with glisttering  ornaments. Shark-shaped earrings swing to and fro on His ears. On His neck a Kaustubha gem glistens.
     Text 2 His graceful arms defeat the elephant’s trunk. He grasps a splendid golden mace. Saffron garments adorn His limbs. He runs like a lion. Seeing Him, the demons and blasphemers tremble. 
     Text 3 He is splendid and pure. His eyes are lotus petals from which flow the nectar of tears. He is like a golden mountain from which a great Gaṅgā flows. Seeing Him, the demigods become filled with bliss.
     Text 4 His bodily hairs stand erect like kadamba filaments. When He leaps the earth trembles. When He heroically strikes His chest, the sound make all the worlds split apart. Gazing at Him, the residents of Brahmaloka offer prayers.
     Text 5 To the fallen souls He carefully gives the jewel of spiritual love for Lord Caitanya. In this way He greatly pleases the Lord. Vṛndāvana dāsa says: It is because of many past bad karma that I do not now worship Lord Nitāi’s feet.

 
Song 60 (Gāndhāra-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) jaya jaya padmābatī-suta sundara
          nityānanda guṇa-bhūpa
jaga-jana nayana         tāpa bhara bhañjana
          jini kaṇā kāruṇa aparūpa rūpa
Text 2 śaśadhara-nikara-darapa-hara ānana
          jhalakata amiyā jharata mṛdu hāsa
gaura prema-bhare        gara gara antara
          nirupama naba naba bacana bilāsa
Text 3 ṭalamala amala-kamala-locana
          jala girata janu nirata suradhunī dhāra
pulaka kadamba-balita su-lalita ati
          parisara bakṣe tarala maṇi-hāra
Text 4 kuñjara damana gamana mano-rañjana
          bāhu pasāri athira abirāma
patita kole kari bitare se-dhana
          bañcita jagate duḥkhita ghanaśyāma


     Text 1 (Refrain) Glory, glory to Lord Nityānanda. He is Padmāvatī’s son. He is handsome and graceful. He is the king of virtues. He breaks apart the burning sufferings in the eyes of the world’s people. His wonderful form eclipses even kaṇā kāruṇa.
     Text 2 His face robs away the pride of a host of moons. His smile is filled with drops of nectar. His heart is overcome with ecstatic love for Lord Gaura. His newer and newer playful words have no peer.
     Text 3 His eyes are splendid lotus flowers that sway to and fro. His tears are a flooding Gaṅgā. His bodily hairs standing erect are kadamba filaments. Heis graceful and playful and charming. A jewel necklace sways to and fro on His chest. 
     Text 4 His garceful gestures defeat the graceful elephants. He delights the heart. His arms are long. He is always restless and unsteady. He hugs the fallen souls. He gives them a great treasure. In all the world only sad Ghanaśyāma dāsa did not receive that gift. Only he was cheated,

 
Song 61 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 rāḍha deśe nāma       ekacakra grāma
          hārā-i-pāṇdita-bara
śubha māgha māsi         śukla-trayodaśī
          janamila haladhara
Text 2 hārā-i paṇḍita        ati haraṣita
          putra-mahotsaba kare
dharaṇī-maṇḍala          kare ṭalamala
          ānanda nāhika dhare
Text 3 śāntipura-nātha       mane haraṣita
          kari kichu anumāna
antare jānila       bujhi janamila
          kṛṣṇera agraja rāma
Text 4 baiṣṇabera mana       ha-ila prasanna
          ānanda-sāgare bhāse
e dīna pāmara       ha-ibe uddhāra
          kahe dīna kṛṣṇa-dāse


     Text 1 In the county named Rāḍha-deśa, in the village of Ekacakra, on the śukla-tryodaśī of the auspicious month of Māgha, as the son of Hāḍāi Paṇḍita, in this world Lord Balarāma took birth.
     Text 2 Joyful Hāḍāi Paṇḍita celebrated the festival of his son’s birth. The circle of the earth was overcome. No one could contain his bliss. 
     Text 3 Śāntipura’s Lord Advaita became joyful at heart. In His heart He knew that Lord Kṛṣṇa’s elder brother Lord Balarāma had taken birth.
     Text 4 Every Vaiṣṇava heart became joyful. Every heart floated in an ocean of bliss. Lord Balarāma would soon deliver the poor sinners. Thus speaks poor Kṛṣṇa dāsa.

 
Song 62 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 bhubana-ānanda-kanda       balarāma nityānanda
          abatīrṇa haila kali-kāle
ghucila sakala dukha          dekhiyā o cānda-mukha
          bhāse loka ānanda-hillole
Text 2 (Refrain) jaya jaya nityānanda rāma
kanaka-campaka pāti      aṅgule cāndera pānti
          rūpe jitala koṭi kāma
Text 3 o mukha-maṇḍala dekhi      pūrṇa-candra kise lekhi
          dīghala nayāna bhāṅa dhanu
ājānu-labhita-bhuja-          tala thala-paṅkaja
          koṭi kṣīṇa kari ari janu
Text 4 caraṇa-kamala-tale         bhakata bhramara bule
          ādha bāṇī amiñā prakāśa
itthaṁ kali-yuge jībe         uddhāra ha-ila sabe
          kahe dīna duḥkhī kṛṣṇa-dāsa


     Text 1 Lord Balarāma-Nityānada, who is the root of the world’s bliss, in the age of Kali descended to the earth and destroyed all suffering. Gazing at His moonlike face, the people of this world float in waves of bliss.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Glory, glory to Lord Nityānanda-Rāma! His complexion defeats a host of golden campaka flowers. His fingernails and toenails defeat a host of moons. His handsome form defeats millions of Kāmadevas.
     Text 3 How can I write that the circle of Lord Nityānanda’s face is like a mere full-moon, that His long eyes and eyebrows are like a mere archer’s bow, or that His arms reaching to His knees are like mere sthala lotus flowers? Even millions of moons, bows, and lotus flowers become weak and petty when compared to Lord Nityānanda.
     Text 4 The devotees have become bumblebees at the lotus flower of Lord Nityānanda’s feet. Lord Nityānanda’s half-spoken words are like glorious nectar. Lord Nityānanda delivers all the fallen souls in the age of Kali. Thus speaks poor sad Kṛṣṇa dāsa.

 
Song 63 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) āhā mari āju ki ānanda
kibā ekacakra-pure       hārā-i paṇḍitera ghare
          abatīrṇa haila nityānanda
Text 2 ati su-komala tanu         hema nabanīta janu
          śobhaya bhubana bimohita
candra mukha nirakhiyā        ullāse nā dhare hiyā
          padmabatī hārā-i paṇḍita
Text 3 śrī-adwaita śāntipure          garjaye ānanda-bhare
          tileka ha-ite nāre thira
nāce pahuṁ ūrdhwa-bāhe        kāṅkhatāli diyā kahe
          ānilu ānilu bala-bīra
Text 4 brahmā ādi deba-gaṇa       kare puṣpa bariṣaṇa
          jaya jaya dhwani anibāra
gandharba kinnara yata        bāya baḍya śata śata
          gāya guṇa sukhera pathāra
Text 5 ojha mahā bhāgyabāna       putera kalyāna dāna
          kare yata lekhā nā-i dite
kata nā kautuka lañā       loka saba āse dhāñā
          mahā-bhīḍa gṛhe prabeśite
Text 6 dhanya rāḍha mahī āra      dhanya se nakṣatra bāra
          dhanya māgha śukla-trayodaśī
narhaari kahe bhāla      dhanya dhanya kāli-kāla
          prakaṭe khaṇḍila duḥkha-rāśi


     Text 1 (Refrain) Ah! Ah! What bliss has come to the town of Ekacakra! In Hāḍāi Paṇḍita’s home Lord Nityānanda has descended to this world.
     Text 2 Infant Lord Nityānanda’s body is soft and delicate. It glistens like new butter or like gold. It enchants all the worlds. Gazing at infant Lord Nityānanda’s moonlike face, Padmāvatī and Hāḍāi Paṇḍita cannot contain the joy in their hearts.
     Text 3 In Śāntipura Lord Advaita roars with bliss. Even for a single sesame seed’s worth of tiem He cannot keep still. Raising His arms, He dances. “I will go. I will go to the hero Balarāma.”, He declares.
     Text 4 Brahmā and the demigods shower flowers. “Jaya! Jaya!”, they chant without stop. Hundreds and hundreds of Gandharvas and KInnaras play musical instruments and sing songs praising the blissful ocean of Lord Nityānanda’s virtues.
     Text 5 Fortunate Hāḍāi Ojha was blessed to have such a son. In writing I cannot describe his great good fortune.How many joyful people hurried to Hāḍāi Ojha’s great home!
     Text 6 Fortunate is the earth. Fortunate is the land of Rāḍha-desa. Auspicious were the stars at that moment. Auspicious was that śukla-trayodaśī in the month of Māgha. Narahari dāsa says: Auspicious, auspicious is the Kali-yuga, for now that Lord Nityānanda has come, all sufferings will be broken into pieces.

 
Song 64 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 prabhu nityānanda          ānandera kanda
          pūrube rohiṇī-tanaya yeṁho
kali dhanya kaila        śubha-kṣaṇe haila
          padmābatī-garbhe prakaṭa teṁho
Text 2 jaya jaya jaya         dhwani atiśaya
          hārā-i paṇḍitera ghare
ekacakra-bāsī       loka sukhe bhāsi
          dhāñā āse dhṛti dharite nāre
Text 3 sūtikā-mandire        jhalamala kare
          nitā-ira mukha candramā cāru
se śobhā dekhite         kata sādha cite
          dekhe āṅkhe nā-i nimikha karu
Text 4 harṣe deba-gaṇa       barṣe puṣpa ghana
          alakhita nṛtya bhaṅgimā bhāle
ghanaśyāma gāya          nānā bādya-bāya
          dhā dhā dhiuki dhiki dhenyā nā tāle


     Text 1 Lord Nityānanda is the root of all bliss. Previously He had been Rohiṇī’s son Balarāma. Now, at an auspicious moment taking birth from Padmāvatī’s womb, He makes the Kali-yuga supremely auspicious.
     Text 2 Great sounds of “Jaya! Jaya! Jaya!” fill Hāḍāi Paṇḍita’s home. Floating in bliss as they run, the people of Ekacakra cannot remain peaceful and quiet. 
     Text 3 The beautiful moon of infant Nityānanda’s face fills the maternity room with glorious light. How many desires to gaze at His handsome glory fill the peoples’ hearts? With unblinking eyes they gaze at Him.
     Text 4 The demigods joyfully shower flowers. Unseen, they gracefully dance. As the musical instruments and drums declare, “Dhā dhā dhiuki dhiki dhenyā nā!”, Ghanaśyāma sings this song.

 
Song 65 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 āge janamila nitā-i cānda
pātila āsiyā karuṇā phānda
Text 2 narī-gaṇa sabe dekhite yāya
sabhāre karuṇā-nayāne cāya
Text 3 deklhiyā se ghare āsite nāre
rūpa heri tāra nayāne jhure
Text 4 dekhi sabe mane birāja kare
e-i kona mahā-puruṣa bare
Text 5 dekhite dekhite bāḍhaye sādha
ghare āsibāre paḍaye bāda
Text 6 mane kari ihāya hiyāra bhari
nayāne kājara kariyā pari
Text 7 kata puṇya kaila ihāra mātā
ehena bālaka dila bidhātā
Text 8 eta kahi kāru nayāna diyā
ānandera dhārā paḍe bahiyā
Text 9 kāru stana bahi dugadha jhare
keha yāya tāre karite kore
Text 10 e-saba bikāra ramaṇī-gaṇe
śibarāma āśā karaye mane


     Text 1 Now Lord Nitāicandra has taken birth. Now the trap of His mercy is set.
     Text 2 The ladies go to see Him. Infant Lord Nitāi glances at them with His merciful eyes.
     Text 3 Seeing Him, they cannot stay in the house. After seeing His glorious form they find tears always streaming from their eyes.
     Text 4 When they gaze at Him, great glory ffills their hearts. Each one of them is a great exalted saint.
     Text 5 As they gaze and gaze at Him, the desire to see Him grows stronger and stronger in their hearts. They argue over who will go into the house to see Him.
     Text 6 Infant Lord Nitāi is the kajjala that anoints their eyes. He fills their hearts.
     Text 7 How many pious deeds had the mother done, that destinay gave to her such an infant boy?
     Text 8 As the ladies gaze at Him, flooding streams of blissful tears flow from their eyes.
     Text 9 Any lady who places the infant in her lap finds that milk suddenly began to flow from her breasts.
     Text 10 The ladies there are overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. Śivarāma yearns to join them and also gaze at the infant Lord.

 
Song 66 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 rāḍha mājhe ekacākā nāme āche grāma
tāhe abatīrṇa nityānanda balarāma
Text 2 hāḍā-i paṇḍita nāma śuddha bipra-rāja
mūle sarba pitā bhāne kaila pitā byāja
Text 3 mahā jaya jaya dhwani puṣpa bariṣaṇa
saṅgope debatā gaṇa karila takhana
Text 4 kṛpā-sindhu bhakti-dātā śrī-baiṣṇaba-dhāma
abatīrṇa haila rāḍhe nityānanda rāma
Text 5 se-i dina haite rāḍha-maṇḍala sakala
punaḥ punaḥ bāḍhite lagila su-maṅgala
Text 6 śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu nityānanda jāna
bṛndābana dāsa tachu pada yuga gāna


     Text 1 In Rāḍha-deśa is a village named Ekacakra. There Lord Nityānanda-Balarāma descended to this world.
     Text 2 A pure regal brāhmaṇa named Hāḍāi Paṇḍita played the role of father to Lord Nityānanda, Lord Nityānanda who is in truth the father of everyone.
     Text 3 There were great sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!” There was a shower of flowers. Disguised, the demigods came.
     Text 4 Thus Lord Nityānanda-Rāma, who is an ocean of mercy, the giver of devotional service, and the shelter of the Vaiṣṇavas, descended to this world in Rāḍha-deśa.
     Text 5 From that day the circle of Rāḍha-deśa became more and more auspicious.
     Text 6 Thus Vṛndāvana dāsa sings the glories of the feet of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda.

 
Song 67 (Gāndhāra-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nācata re nitā-i bara cānda
siñca-i prema-          sudhā-rasa jaga-jane
          adabhuta naṭana su-chānda
Text 2 pada-tala-tāla        khalita maṇi-mañjira
          calatahi ṭalamala aṅga
meru-śikhare kiye        tanu anu pāmare
          jhalamala bhāba-taraṅga
Text 3 royata hāsata         calata gati manthara
          hari bali mūrachi bibhora
khene khene gaura        gaura bali dhāba-i
          ānande garajata ghora
Text 4 pāmara paṅgu          adhama jaḍa ātura
          dīna abadhi nāhi māna
abirata durlabha         prema ratana dhana
          yāci jagate karu dāna
Text 5 ayācita-rūpe          prema-dhana bitaraṇe
          nikhila tāpa dūre gela
dīna-hīna sabahuṁ        manaratha pūrala
          abalā unamata bhela
Text 6 aichana karuṇā-       nayana abalokane
          kāhu nā rahe duradina
balarāma dāsa           kahe bhela bañcita
          dāruṇa hṛdaya kaṭhina


     Text 1 (Refrain) Splashing the people of this world with the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love, Lord Nitāicandra, the wonderful graceful dancer, dances.
     Text 2 Following the rhythm of His dancing feet, His jewel anklets jingle. With graceful restless motions His body moves as He dances. How has His body become like Mount Meru’s summit effulgent in waves of ecstatic spiritual love?
     Text 3 He weeps. He laughs. He slowly walks. Calling out, “Hari!”, He is overcome. Moment after moment He chants, “Gaura! Gaura!” He runs. Joyfully He roars.
     Text 4 Without stop He begs the whole world to accept His gift of the rare jewel of ecstatic spiritual love. He offers it to every person. In His heart He does not think, “That person is sinner. That person is lame. That person is the lowest. That person is dull. That person is sick. That person is poor.”
     Text 5 Even without being asked, He gives away the treasure of ecstatic spiritual love. With that gift He makes all sufferings flee far away. He fulfills the poor wretched people’s every desire. He makes the weak and powerless filled with the ecstasy of spiritual love.
     Text 6 Who, attaining Lord Nitāi’s merciful glance, can remain unfortunate? Balarāma dāsa says: Alas! I was cheated of Lord Nitāi’s merciful glance. That is why my heart is so cruel and hard.

 
Song 68 (Maṅgala-rāga)
 

Text 1 añjana gañjana        locana rañjana
          gati ati lalita su-ṭhāna
calata khalata puna      puna uṭhi garajana
          cāhani baṅka nayāna
Text 2 gaura gaura bali      ghana de-i karatāli
          kañja nayāne bahe lora
premete abaśa haiyā      patitere nirakhiyā
          ā-isa ā-isa bali de-i kora
Text 3 huhuṅkāra garajana         mālasāṭa punaḥ puna
          kata kata bhaba bikhāra
kadamba-keśara janu      pulake pūrala tanu
          bhā-iyāra bhābe mātoyāra
Text 4 āgama nigama para          beda bidhi agocara
          taha kaila patitere dāna
kahe ātmārāma dāse       nā pā-iyā kṛpā-leśe
          rahi gela pāṣāṇa-samāna


     Text 1 Lord Nitāi’s delightful reddish eyes eclipse the most graceful black kajjala. His movements are graceful. As He walks He stumbles and stands up again and again. He gazes with graceful curved eyes.
     Text 2 Chanting, “Gaura! Gaura!”, He claps His hands. Tears stream from His lotus eyes. Overcome in the ecstasy of spiritual love, He sees a fallen sinner, coaxes him with, “Come here! Come here!”, and gives him a hug.
     Text 3 He roars. He strikes Hi chest. How many symptoms of ectsatic love does He manifest? His bodily hairs stand upright like kadamba filaments. He is wild in the ecstasy of spiritual love.
     Text 4 He is beyond the Agama and Nigama scriptures. He is beyond what the Vedas can see. To the fallen sinners He gives a precious gift. Atmārāma dāsa says: I never attained even a small fragment of Lord Nitāi’s mercy. That is why I remain dull like a stone.


Song 69 (Kāmoda-rāga)

Text 1 kīrtana-rasa-maya          āgama-agocara
          kebala ānanda-kanda
akhila loka-gati         bhakata prāṇa-pati
          jaya jaya nityānanda cānda
Text 2 heri patita gaṇa      karuṇābalokana
          jaga-bhari karala apāra
bhaba-bhaya-bhañjana          durita-nibāraṇa
          dhanya dhanya abatāra
Text 3 hari-saṅkīrtane       sājala jaga-jane
          sura nara nāga paśu pākhī
sakala beda-sāra         prema sudhā-rasa
          deyala kāhu nā upekhi
Text 4 tri-bhubana-maṅgala-       nāma-prema-bale
          dūre gela kali āndhiyāra
śamana-bhabana-patha          sabe eka rodhala
          bañcita rāma durācāra

 
     Text 1 Glory, glory to Lord Nityānandacandra! He tastes the sweet nectar of kīrtana. He is beyond the Agama scriptures. He is the root of transcendental bliss. He is the shelter of all the worlds. He is the master of the devotees’ lives.
     Text 2 Seeing the fallen sinners, He casts on them a glance of mercy. He fills all the worlds with the shoreless ocean of His mercy. He chases away all sins. He breaks into pieces the fear of repeated birth and death. Glorious glorious is His descent to this world.
     Text 3 He engages the people of this weorld in the chanting of Hari-sankirtana. He engages the demigods and the humans. He engages even the birds and beasts ans snakes. To everyone He gives the sweet nectar of ecstatic spiritual love, love that is the essence of all the Vedas. To whom did He not give that nectar?
     Text 4 By the power of spiritual love for the holy name, love that is the most auspicious thing in all the worlds, He chased far away the blinding darkness of Kali-yuga. He saved everyone from the path that leads to Yamarāja’s world. Only wicked Rāma dāsa He did not save. Only Rāma dāsa was cheated.

 
Song 70 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) pahuṁ mora nityānanda rāya
mathiyā sakala tantra         hari-nāma mahā-mantra
          kare dhari jībere bujhāya
Text 2 caitanya agraja nāma       tri-bhubane anupāma
          suradhunī-tīre kari thānā
hāṭa kari parabandha          rājā haila nityānanda
          pāṣāṇdi-dalana bīrabānā
Text 3 rāmā-i su-pātra haiyā      rājā-ājñā cālā-iyā
          kotoyāla hailā hari-dāsa
kṛṣṇa-dāsa laiyā ḍāḍya        keha yā-ite nāre bhāḍya
          likhana paḍhane śrīnibāsa
Text 4 pasāriyā biśwambhara       āra priya gadādhara
          āścarya catware biki kini
gaurī-dāsa hāsi hāsi          bājāra nikaṭe bāsi
          hāṭera mahimā kichu śuni

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) Churning all the ascriptures, my Lord Nityānanda Rāya extracted the nectar that is the maha-mantra of Lord Hari’s holy names. Taking the people of this world by the hand, He taught them the glory of that nectar of the holy names.
     Text 2 Lord Nityānanda, who is Lord Caitanya’s elder brother, and who is the most glroious in all the worlds, went to the Ganga’s bank and opened a marketplace. Powerful Lord Nityānanda, who crushes the demons, became the king of that martketplace.
     Text 3 Rāmāi Paṇḍita became the superintendent of that martketplace. By the king’s order he appointed Haridāsa Ṭhākura as the policeman there. Krsna-dasa was the doorman. To stop any cheating, Śrinivāsa was appointed the accountant.
     Text 4 Lord Viśvambhara Himself has became a shopkeeper in that marketplace. So have dear Gadādhara and many others. In that merket there is a great wonder of buying and selling. Having heard something of its glories, Gaurī-dāsa has come to visit that market. He smiles and smiles.

 
Song 71 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 gajendra-gamane nitā-i calaye manthare
yāre dekhe tāre bhāsāya premera pāthāre
Text 2 patita durgata pāpīra ghare ghare giyā
brahmāra durlabha prema dichena yāciyā
Text 3 yenā laya tāre kaya dante tṛṇa dhari
āmāre kiniyā la-o bala gaura-hari
Text 4 to sabāra lāgiyā kṛṣṇera abatāra
śuna bhā-i gaurāṅga sundara nadīyāra
Text 5 yo pahuṁ gokula-pure nandera kumāra
to sabhāra lāgi ebe kaila abatāra
Text 6 śuniyā kāndaye pāpī caraṇe dhariyā
pulake pūrala aṅga gara gara hiyā
Text 7 tāre kole kari nitā-i yā-i āna-ṭhāma
hena mate preme bhāsā-ola pura grāma
Text 8 debakīnandane bole mu-i abhāgiyā
ḍubiluṁ biṣaya-kūpe nitā-i nā bhajiyā

 
     Text 1 Like the graceful king of elephants, Lord Nityananda slowly walks.Whomever He sees He makes float in an ocean of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 2 Going from house to house, He begs the fallen misled sinners to please purchase His goods of ecstatic spiritual love, goods even the demigod Brahmā finds difficult to buy.
     Text 3 Placing a straw between His teeth, Lord Nityānanda says, “Please purchase My goods. Please pay the price of chanting, `Gaura-Hari!’ and take the goods I sell.
     Text 4 “O My brothers, please listen. Śrī Gaurāṅgasundara of Nadīyā is Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself, Kṛṣṇa who has descended to this world to be with you.
     Text 5 “He is the Supreme Lord. He is Nanda’s son in Gokulapura, and He has descended to this world to be with you.”
     Text 6 Hearing these words, the sinners weep. They grasp Lord Nityānanda’s feet. The hairs of their bodies stand urpight. Their hearts are overcome with ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 7 LordNityānanda hugs them and then goes to the next house. In this way Lord Nityānanda made entire villages and towns float in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 8 Devakīnandana dāsa says: I am vrey unfortunate. I never worshiped Lord Nitāi. That is why I am drowning in this well of materialistic life.

 
Song 72 (Māyūra-rāga)
 

Text 1 bhābe gara gara       nitā-i sundara
          heri gorācāndera chaṭā
kata uṭhe cite      nāre thira haite
          prati aṅge naba pūlaka ghaṭā
Text 2 kibā unamāda          kṣaṇe siṁha-nāda
          kṣaṇe loṭe dharā-tale
kṣaṇe dīrgha-śwāsa       kṣaṇe mahā-hāsa
          khase bāsa bhāse āṅkhera jale
Text 3 kṣaṇe joḍa lampha          kṣaṇe dehe kampa
          khene yāya keha keha dharite nāre
kṣaṇe kibā kaiyā         bahe thīra haiyā
          sāmā-iyā biśwambhera kore
Text 4 nityānanda kole       laiyā netra-jale
          bhāse kibā prabhu premera rīti
kahe narahari       śrībāsādi cāri
          pāśe kānde keha nā dhare dhṛti

 
     Text 1 Glancing at the moonlight of Lord Gauracandra’s splendor, glorious Lord Nitāi is overcome with spiritual bliss. How much ecstasy rises within His heart? He cannot stay still. The hairs stand up on His every limb.
     Text 2 He  has become wild in the ecstasy of spiritual love. One moment He roars like a lion. The next moment He rolls on the ground. The next moment He lets out a long sigh. The next moment He loudly laughs. The next moment His clothing is in disarray. The next moment He floats in the tears that stream from His eyes. 
     Text 3 The next moment He leaps. The next moment His body trembles. The next moment He bexcomes wild and no one can restrain Him. The next moment He is quiet and peaceful. The next moment He hugs Lord Viśvambhara.
     Text 4 Hugging Viśvambhara, Lord Nitāi makes Them both float in the tears streaming from His eyes. These are the ways of Lord Nitāi’s ecstasy of spiritual love. Narahari says: The four brothers headed by Śrīvāsa stand there and weet. None of them can remain peaceful.

 
Song 73 (Bālā-rāga or Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 aruṇa nayana          bibidha bhūṣaṇa
          śirete pāga laṭa-paṭiyā
caudike phiri phiri      bāhu-yuga tuli
          nācata hari hari baliyā
Text 2 (Refrain) nitā-i raṅgiyā nāce
aruṇa nayane        o cānda-bayāne
          kata nā mādhurī āche
Text 3 calana sundara        matta kari-bara
          nūpura jhaṅkṛta baliyā
bhābe abaśa         nāhi diga-pāśa
          gaura bali huhuṅkāriyā
Text 4 yateka bhakata        dharaṇī loṭata
          heriyā o cānda-bayāniyā
bāsudeba ghoṣa      kātara bañcita
          māgahuṁ prema-rasa dāniyā

 
     Text 1 Splendid with saffron garments, many ornaments, and glorious turban, calling out, “Hari! Hari!”, with raised arms and turning and turning in the four directions, He dances.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Glorious Lord NItāi dances. His eyes are red. His face is like the moon. How much sweetness resides within Him?
     Text 3 Like an intoxicated elephant He gracefully walks, His anklets jangling. Overcome with ecstasy, He does not know one direction from another. “Gaura!”, He roars. 
     Text 4 Seeing His moonlike face, the devotees, now overcome with ecstasy, roll on the ground. Everyone is plunged in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Only sad Vāsudeva Ghoṣa is not plunged. Only he is cheated.

 
Song 74 (Sindhuḍā-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nitā-i kebala patita janāra bandhu
jība cira puṇya-phale         bidhi āni milāyana
          raṅga mājhe pirītera sindhu
Text 2 diga nehāriya yāya         ḍāke pahum gaura rāya
          abanī paḍaye mūrachiyā
nija sahacara mele       nitā-i kariyā kole
          kānde pahuṁ cānda-mukha cāhiyā
Text 3 naba guñjāruṇa āṅkhi       prema chala chala dekhi
          sumeru upare mandākinī
megha-gabhīra-nāde       punaḥ bhāyā bali ḍāke
          pada-bhare kampita dharaṇī
Text 4 nitā-i karuṇāmaya          jībe dila prema-caya
          ye prema bidhira abidita
nija guṇe prema-dāne          bhāsā-ila tri-bhubane
          bāsudeba ghoṣa se bañcita

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) Lord Nitāi is the fallen soul’s only friend. By harvesting the fruits of many pious deeds a long time growing, a soul may find that destiny brings him to meet Lord Nitāi, Lord Nitāi who is an ocean of the bliss of spiritual love.
     Text 2 Seeing Lord Gaura Rāya apporach, Lord Nitāi calls out to Him and then falls unconscious to the ground. His companions gather around Him. Lord Gaura hugs Lord Nitāi, gazes at His moonlike face, and weeps.
     Text 3 Lord Nitāi’s eyes are like red guñjā. Shedding tears of ecstatic spiritual love, He looks like a golden Mount Sumeru with the heavenly Gaṅgā flowing down its slopes. He roars like a thundercloud. Again and again He calls out, “Brothers!” His footsteps make the earth trmeble.
     Text 4 To the conditioned souls merciful Lord Nitāi gives a great treasure of spiritual love, a treasure unknown even to the demigod Brahmā. Lord Nitāi kindly makes the three worlds float in ecstatic spiritual love. Only Vāsudeva Ghoṣa does not float in that love. Only he was cheated.

 
Song 75 (Sindhuḍā-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nitā-i āmāra parama dayāla
āniyā premera banyā      jagata karila dhanyā
          bharila premera nadī-khāla
Text 2 lāgiyā premera dhe-u       bākī nā rahila ke-u
          pāpī tāpī calila bhāsiyā
sakala bhakata meli      se premete kari keli
          keha keha yāya santāriyā
Text 3 ḍubila nadīyā-pura         ḍube preme śāntipura
          dohe mili bā-ichali khelāya
tā dekhi nitā-i hāse          sakale-i preme bhāse
          bāsu ghoṣa hābuḍubu khāya

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) My Lord Nitāi is supremely merciful. Digging a canal from the ocean of ecstatic spiritual love, He flooded the world with its waters. In this way He made the world very fortunate.
     Text 2 The sad sinners become like ducks floating in the waves of spiritual love. Gathering together, the devotees play in those waters of spiritual love. One after another they swim in those waters.
     Text 3 The towns of Nadīyā were all submerged in those waters. The town of Śāntipura was also submerged. The devotees there gathered and played in the waters. Seeing all this, Lord Nitāi smiled and laughed. Everyone floated in the waters of ecstatic spiritual love. Even Vāsudeva Ghoṣa was plunged in those waters. Rising and falling, and struggling to stay afloat, he drank from those waters.

 
Song 76 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 pūrube gobardhana          dharila anuja yāra
          jaga-jane bale balarāma
ebe se caitanya saṅge         ā-ila kīrtana raṅge
          ānande nityānanda nāma
Text 2 parama udāra          karuṇāmaya bigraha
          bhubana-maṅgala guṇa-dhāma
gaura-pirīti rase       kaṭira basana khase
          abatāra ati anupāma
Text 3 nācata gā-ota         hari hari bolata
          abirata gaura gopāla
hāsa prakāśa        milita madhurādhare
          bolata parama rasāla
Text 4 rāma-dāsera pahuṁ          sundara bigraha
          gaurī-dāsa āra nāhi jāne
akhila loka yata         iha rase unamata
          jñāna dāsa nitā-i guṇa-gāne

 
     Text 1 He whom the world had called Balarāma, Balarāma whose younger brother lifted Govardhana Hill, now joyfully joins Lord Caitanya in the kīrtana dancing-arena. Now His name is Nityānanda. 
     Text 2 Lord nityānanda is supremely noble and generous. His form is made of kindness. He brinsg auspicviousness to all the worlds. He is the abode of all virtues. He is plungednin the nectar of love for Lord Gaura. The garments about His waist are in disarray. He kindly descended to this world. He has no peer.
     Text 3 He dances. He sings, “Hari! Hari!” Without stop He calls, “Gaura! Gopāla!” He laughs. The words that come from His lips are the sweetest nectar.
     Text 4 He is Rama dāsa’s master. His form is graceful and handsome. Gaurī dāsa knows none but Him. He has made all the worlds wild with the taste of the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. In this way Jñāna dāsa sings Lord Nitāi’s glories.

 
Song 77 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) dekha re bhā-i prabala malla-rūpa-dhārī
nāma nitā-i         bhāyā bali royata
          līlā bujha-i nā pāri
Text 2 bhābe bighūrṇita      locana ḍhara ḍhara
          diga-bidiga nāhi jāne
matta siṁha yena         garajana ghana ghana
          jagame bāhu nā māne
Text 3 līlā rasamaya         sundara bigraha
          ānande naṭana bilāsa
kali-mala-dalana         gati ati panthara
          kīrtana karala prakāśa
Text 4 kaṭi-taṭe bibidha          baraṇa paṭa pahiraṇa
          malayaja lepana aṅga
jñāna dāsa kahe          bidshi āni milāyala
          kali mājhe aichana raṅga

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) O my brother, please glance at this person with the body of a pwerful wrestler. His name is Nitāi. Calling out, “O My brothers!”, He weeps. No one can understand His pastimes.
     Text 2 His is overcome by the ecstasy of spiritula love. Tears stream from His restless eyes. He does not know one direction from another. Like a wild lion He roars. 
     Text 3 His pastimes are sweet. His form is graceful and handsome. He enjopys pastimes of blissful dancing. Kali-yuga’s sins He breaks into pieces. His movemets are graceful. He reveals the chanting of the holy names. 
     Text 4 About His waist rests a cloth of many colors. sandal paste anoints His limbs. Jṇāna dāsa says: Destiny brings certain souls to meet Lord Nitāi, who now enjoys pastimes in the Kali-yuga.

 
Song 78 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 ye jana gaurāṅga bhajite cāya
se śaraṇa la-uka         nitā-i-cāndera
          aruṇa du-khāni pāya
Text 2 nitā-i-cāndere ye jana bhaje
saṁsāra-tāpera      śire pada dhari
          amiyā sāgare māje
Text 3 nitā-i yāhā yāhā rahiyā
brahmāra durlabha        prema sudhā-nidhi
          mānasa bhariyā piye
Text 4 ye nitā-i baliyā kānde
jñāna dāsa kahe          gaura-pada se-i
          hiyāra mājhare bāndhe

 
     Text 1 Anyone who yearns to worship Lord Gaurāṅga must first take shelter of Lord Nitāicandra’s reddish feet.
     Text 2 Any person suffering in this world of birth and death who worships Lord Nitāicandra and places on his head Nitāicandra’s feet finds himself plunged in an ocean of nectar.
     Text 3 Anyone who takes shelter of Lord Nitāi finds his heart flooded with with a nectar ocean of ecstatic spiritual love, an ocean the demigod Brahmā finds only with great difficulty. That person tastes the nectar of that ocean.
     Text 4 Jṇāna dasa says: Anyone who calls out, “Nitāi!” and weeps keeps Lord Gaura’s feet always within his heart.

 
Song 79 (Dhānasī-rāga)
 

Text 1 āre mora āre mora nityānanda rāya
āpe nāce āpe gāya caitanya bolāya
Text 2 lamphe lamphe yāya nitā-i gaurāṅga ābeśe
pāpiyā pāṣaṇḍī āra nā rahila deśe
Text 3 paṭṭa-bāsa paridhāna mukutā śrabaṇe
jhalamala kariteche nānā ābharaṇe
Text 4 saṅge saṅge yāya nitā-ira rāmā-i sundara
gaurī-dāsa ādi kari saṅge sahacara
Text 5 caudike nitā-i mora hari-bola bolāya
jñāna-dāsa niśi niśi nitā-ira guṇa gāya

 
     Text 1 Ah! Ah! Nityānanda is my Lord. He dances. “Caitanya!”, He sings.
     Text 2 Filled with love for Lord Gaurāṅga, Lord Nityānanda leaps and leaps. In the place where He stays sinners and blasphemers cannot stay 
     Text 3 He wears glorious colorful garments. Pearl earrings adorn His ears. He has many different glistening ornaments.
     Text 4 Graceful Rāmāi, Gaurī-dāsa, and many others are His companions. 
     Text 5 In the four directions He chants, “Haribol!” Night after night Jṇāna dāsa sings Lord Nitāi’s glories.

 
Song 80 (Deśa-rāga)
 

Text 1 sahaje nitā-i-cāndera rīta
dekhi unamata-jagata-cita
Text 2 abanī kampita nitā-i bhare
bhāyā bhāyā bale gabhīra-sware
Text 3 gaura balite saura-hīna
kānde bā ki bhābe rajanī dina
Text 4 nitā-i-caraṇe ye kare āśa
bṛndābana tāra dāsera dāsa

 
     Text 1 Seeing Lord Nitāicandra’s glories, the hearts of all the world are now wild with bliss.
     Text 2 The earth trembles under Lord Nitāi’s footsteps. “O My brothers! My brothers!”, He calls out in a deep voice.
     Text 3 When the sunlight has gone He still chants, “Gaura!” and weeps. In His ecstasy of spiritual love what are day and night to Him?
     Text 4 Vṛndāvana dāsa is the servant of the servant of every person who yearns to attain Lord Nitāi’s feet.

 
Song 81 (Pāhiḍā-rāga or Gāndhāra-rāga)
 

Text 1 rūpe guṇe anupama          lakṣa koṭi manoramā
          braja-badhū ayute ayute
rāsa-keli rasa raṅge          bihare yāhāra saṅge
          so ebe ki lāgi abadhūta
Text 2 (Refrain) hari hari e dukha kahaba kāra āge
sakala nāgara guru       rasera kalapa-taru
          kene nitā-i phirena bairāge
Text 3 saṅkarṣaṇa śeṣa yāra       aṁśā-kalā abatāra
          anukṣaṇa goloke birāje
śiba bihi agocara        āgama nigama para
          kene nitā-i saṅkīrtana mājhe
Text 4 kṛṣṇera agraja nāma        mahāprabhu balarāma
          kali-yuge śrī-nityānanda
gaura-rase nimagana      karā-ila jaga-jana
          dūre rahu balarāma manda

 
     Text 1 In the past He enjoyed nectar rāsa-dance pastimes with millions and millions and millions and millions of peerlessly beautiful, charming, and saintly vraja-gopīs, but now He is an avadhūta.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Alas! Alas! How can I express my grief? Why does Lord Nitāi, who in the past was the guru of all amorous heroes, and who is a kalpa-taru tree of nectar, now wander about as a sannyāsī?
     Text 3 Why does Lord Nitāi, whose expands as the aṁśa and kalā avatāras Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa and Lord Śeṣa, and who is always gloriously manifest in the spiritual world of Goloka, and who is beyond the seeing-power of Śiva and Brahmā, and who is beyond the Agama and Nigama scriptures, now enjoy pastimes of saṅkīrtana?
     Text 4 He was Lord Kṛṣṇa’s elder brother. He was the great Lord Balarāma. In the Kali-yuga He has become Śrī Nityānanda. Now He has plunged the people of the world into the nectar of love for Lord Gaura. Alas! Only Balarāma dāsa He did not plunge into that nectar. The fool Balarāma dāsa stayed far away.

 
Song 82 (Maṅgala-rāga)
 

Text 1 gajendra-gamane yāya       sa-karuṇa diṭhe cāya
          pada-bhare mahī ṭalamala
matta-siṁha gati jini         kampamāna medinī
          pāṣaṇḍi-gaṇa śuniya bikala
Text 2 (Refrain) āyata abadhūta karuṇāra sindhu
preme gara gara mana          kare hari-saṅkīrtana
          patita-pābana dīna-bandhu
Text 3 huṅkāra kariyā cale        acala sacala naḍe
          preme bhāse amara-samāje
sahacara-gaṇa saṅge          bibidhe khelana raṅge
          alakhite kare saba kāje
Text 4 śeṣa-śāyī saṅkarṣaṇa       abatāri nārāyaṇa
          yāra aṁśa-kalāya gaṇana
kṛpā-sindhu bhakti-dātā       jagatera hita-kartā
          se-i rāma rohiṇī-nandana
Text 5 yāra līlā lābaṇya dhāma         āgama nigama gāna
          yāra rūpa madana-mohana
ebe akiñcana beśe        phire pahuṁ deśe deśe
          uddhāra karena tri-bhubana
Text 6 brajera baidagadhi sāra         yata yata līlā āra
          pā-i-bāre yadi ṭhāke mana
balarāma dāse kaya       manoratha siddhi haya
          bhaja bhaja śrīpāda caraṇa

 
     Text 1 He ealks like the graceful king of elephants. His glances are full of mercy. The earth trembles with His footsteps. His walking defeats the grace of a wild lion. Hearing of Him, the blapshemers are bewildered with fear.
     Text 2 (Refrain) He is a great avadhūta. He is an ocean of mercy. His heart overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, He enjoys pastimes of Hari-saṅkīrtana. He is the purifier of the fallen. He is the friend of the poor.
    Text 3 As He walks He roars. He makes the moving and unmoving beings and even the demigods float in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. With a host of companions He enjoys many blissful pastimes. No one understands how He does what He does.
     Text 4 He reclines on Lord Śeṣa. He is Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa. He is the origin of the avatāras. He is Lord Nārāyaṇa. From Him the aṁśā and kalā avatāras come. He is an ocean of mercy. He is the giver of devotional service. He brings auspiciousness to all the worlds. He is Lord Balarāma, the son of Rohiṇī.
     Text 5 He is the abode of playful pastimes and graceful handsomeness. The Agama and Nigama scriptures sing of His glories. His form is more enchanting than Kāmadeva. Accepting the garments of a penniless sannyāsī, He wanders from place to place. He delivers the three worlds.
     Text 6 In Vraja His intellugence, joking, and playful pastimes are all sublime. Balarāma dāsa says: If you fix your heart on attaining Him, your desires will be all fuflilled. Therefore please worship, worship His glorious feet.

 
Song 83 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 nitā-i mora jībana dhana nitā-i mora gati
nitā-i bihane mora āra nāhi gati  
Text 2 asāra saṁsāra-sukhe diyā mene chā-i
nagare māgiyā khāba gāhaba nitā-i 
Text 3 ye dekha nitā-i nā-i se deśe nā yāba
nitā-i-bimukha janāra mukha nā dekhiba 
Text 4 gaṅgā yāra pada-jala hara śire dhare
hena nitā-i nā bhajiyā duḥkha pāña mare 
Text 5 locana bale āmāra nitā-i premera kalpa-taru
kāṅgālera ṭhākura nitā-i jagatera guru

 
     Text 1 Nitāi is my life and wealth. Nitāi is my exalted status in this world. Without Nitāi I have no good destination.
     Text 2 The useless pleasures this world of birth and death offers I consider worthless like a pile of ashes. In the town I will beg something. Then I will eat. I will always glorify Lord Nitāi.
     Text 3  I will not stay in any country where I cannot see Nitāi. In the faces of persons who spurn Nitāi I will not look. 
     Text 4 The Gaṅgā Śiva places on his head is water that washed Nitāi’s feet. He is tortured with troubles who does not worship Nitāi.
     Text 5 Locana dāsa says: My Nitāi is a kalpa-taru tree of ecstatic spiritual love. Nitāi is the master of the poor. He is the guru of all the worlds. 

 
Song 84 (Sindhuḍā-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) dekha nitā-i-cāndera mādhurī
pulake pūrala tanu       kadamba keśara janu
          bāhu tuli bole hari hari
Text 2 śrī-mukha-maṇḍala dhāma          jini kata koṭi kāma
          se nā bihi kise niramila
mathiyā lābaṇya-sindhu        tāhe niṅgāḍiyā indu
          sudhā diyā mukhāni gaḍila
Text 3 naba kañja-dala āṅkhi      tāraka bhramara pākhī
          ḍubi rahu prema-makarande
se-rūpa dekhila yeha          se jānila rasa-meha
          abanī bhāsala premānande
Text 4 pūrube ye braja-pure       bihare nandera ghare
          rohiṇī-nandana balarāma
ebe padmābatī-suta       nityānanda abadhūta
          bhubana-pābana haila nāma
Text 5 se pahuṁ patita heri       karuṇāmaya abatāri
          jībere bolaya gaura-hari
paḍiyā se bhaba-bandhe        kāndaye locana andhe
          nā dekhiyā se-rūpa mādhurī

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) Look at the glorious sweetness of Lord Nitāicandra! Like kadamba filaments, the hairs of His body stand erect. Raising His arms, He chants, “Hari! Hari!”
     Text 2 How many millions of Kāmadevas does trhe glorious circle of Hisd face defeat? How did the demigod Brahmā create such a face? Perhaps Brahmā churned the ocean of glorious handsomeness, extracted from it a glorious moon, and with the nectar from that moon created Lord Nitāi’s face.
     Text 3 Lord Nitāi’s eyes are lotus petals and his pupils are black bees drowning in the flower-nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Anyone who sees Him knows that Lord Nitāi is a nectar cloud flooding the earth with a monsoon of blissful spiritual love.
     Text 4 In the past He was Rohiṇī’s son Balarāma who enjoyed pastimes in Nanda’s Vrajapura home. Now He is Padmāvatī’s son, the avadhūta Nityānanda, Nityānanda whose name is Bhuvana-pāvana (the purifier of the worlds).
     Text 5 Seeing how the people had become fallen, the Lord descended to this world and taught the fallen souls to chant the holy names “Gaura-Hari!” Fallen in the prison of repeated birth and death, blind Locana dāsa weeps. Never has He seen any sweetness like that of Lord Nitāi.

 
Song 85 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nitā-i-cāndera guṇa ki kahaba āra
emana dayāla nidhi       kabhu nāhi hoyala
          kabhu nāhi hoyaba āra
Text 2 mūḍha pāṣaṇḍī chila        jagā-i mādhā-i duhuṁ
          kāndhā pheli mārila kapāle
rudire bahila nadī       du-bāhu pasāri tamu
          pahuṁ dohe kalayahi kole
Text 3 goloke dulaha dhana        ā-cāṇḍāle bitaraṇa
          jāti kula nā karata bicāra
mukhe hari hari bali          nāciyā nāciyā cale
          du-nayane bahe jala-dhāra
Text 4 āpahi mātala          jagata mātā-ola
          khene kānde khene mṛdu hāsa
āpana preme bhorā        nitā-i māto-yārā
          ki bujhaba pāmara dīna hari-dāsa

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) How shall I describe Lord Nitāicandra’s glories? He is an ocean of compassion. Never has there been anyone like Him. Never will there be anyone like Him.
     Text 2 Two fools and blasphemers, Jagāi and Mādhāi, struck Lord Nitāi’s forehead with a pottery fragment and mad a river of blood to flow. Still Lord Nitāi extended His arms and hugged His two attackers.
     Text 3 Lord Nitāi freely gave away the rare treasure of Goloka, gave it even to the cāṇḍālas. He did not consider the caste or family of anyone who received His gift. With His mouth He chanted, “Hari! Hari!” He danced and danced. Flooding rivers of tears flowed from His eyes.
     Text 4 He became like a wild man. He made the whole world wild in the ecstasy of spiritual love. One moment He wept. The next moment He gently smiled and laughed. Lord Nitāi became wild with the ecstasy of spiritual love. How can the poor fallen wretch Haridāsa understand Him?

 
Song 86 (Daśa-rāga)
 

Text 1 dekha dekha mora nityānanda
bhubana-mohana prema ānanda
Text 2 prema-dātā mora nitā-i-cānda
jane jane de-i premera phānda
Text 3 nitā-i baraṇa kanaka cāmpā
bidhi dila rūpa añjali māpā
Text 4 dekhite nitā-i sabā-i dhāya
dhari kole nite sabāre cāya
Text 5 nitā-i bale bala gaura-hari
preme nāce bāhu ūrdhwa kari
Text 6 nācaye nitā-i gaura-rase
bañcita e rādhā-ballabha dāse

 
     Text 1 Look! Look at my Lord Nityānanda! He charms all the worlds. He is filled with the bliss of spiritual love.
     Text 2 My Lord Nitāicandra freely gives the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. For person after person He has set a trap of spiritual love.
     Text 3 Lord Nitāi is splendid like a golden campaka flower. Standing before Him, the demigod Brahmā folds his hands.
     Text 4 Everyone runs to see Lord Nitāi. Lord Nitāi gives everyone a glance and a hug.
     Text 5 Lord Nitāi chants, “Bolo Gaura-Hari!” Raising His arms, He dances in the ecstasy of spiritual love.
     Text 6 Tasting the nectar of spiritual love for Lord Gaura, Lord Nitāi dances. Alas! Rādhā-vallabha dāsa did not taste that nectar of spiritual love. Of that taste he was cheated.

 
Song 87 (Tuḍī-rāga)
 

Text 1 ānanda kanda          nitā-i cānda
          aruṇa nayāna bayāna chanda
karu nūpura         saghana jhura
          hari hari bali bola re
naṭana raṅga        bhakata saṅga
          bibidha bhāṣa rasa-taraṅga
īṣat hāsa      madhura bhāṣa
          saghane gīma dola re
Text 2 patita kora      jagata gaura
          e dina rajanī ānande bhora
prema-ratana        kariyā yatana
          jaga-jane karu dāna re
kīrtana mājha       rasika-rāja
          yaichana kanayā giri birāja
braja-bihāra          rasa bithāra
          madhura madhura gāna re
Text 3 dhūli dhūsara       dharaṇī upara
          kabahuṁ aṭṭa-hāsa re
kabahuṁ loṭata      preme gara gara
          kabahuṁ calita kabahuṁ khelata
kabahuṁ sweda       kabahuṁ kheda
          kabahuṁ pulaka swara abheda
kabahuṁ lampha      kabahuṁ jhampa
          dīrgha-śwāsa re
Text 4 karuṇā sindhu         akhila bandhu
          kali-yuga-tama-pulaka-indu
jagata-locana       paṭa-mocana
          nitā-i pūrala āśa re
andha adhama        dīna durjana
          prema-dāne karala mocana
pā-ola jagata       kebala bañcita
          e rādhā-ballabha dāsa re

 
     Text 1 Lord Nitāicandra is the root of transcendental bliss. His eyes are reddish. His face is glorious. His anklets jangle. He chants, “Hari! Hari!” Surrounded by the devotees, He enjoys pastimes of dancing. His talking is waves of nectar. He gently smiles. His words are sweet. His neck sways to and fro.
     Text 2 He hugs the fallen souls. Lord Gaura is the whole world to Him. Day and night He is overcome with spiritual bliss. To the people of this world He earnestly gives the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. In the kīrtana of chanting the holy names, He is the king of they who taste nectar. He glistens like a golden mountain. He sings sweet sweet songs of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s nectar Vraja pastimes.
     Text 3 Falling to the ground, He is covered wityh dust. He loudly laughs. Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, He rolls about on the ground. Sometimes He is restless. Sometimes He is playful. Sometimes He perspires. Sometimes He laments. Sometimes His bodily hairs stand up. Sometimes He calls out. Sometimes He leaps. Sometimes He hides and let out long sighs.
     Text 4 He is an ocean of mercy. He is everyone’s friend. He is a moon glistening in the darkness of Kali-yuga. He gives eyes to the people of the world. He pulls away the curtain of illusions. He fulfills everyone’s desires. To the blind, fallen, poor, wicked souls of this world He gives the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. He delivers all the world. Only Rādhā-vallabha dāsa is not delivered. Only he is cheated.

 
Song 88 (Paṭha-mañjarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 nitā-i-cānda dayāmaya nitā-i-cānda dayāmaya
kali-jībe eta dayā kāru nāhi haya
Text 2 khene kāla khene gorā khene aṅga pīta
khene hāse khene kānde khene nā pāya sambita
Text 3 khene goṁ goṁ kare gora balite nā pāre
gorā rāge rāṅgā āṅkhi jale-i santāre
Text 4 āpani bhāsiyā jale bhāsā-ola kṣiti
e bhaba acale yadu rahala abadhi

 
     Text 1 Lord Nitāicandra is merciful. Lord Nitāicandra is merciful. No one gives mercy as He does to Kali-yuga’s souls.
     Text 2 One moment He is dark. The next moment He is fair. The next moment He is yellow. The next moment He laughs. The next moment He weeps. The next moment He falls unconscious. 
     Text 3 The next moment, unable to speak Lord Gaura’s name, He moans “Goṁ goṁ”. He swims in tears streaming from His eyes, eyes reddened with spiritual love for lord Gaura.
     Text 4 He floats in the ocean opf spiritual love. He makes the whole world float in that ocean. Only Yadu dāsa, who stands on the mountain top of repeated birth and death, remains untouched by that ocean.

 
Song 89 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 baḍa-i dayāla āmāra        nityānanda rāya re
          kāṅgālera ṭhākura
ghare gahre prema-dhana       yāciyā bilāya re
          tarā-ila āndhala ātura
Text 2 ḍhuliyā ḍhuliyā cale       premāra ābeśe re
          yena mada matta mātoyārā
khene khene kānde ara         khene khene hāse re
          bhā-iyaṛa bhābete jñāna-hārā
Text 3 kṛpā-sindhu dīna-bandhu         nitā-i dayāla re
          agatira gati prema-dātā
ananta dāsera hiyā       dibā-niśi māge re
          nitā-ira pāda-padma rātā

 
     Text 1 My Nityānanda Rāya is very merciful, O! He is the Lord of the poor. Going from house to house, He begs everyone to accept His gift of ecstatic spiritual love, O! He delivers the suffering blind souls. 
     Text 2 Swaying to and fro, He walks, overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, O! He is wild like a man drunk from wine. Moment after moment He weeps. Moment after moment He laughs, O! He falls unconscious, overcome with ecstatic spiritual love for His brother.
     Text 3 He is an ocean of mercy. He is the friend of the poor. Nitāi is merciful, O! He is the shelter of they who have no shelter. He is the giver of ecstatic spiritual love. Day and night Ananta dāsa’s heart prays, O, to Lord Nitāi’s reddish lotus feet.

 
Song 90 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 preme matta mahā-balī      cale diga diga dali
          dharaṇī dharite nāre bhāra
aṅga-bhaṅgī sundara      gati ati manthara
          ki chāra kuñjara mātoyāra
Text 2 preme pulakita tanu        kanaka kadamba janu
          prema-dhārā bahe duṭī āṅkhe
nāce gāya gora-guṇe        pūraba paiḍāche mane
          bhā-iyā bhā-iyā bali ḍāke
Text 3 huhuṅkāra malasāṭe         keśarīra raba chūṭe
          śuni buka phāṭi mare pāṣaṇḍīra jana
laguḍa nāhika sāte       aruṇa kañjaka hāte
          haladhara mahā-bīra bālā
Text 4 kebala patita-bandhu       ratnera ratana sindhu
          āndhera locana parakāśa
patitera abaśeṣe         rahileka gupta-dāse
          punaḥ pahu nā kaila tallāsa

 
     Text 1 He is very powerful. He is wild in the ecstasy of spiritual love. He walks in one direction and then another. The earth cannot bear the weight of His footsteps. His form is graceful and handsome. His footsteps are slow. Is He an elephant drunk on wine? 
     Text 2 The hairs of His body stand erect in the ecstasy of spiritual love, erect like the filaments of a golden kadamba flower. Flooding rivers of tears of spiritual love stream from His eyes. He dances. He sings of Lord Gaura’s glories. In His heart He thinks of the past. “Brother! Brother!”, He calls. 
     Text 3 He roars. He beats His chest. He roars like a lion. Hearing His roar, the blasphemers feel their hearts crack into shards. His mace is not meek and shy. His hands are red lotus flowers. He is the great hero Balarāma.
     Text 4 He is the fallen soul’s only friend. He is an ocean filled with the jewels of jewels. He gives eyes to the blind. The only fallen soul remaining is Gupta dāsa, Gupta dāsa who still does not search for His Lord. 

 
Song 91 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) mari yā-i emana nitā-i kena nā bhajila
hari hari dhik āre      ki buddhi lāgila more
          hate nidhi pā-iyā hārā-ila
Text 2 emana dayāra sindhu       patita janāra bandhu
          tri-bhubane āra dekhi nā-i
abadhūta-beśe phiri      jībe dila nāma hari
          hāse nāce kānde āre bhā-i
Text 3 nitā-ira pratāpa heri      yama kāmpe tharahari
          pāche tāra adhikāra yāya
pāpī tāpī yata chila          nitā-i saba nistārila
          eḍā-ila śamanera dāya
Text 4 hare kṛṣṇa hari-nāma       bale nitā-i abiśrāma
          bhaye śamana dūre palā-ila
mohana madete andha      biṣaye rahila bandha
          nitā-i bhajite nā pā-ila

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) Alas! Alas! Why did I not worship Lord Nitāi? Alas! Alas! Alas! What was I thinking? I had a precious treasure in my hand, and I threw it away.
     Text 2 He is an ocean of mercy. He is the friend of the fallen. In the three worlds I never saw anyone like Him. In the garments of an avadhūta He wanders. He gives Lord Hari’s holy name to the souls in this world. O my brothers, He laughs, dances, and weeps. 
     Text 3 Seeing Lord NItai’s power, Yamaraja trembles in fear. All powers follow Lord Nitāi. Lord Nitāi delivers the troubled sinners. Now they are shunned by Yamarāja’s punishments.
     Text 4 Without stop Lord NItāi chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Now frightened Yamarāja flees far away. Blinded by a host of illusions, Mohana dāsa ramains shackled to materialism. Alas! He did not worship Lord Nitāi.

 
Song 92 (Paṭha-mañjarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 dayā kara more nitā-i dayā kara more
agatira gari nitā-i sādhu loke bale
Text 2 jaya prema-bhakti-dātā patākā tomāra
uttama adhama kichu nā kara bicāra
Text 3 prema-dāne jagaj-janera mana kaila sukhī
tumi dayāra ṭhākura āmi kena duḥkhī
Text 4 kānurāma dāsa bale ki baliba āmi
e baḍa bharasā mora kulera ṭhākura tumi

 
     Text 1 O Lord NItāi, please me merciful to me. Please me merciful to me. O Lord NItāi, the devotees say You are the shelter of the fallen souls who have no shelter.
     Text 2 Glory to You! Among the saints that give the gift of devotional service and spiritual love, You are the leader, the leader that carries the flag. You make no distinction of high and low. You give that gift to everyone.
     Text 3 Your gift of spiritual love brings happiness to the hearts of all the world. You are the Lord of mercy. When You are present, how can I remain unhappy?
     Text 4 Kānurāma dāsa says: What shall I say? O Lord Nitāi, my faith rests in You. You are the Deity I and my family worship.

 
Song 93 (Kalyāṇa-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) āyata nityānanda adabhuta cānda
sahaja gamana       naṭana gati sundara
          tri-bhubana jana mohana chānda
Text 2 bayana nayana         su-bimala sundara
          ambuja madhulika bhuja-yuga bhānti
aruṇādhara-dyuti         aruṇiha śobhe ati
          daśana moti-phala pānti
Text 3 bhaba-tāpita jana          siñcaha sa-karuṇa
          bacana pīyūṣa-rasa dhāre
hare kṛṣṇa nāma          kiraṇe nāśa-i saba
          durbāsanā āndhiyāre
Text 4 caudike saṅgī         raṅgī uḍu maṇḍala
          niśi diśi cānda parakāśe
śrī-jāhnabā-ballabha          śrī-pāda-pallaba
          āśe śrī-kānu dāsa bhāṣe

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) Lord Nityānanda is like a wonderful glorious moon. His walking and dancing are graceful. He enchants everyone in the three worlds.
     Text 2 His eyes and face are glorious and handsome. His two arms glisten like lotus flowers and black bees. His red lips glisten like the dawning sun. His teeth are like a row of pearls.
     Text 3 The souls suffering in this world of birth and death He splashes with the nectar of kind words. With the glorious effulgence of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra He destroys the blinding darkness of sinful desires.
     Text 4 Surrounded on four sides by His asosciates, He is like a moon surrounded by a host of stars, a moon that lights up the night. He is Jāhnavā’s graceful beloved. Yearning to attain His graceful lotus feet, Kānu dāsa speaks these words.

 
Song 94 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 preme mātoyārā nitā-i nāgara
atulita prema dayāra sāgara
Text 2 prema-bhare antara gara gara
nā jānena pahuṁ ke āpana para
Text 3 hena dayā kothā e dharaṇī para
deya prema deba-bidhi agocara
Text 4 pātakī uddhāra kārya nirantara
patitera dukhe netra jhara jhara
Text 5 yāci prema deya sabe akātara
aphuranta yena bhāṇḍāra sundara
Text 6 kānu dāsa kahe juḍi du-i kara
pade diha sthāna e dīna kiṅkāra

 
     Text 1 Lord Nitāi is wild in the ecstasy of spiritual love. He is a peerless ocean of mercy.
     Text 2 Who is His companion and who is an outsider? His heart overcome with spiritual love, Lord Nitāi does not know.
     Text 3 Where on the earth is any mercy like His? He gives away ecstatic spiritual love, love beyond the rules of the Vedas.
     Text 4 He always tries to deliver the sinners. Compassionately feeling the fallen souls’ sufferings, He weeps, tears flowing from His eyes.
     Text 5 He begs everyone to accept His gift of ecstatic spiritual love, a gift that makes one always free of all suffering. He is the abode of all glorious handsomeness.
     Text 6 Folding his palms, Kānu dāsa says: O Lord, please give this poor servant a place somewhere at Your feet.

 
Song 95 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nitā-i karuṇāmaya abatāra
dekhi dīna-hīna          karaye prema-dāna
          āgama nigama sāra
Text 2 sahaje ḍhara ḍhara         sa-jala niramala
          kamala jiniyā diṭhi śobhā
badana-maṇḍala      koṭi śaśadhara
          jiniyā jaga-mana-lobhā
Text 3 bacana amiyā          śrabaṇe dūre gela
          pātakīra mana-āndhiyāra
aṅga cikkaṇa        madana-mohana
          kaṇṭhe śobhe maṇi-hāra
Text 4 nabīna kari-kara       jiniyā bhuja-bara
          tāhe śobhe hemamaya daṇḍa
heriyā saba loka         pāśare duḥkha śoka
          khaṇḍaye hṛdaya pāṣaṇḍa
Text 5 nitā-ira karuṇāya          abanī bhāsala
          pūrala jaga-mana āśa
o prema-leśa        paraśa nā pā-iyā
          kaṇḍaye harirāma dāsa

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) Merciful Lord Nitāi has descended to this world. Seeing the poor fallen people, He gives them the gift of ecstatic spiritual love, a gift that is the greatest glory of the Agama and Nigama scriptures.
     Text 2 The graceful splendor of His eyes defeats the splendid lotus flower splashed with drops of water. The circle of Hisd face defeats millions of moon. The hearts of this world yearn to attain Him.
     Text 3 When His nectar words enter the ear, the sins that blind the heart flee far away. His glistening limbs are more enchanting than Kāmadeva. A jewel necklace glistens on His neck.
     Text 4 His arms defeat the young elephant’s trunk. He carries a glistening mace. Glancing at the people, He severs the ropes of suffering, grief, and sin that knot every heart.
     Text 5 Lord Nitāi fulfills the desires in every heart in this world. He kindly makes the whole world float in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Unable, alas, to touch even a single drop of that nectar of ecstatic spiritual love, Harirāma dāsa weeps.

 
Song 96 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) jaya jaya nityānanda rāya
aparādha pāpa mora       tāhāra nāhika ora
          uddharaha nija karuṇāya
Text 2 āmāra asata mati      tomāra nāme nāhi rati
          kahite nā bāsi mukhe lāja
janame janame kata       kariyāchi ātma-ghāta
          ata eba se mora e-i kāja
Text 3 tumi-o karuṇā-sindhu       pātakī janāra bandhu
          ebāra karaha yadi tyāga
patita-pābana nāma       nirmala se anupāma
          tāhāte lāgaye baḍa dāga
Text 4 pūrube yabana-ādi          kata kata aparādhī
          tarā-icha śuniyāche kāṇe
kṛṣṇa-dāsa anumāni       ṭhelite nāribe bumi
          yadi ghṛṇā nā karaha mane

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) O Lord Nityānanda Rāya, glory, glory to You! O Lord, please do not think of my sins and offenses. Please kindly deliver me.
     Text 2 My heart is very sinful. It is not attracted to your holy names. I do not like to speak of these things. Shame fills my mouth. In how many births after births did I kill any chance to make spiritual advancement? That is why I am in such a state.
     Text 3 You are an ocean of mercy. You are the friend of the sinners. If You abandon me now, then Your peerless and glorious reputation as Patita-pāvana (purifier of the fallen) is only a great trick.
     Text 4 How many yavanas and other offenders have You already delivered? With my own ears I heard how You delivered them. I, Kṛṣṇa dāsa, think this: O my Lord, if in Your heart You do not hate me, please do not push me away.

 
Song 97 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 adoṣa daraśi mora prabhu nityānanda
nā bhajinu hena prabhura caraṇārabinda
Text 2 hāya re nā jāni mu-i kemana asura
pā”ā nā bhajinu hena dayāra ṭhākura
Text 3 hāya re abhāgāra prāṇa ki sukhe āchaha
nitā-i baliyā kena mariyā nā yāha
Text 4 nitā-ira karuṇā śuni pāṣāṇa milāya
hāya re daruṇa hiyā nā darabe tāya
Text 5 nitā-i caitanya aparādha nāhi māne
yāre tāre nija prema-bhakti kare dāne
Text 6 tāra nāma la-ite nā gale mora hiyā
kṛṣṇa-dāsa kahe mu-i baḍa abhāgiyā

 
     Text 1 I pray that Lord Nityānanda will not look at my sins, I did not worship the Lord’s lotus feet.
     Text 2 Alas! I did not know. What a demon I was. I did not worship Lord Nitāi, the Lord of mercy.
     Text 3 O my unfortunate heart! Will you ever become happy? Why do you not call out, “Nitāi!”, and die.
     Text 4 When they hear of Lord NItāi’s mercy, even the stones melt. O my cruel heart, you do not melt when you hear His glories.
     Text 5 To persons who do not offend Lord Caitanya, Lord Nitāi gives the gift of spiritual love and devotion.
     Text 6 Alas! The Lord’s holy name does not rest on my throat or in my heart. Kṛṣṇa dāsa says: I am very unfortunate.

 
Song 98 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 gorā-preme gara gara nitā-i āmāra
aruṇa-nayane bahe suradhunī-dhāra
Text 2 bipula-pulakābalī śohe pahuṁ gāya
gajendra-gamane heli duli cali yāya
Text 3 patitere nirakhiyā du-bāhu pasāri
kole kari saghane bolaya hari hari
Text 4 emana dayāra nidhi ke ha-ibe āra
narahari adhama tarite abatāra

 
     Text 1 My Lord Nitāi is overcome with ecstatic love for Lord Caitanya. From Lord Nitāi’s reddened eyes flows a celestial Gaṅgā of tears.
     Text 2 The hairs of His body stand erect. Swaying to and fro, He walks like the king of elephants.
     Text 3 Seeing a fallen sinner, He extends His two arms, hugs the sinner, and begs, “Chant, `Hari! Hari!’ “
     Text 4 Lord Nitāi is an ocean of mercy. How could it be otherwise. After all, He descended to this world to deliver the fallen sinner Narahari.

 
Song 99 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 prabhu nityānanda rāma          rūpe guṇe anupāma
          padmābatī-garbhe janamila
nija gaṇa la-iyā saṅge        dwādaśa batsara raṅge
          śrī-ekacakrāya bilāsiyā
Text 2 gora abatīrṇa haile        sannyāsīra saṅga chale
          bāhira ha-ila ghara haite
tīrtha paryaṭana kare         biṁśati barṣera pare
          ānande ā-ila nadīyāte
Text 3 pāñā prāṇa gorācānde         paḍi se premera phānde
          daṇḍa kamaṇḍalu phele dūre
sadā mati saṅkīrtane          kṣetre cale prabhu sane
          prabhu daṇḍa tina-khaṇḍa kare
Text 4 prabhura ādeśa mate        gauḍe āsi kṣetra haite
          prabhu-mano-hita karma haila
dāsa narahari gati       basu jāhnabāra pati
          yāre tāre prema bilā-ila

 
     Text 1 Lord Nityānanda Rāma, whose virtues and handsomeness are without peer, took birth from Padmāvatī’s womb. For twelve years, He enjoyed pastimes of playing with His childhood friends in the village of Ekacakra.
     Text 2 When Lord Gaura descended to this world, Lord Nityānanda, on the pretext of accompanying a sannyāsī, left home. He traveled to many holy places. Then, after twenty years, He joyfully entered Nadīyā.
     Text 3 Lord Gauracandra was His very life. He fell into the trap Lored Gauracandra had set, the trap of ecstatic spiritual love. The daṇḍa and kamaṇḍalu He threw far away. His heart was always in saṅkīrtana. He accompanied Lord Gauracandra on the journey to Jagannātha-kṣetra. Lord Gauracandra’s daṇḍa He broke in three.
     Text 4 On Lord Gauracandra’s command He left Jagannātha-kṣetra and returned to Gauḍa-deśa. He strove to satisfy the desire in Lord Gauracandra’s heart. He freely gave away the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. He is Jāhnavā’s and Vasudhā’s husband and Narahari dāsa’s shelter.

 
Song 100 (Aśābarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) āju ānande nitā-i-cānde
śobhamaya siṁhā-         sane basā-iyā
          keha nā dhairaja bāndhe
Text 2 su-bāsita gaṅgā-jala laiyā
paḍi mantra māthe        ḍhale jala
          dāmodara haraṣita haiyā
Text 3 jaya jaya dhwani kari
mānuṣa misāñā        sura-gaṇa śobhā
          nirakhe nayana bhari
Text 4 keha gāya abhiṣeka raṅge
pā-iyā śuṣka-       bāsa narahari
          candana de-i se aṅge

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) Now Lord Nitāicandra joyfully sits on the lion-throne. He is handsome and glorious. Now no one is peaceful.
     Text 2 Chanting mantras, joyful Dāmodara pours scented Gaṅgā water on the Lord’s head.
     Text 3 There is a great tumult of “Jaya! Jaya!” Mingling amongst the humans, the demigods gaze at the Lord’s glory. They fill their eyes with the sight of Him.
     Text 4 Someone sings. The abhiṣeka is gloriously performed. I, Narahari dāsa, bring dry garemnts. I anoint Lord Nitāicandra’s limbs with sandal paste.

 
Song 101 (Belābalī-rāga or Maṅgala-rāga)
 

Text 1 āju śubha-kṣaṇe       nitā-i-cāndera
          adhibāse kibā śobhāra ghaṭā
nirupama beśe       bilāsaye bhāle
          jhalamala kare aṅgera chaṭā
Text 2 kata śata mana-       matha-mada-hare
          hāsi niśā-mukha candramā cāru
kañja-dala-dali          lalita locana
          cāhani nā rākhe dhairaja kāru
Text 3 cāri-pāśe bipra       beda uccarāye
          cāru-bhaṅgī heri haraṣa hiyā
nārī-gaṇa-mana      uthale ulase
          ghana ghana ulu lululu diyā
Text 4 nānā bādya-dhwani          bhedaye gagana
          nāce nartaka ki madhura gati
jaya jaya rabe      bharaye bhubana
          bhaṇe ghanaśyāma kautuka ati

 
     Text 1 At this auspicious moment Lord Nitāicandra’s adhivasa ritual is splendid and glorious. Lord Nitāi’s garments are peerless. His forehead is graceful and splendid. His limbs glisten with glory.
     Text 2 Glistening in the night, the moon of Lord Nitāi’s face robs away the pride of how many hundreds of Kāmadevas? His graceful playful eyes, eyes like lotus petals, cast many graceful glances. He cannot remain peaceful.
     Text 3 Around HIm on four sides, the brāhmaṇas chant the Vedas. gazing at Lord Nitāi’s graceful form, they feel great bliss in their hearts. Their hearts flooded with bliss, the ladies warble, “Ulu-lululu!”
     Text 4 Many musical instruments play tumultuous music that breaks the sky. The dancers dance. How sweet are their movements! The whole world is filled with sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!” Joyful Ghanaśyāma dasa speaks these words.

 
Song 102 (Bhūpālī-rāga)
 

Text 1 basudhā jāhnabā debī śobhā-bidhi, adhibāsa-bhūṣa-bhūṣita tanu
jhalamala kare cāru ruci chaṭā, taḍita kuṅkuma ketakī janu
Text 2 cāri-pāśe bipra-gaṇa dhanya mane, cāhi kanyā-pāne haraṣa-hiyā
beda-dhwani kari kare āśirbāda, dhānya dūrbā duhuṁ mastake diyā
Text 3 paṇḍita-gharaṇī dharaṇīte pada, nā dharaya hiyā dhairaja bāndhe
bibidha maṅgala karu sakhī-kula, ulu lulu de-i kata nā sādhe
Text 4 śaṅkha ghaṇṭā ādi bādya bāje bahu, kolāhala nāhi tulanā dite
bhaṇe narahari sura-nārī alakhita dekhe kata kautuka cite

 
     Text 1 Their forms decorated with ornaments for the adhivāsa, the goddesses Vasudhā and Jāhnavā shine with great splendor. They glisten with great beauty. They glisten like lightning, or kuṅkuma, or ketakī flowers.
     Text 2 From the four directions brahmanas offer blessing. With joyful hearts, they glance at the the two girls. They chant the Vedas. They speak words of blessing. With auspicious dūrvā grass they touch the two girls’ heads.
     Text 3 Although their feet peacefully rest upon the ground, the paṇḍitas’ wives find they cannot keep their hearts at all peaceful and still. The girls all offer auspicious blessings. “Ulu-lulu!”, they warble. How many desires fill their hearts?
     Text 4 Conchshells, bells, and a host of musical instruments sound. A tumult arises, a tumult without equal. Narahari dāsa says: How many demigoddesses came and, unnoticed by the others, with joyful hearts watched all of this?

 
Song 103 (Deśapāla-rāga)
 

Text 1 koṭi manamatha-garabha-bhara-hara parama sughara nitā-i haladhara
karata gamana caḍi naba caudale chabi chala chalakaye
beśa biraci bibāha mata kata, bhānti bhūṣaṇa aṅge bilasata
lalita locana-khañja mukha mṛdu-hāsa mañjula jhalakaye
Text 2 rūpa pibā-ite matta atiśaya, karata bhūsura-bṛnda jaya jaya
bandī-gaṇa-mana-modita ghana ghana bimala yaśa parakāśaye
teji nija nija geha dhāyata, nārī-purukha nameha pāyata
nirakhi rahu cahu ora nimikhana-daraśa-rasa-sukhe bhāsaye
Text 3 gāna karu guṇī tāla-śruti sura, rāga mūrachana grāma-sumadhura
naṭata nartaka ughaṭita kataka thaitā thai thai nini ni na
bādya bādaka ba-oye bahutara, tāla prakaṭa nā hota paṭatara thoṅkṛ na na na na thunga thuṅkāta dhodhilaṅga dhiki dhiki ninā
Text 4 dīpa-damake asaṅkhya kṣiti-para, dibasa saba bhela rajanī ujora
bipula kala-kala-dhwani-nirata saba loka gati-patha śohaye
gagana-gata lakhi deba alakhita, sa-rasa baraṣata kusuma pulakita
dāsa narahari pahuka atula bilāsa jaga-mana mohaye

 
     Text 1 Lord Balarāma has nowe become glorious lord Nitāi, Lord Nitāi who robs many millions of Kāmadevas of all their pride. He rides in a palanquin. He shines with great splendor. How many glorious gasrments dopes He wear for His wedding? Many ornaments glisten on His body. His eyes are graceful playful lotus flowers. His smile is gentle. He is graceful and glorous.
     Text 2 Drinking the nectar of the sight of his glorious form, the brāhmaṇas become wild with bliss. “Jaya! Jaya!”, tbey chant. With joyful hearts the poets recite poems describing the Lord’s pure and splendid glories. Men and women run from their homes. They bow down before Lord Nitāi’s feet. With unblinking eyes they gaze at Lord Nitāi. Now they float in the nectar of bliss. 
     Text 3 Singers sing songsa with graceful rhythms and melodies, sweet songs that charm the heart.  Beating out the rhythms, “Thaitā thai thai nini ni na!”, how many dances do the dancers dance? Many musical instruments sound. “Thoṅkṛ na na na na thunga thuṅkāta dhodhilaṅga dhiki dhiki ninā!”, they declare. Never have there been such graceful rhythms.
     Text 4 Numberless lamps light the night, make it glisten like day. Sweet sounds are everywhere. Traveling on the pathways, the people are splendid and glorious. Unseen, the demigods watch from the sky. They shower a sweet rain of flowers. The master of Narahari dāsa enjoys peerless pastimes, pastimes that charm the peoples’ hearts.

 
Song 104 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 bhubana-pābana nitā-i mora
nā jāni ki bhābe sadā-i bhora
Text 2 gorā gorā bali du-bāhu tuli
matta-gaja yena calaye ḍhuli
Text 3 kaṇṭhe jhalamala mālatī-mālā
parisara buke karaye khelā
Text 4 su-lalita-mukhe madhura hāsi
cānde ḍhale yena amiñā-rāśi
Text 5 ṭalamala jala jāruṇa āṅkhi
se cāhani cāru karuṇā mākhi
Text 6 bāreka se āṅkhe dekhaye yāre
premera pāthāre bhāsaya tāre
Text 7 dīna-hīna duḥkhī kichu nā bāche
hena prema-dātā ke āra āche
Text 8 narahari hena prabhu nā bhaji
biṣaya-biśeṣe rahila maji

 
     Text 1 My Lord Nitāi purifies all the worlds. How is He always overcome with the ecstasy of spiritual love? I do not know.
     Text 2 Raising His arms, He chants, “Gaura! Gaura!” Liek an intoxicated elephant, He sways to and fro.
     Text 3 On His neck glistens a jasmine garland, a garland that playfully rests on His chest.
     Text 4 On His graceful playful face is a gentle smile. From the moon of His face flows a flood of nectar.
     Text 5 Tears stream from His eyes. His glance is filled with mercy.
     Text 6 Any person who once sees Him with his own eyes floats in an ocean of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 7 He does not consider who is poor, or fallen, or troubled. Who is not like that? To every person He gives the gift of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 8 Alas! Narahari dāsa did not worship Lord Nitāi. That is why Narahari dāsa is now plunged in materialistic life.

 
Song 105 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 nitā-i guṇa-nidhi          śobhāra abadhi
          ki sudhāya bidhi gaḍila sādhe
prabhātera bhānu         jini tanu-chaṭā
          heriyā kemana dhairaja bāndhe
Text 2 ājānu-lambita         bhuja bhujaṅgama
          bhaṅgī nirupama raṅgete bhāsi
badana śarada-      bidhu-ghaṭā ghana
          bariṣaye sudhā īṣat hāsi
Text 3 gorā gorā bali        gara gara hiyā
          heli duli cale kuñjara pārā
ṭalamala jala-      jāruṇa-locana
          jhara jhara jhare ānanda-dhārā
Text 4 sura-nara-gaṇa       dhāya cāri-pāśe
          se dulaha pada paraśa-āśe
dāsa narahari       pahuṁ paratāpe
          balī kali-kāla kāmpaye trāse

 
     Text 1 Lord Nitāi is a treasure-house of virtues. He stands at the apex of glory and handsomeness. What nectar flows from Him! The effulgence of His form defeats the rising sun. After seeing Him, how can anyone remain still and peaceful?
     Text 2 His arms are like snaks reaching to His knees. He floats in playful gracefulness, gracefulness without peer. His face is like the autumn moon. His gentle smile showers nectar.
     Text 3 He chants, “Gaura! Gaura!” His heart is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. Swaying to and fro, He walks like an intoxicated elephant. From His eyes stream tears, tears like flooding rivers of spiritual bliss.
     Text 4 Yearning to touch His feet, feet found only with great difficulty, the demigods and humans run from the four directions. Aha! The invicible power of Narahari dāsa’s master makes strong Kali-yuga tremble in fear.

 
Song 106 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 nitā-i karuṇā-nidhi
āni milā-ila bidhi
Text 2 dīna-hīna dukhī jane
dhanī kaila prema-dhane
Text 3 priya-parikara saṅge
nāciyā bulaya raṅge
Text 4 nā jāni ki preme māti
nā jāne dibasa rāti
Text 5 gorā gorā bali kānde
tile nā dhairaja bāndhe
Text 6 dhūli dhūsarita dehā
tā heri ke dhare thehā
Text 7 guṇe kebā nāhi jhure
eka narahari dūre

 
     Text 1 Lord Nitāi is an ocean of mercy. The rules of religion rest in Him.
     Text 2 To the poor, fallen, unhappy people He gives the treasure of ecstatic spiritual love. He makes them wealthy in that treasure.
     Text 3 Surrounded by His dear associates, He dances in the dancing-circle.
     Text 4 How has He become intoxicated with ecstatic spiritual love? I do not know. He does not know if it is day or night.
     Text 5 Chanting, “Gaura! Gaura!”, He weeps. Not a single sesame seed’s worth of peaceful restraint remains within Him.
     Text 6 His body is covered with dust. Seeing Him, who can remain peaceful?
     Text 7 Seeing His glories, who will not weep in ecstasy? Alas! Only Narahari dāsa stays far away from that ecstasy.

 
Song 107 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 gorā-preme mātiyā nitā-i
jagata mātāya sa-karuṇa diṭhe ca-i
Text 2 nācaye ājānu bāhu tuli
patitera kolete paḍaye ḍhuli ḍhuli
Text 3 kata sukhe hiyā nā uthale
mukha buka bhāsi yāya nayanera jale
Text 4 prati aṅge pulakera ghaṭā
madana mūrachi paḍe dekhi rūpa-chaṭā
Text 5 su-cānda-badane mṛdu hāsi
kahite madhura kathā ḍhāle sudhā-rāśi
Text 6 ki naba bhaṅgimā rāṅgā pāya
narahari parāṇa majila mene tāya

 
     Text 1 Intoxicated by the ecstasy of spiritual love for Lord Gaura, with a merciful glance Lord Nitāi now makes the whole world also intoxicated with that ecstasy.
     Text 2 Raising His arms, arms that reach to His knees, Lord Nitāi dances. Hu hugs the fallen souls. He sways to and fro. Overcome with ecstatic love, he falls to the ground.
     Text 3 How much spiritual bliss floods His heart? That bliss takes the form of tears, tears that flow down His face and chest. He floats in those tears.
     Text 4 The hairs on His every limbs stand erect. Seeing the glory of His spiritual form, Kāmadeva falls unconscious.
     Text 5 A gentle smile rests on His moonlike face. His sweet words are like a flood of nectar.
     Text 6 How glorious are His ever-new graceful reddish feet! To Lord Nitāi’s feet Narahari dāsa dedicates His every breath.

 
Song 108 (Gujari-rāga)
 

Text 1 bhubane jaya jaya, nitā-i dayāmaya, haraye bhaba-bhaya, nija-guṇe
adhama duragata, tāhāra unamata, kara-i abirata, prema-dāne
Text 2 gaura-hari bali, nācaye bāhu tuli, paḍaye ḍhuli ḍhuli, kṣiti-tale
komala kalebara, ki hema-dharādhara, se dhūli dhūsara, śohe bhāle
Text 3 jini kamala-dala, nayana ṭalamala, saghane chala chala, jala-dhārā
badane mṛdu hāsi, ḍhālaye sudhā-rāśi, kaluṣa-tama-nāśī, śaśī pārā
Text 4 ki bhābe gara gara, kāmpaye thara thara, raṅga ki kaba, narahari dāse
akhila carācara, nirakhi pahu bara, bhulala duḥkha-bhara, sukhe bhāse
.pa
 
     Text 1 Merciful Lord Nitāi fills the world with sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!” He kindly removes every person’s fear of repeated birth and death in this world. To the fallen misled people of this weorld He gives the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. He makes them wild with that love.
     Text 2 Raising His arms, and chanting, “Gaura-Hari!”, He dances. He sways to and fro. He falls to the ground. Is His soft body actually a golden mountain? Even covered with dust, His body is splendid and glorious.
     Text 3 His restless eyes defeat the lotus petals. A flood of tears streams from those eyes. A gentle smile rests on His face. Flooding streams of nectar flow from that smile. His face is a moon that dispells the darkness of sin.
     Text 4 Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, He trembles. When will Narahari dāsa understand that love? Seeing Lord Nitāi, every moving and unmoving creature in this world is now freed from a great burden of sufferings. Now everyone floats in bliss.

 
Part 1E Lord Advaita Acārya

 
Song 109 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya jaya adabhuta         so pahuṁ adwaita
          suradhunī sannidhāne
āṅkhi mudi rahe          preme nadī bahe
          basana titla ghāme
Text 2 nija pahuṁ mane       ghana garajane
          uṭhe joḍe joḍe lampha
ḍāke bāhu tuli      kānde phuli phuli
          dehe biparīta kampa
Text 3 adwaita huṅkāra       suradhunī-tīre
          ā-ila nāgara-rāja
tāhāra pirīte       ā-ila turite
          udaya nadīyā mājha
Text 4 jaya sītā-nātha       karala bekata
          nandera nandana hari
kahe bṛndābana      adwaita-caraṇa
          hiyāra mājhāre dhari

 
     Text 1 Glory, glory to wonderful Lord Advaita! Sitting by the Gaṅgā’s banks, He weeps. From His eyes flows a river of tears of ecstatic spiritual love. Perspiration soaks His garemnts.
     Text 2 Meditating on His master, He roars. Raising His feet, He leaps. Raising His arms, He shouts. He weeps. His body trembles.
     Text 3 Lord Advaita roars, “Lord Kṛṣṇa, the king of heroes, has come to the Gaṅgā’s banks! Filled with spiritual love, He has quickly come! Now He is manifest in Nadīyā!”
     Text 4 Glory to Lord Advaita! Because of Him, Nanda’s son, Lord Kṛṣṇa, caome to this world. Vṛndāvana dāsa says: In my heart I grasp Lord Advaita’s feet.

 
Song 110 (Tuḍī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya jaya adwaita ācārya dayāmaya
yāra huhuṅkāre gaura abatāra haya
Text 2 prema-dātā sītā-nātha karuṇā-sāgara
yāra prema-rase ā-ila gaurāṅga nāgara
Text 3 yāhāre karuṇā kari kṛpā diṭhe cāya
prema-rase se-jana caitanya-guṇa gāya
Text 4 tāhāra padete yeba la-ila śaraṇa
se-jana pā-ila gaura-prema-mahā-dhana
Text 5 emana dayāra nidhi kene nā bhajiluṁ
locana bale nija māthe bajara pāḍiluṁ

 
     Text 1 Glory, glory to merciful Lord Advaita Acārya! Because of His loud plea, Lord Gaura descended to this world.
     Text 2 Lord Advaita is Sita’s husband. He the giver of devotional service and ecstatic spiritual love. He is an ocean of mercy. Because of the nectar of His ecstatic spiritual love, Lord Gaurāṅga has come to this world.
     Text 3 Anyone who attains His merciful galnce, with great love sings of Lord Caitanya’s glories.
     Text 4 Anyone who takes shelter of His feet attains a great treasure of love for Lord Gaura.
     Text 5 He is an ocean of mercy. Locana dāsa says: Alas! Why did I not worship Him? I have cast a thunderbolt at my own head.

 
Song 111 (Aśābarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya adwaita dayita        karuṇāmaya
          rasamaya gaurāṅga rāya
nityānanda candra        kanda yachu mānasa
          mānuṣa se karuṇāya
Text 2 aja-bhaba deba        deba-gaṇa bandita
          yachu saha eka parāṇa
sura-muni-gaṇa      nārada śuka surasuta
          yāka marama nāhi jāna
Text 3 (Refrain) dekha dekha dīna dayāmaya rūpa
daraśane durita          dūra karu durajane
          deyata prema anupa
Text 4 akhila jībana jana         nimagana anukhaṇa
          biṣaya biṣānala māha
yāka kṛpāye         so-i aba jane jane
          prema karuṇā abagāha
Text 5 aichana parama        dayāmaya pahuṁ mora
          sītā-pati ācārya
kaha śyāma-dāsa          āśa pada-pankaja
          anukhana ha-u śiro-dharya

 
     Text 1 Glory to dear, merciful Lord Avaita! He is very kind to the people. In His heart nectar Lord Gaurāṅga Rāya and Lord Nityānandacandra always stay.
     Text 2 Brahmā, Śiva, and all the demigods bow down before His feet. He is their very life. Even Nārada, Śukadeva, and the great demigod-sages in their hears do not know all His glories.
     Text 3 (Refrain) Look! Look! His mercy personified, mercy to the poor and fallen. His glance makes sins flee far away. To the fallen people He gives the peerless gift of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 4 The poor fallen souls at every moment drowning in the poison flames of materialistic life He rescues. He kindly picks them up and plunges them in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 5 My Lord Advaita Acārya is supremely merciful. Śyāma dāsa says: I yearn to attain Lord Advaita’s lotus feet. At every moment I place His lotus feet upon my head.

 
Song 112 (Bhūpālī-rāga or Chūṭā-rāga)
 

Text 1 adwaita ācārya guṇa ke kahite pāre
ye ānila gauracandra jagata mājhāre
Text 2 huṅkāra kari tulasī deya bāre bāre
nabadwīpe gaura āni tārila saṁsāre
Text 3 nityānanda āsi mile prabhura āgāre
tina jana eka bhābe nācaye apāre
Text 4 hari-bola hari bola bhābete uccāre
ābeśe paḍile bhūme eke dhāre āre
Text 5 ānanda utsaba kare bhakte ghare ghare
saṅkarṣaṇa pahuṁ pāche phire dwāre dwāre

 
     Text 1 Who has the power to describe all of Lord Advaita’s glories, Lord Advaita who brought Lord Gauracandra to this world?
     Text 2 Again and again He offered tulasī. Again and again He roared His appeal. In this way Lord Advaita brought Lord Gaura to Navadvīpa. In this way He delivered everyone from the world of birth and death.
     Text 3 Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda met at Lord advaita’s home. Plunged into a shoreless opcean of ecstatic spiritual love, the three of Them danced.
     Text 4 Overcome with spiritual love, They called out, “Haribol! Haribol!” Overcome with spiritual love, They fell to the ground.
     Text 5 In home after home They enjoyed great festivals of spiritual bliss with the devotees. As Lord Advaita went from door to door, Saṅkarṣaṇa dāsa followed Him.

 
Song 113 (Kāmoda-rāga or Belābalī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) śrī-adwaitacandra bhūpa mora
gaura-prema-bhare        gara gara antara
          abirata aruṇa-nayāne jhare lora
Text 2 pulakita lalita       aṅga jhalamala kata
          dinakara-nikara nindi bara jyoti
kuñjara-gamana      damana mano-rañjana
          hasata sulasata daśana janu moti
Text 3 siṁha-garaba-hara          garajata ghana ghana
          kampita kali dūre durajana gela
prabala pratāpe          tāpa-traya kuṇṭhita
          jaga-jana parama hariṣa-hiyā bhela
Text 4 karuṇā-jaladhi        umaḍi cahuṁ-diśa
          pāmara patita bhakati-rase bhāsi
narahari kumati          ki bujhiba raṅga
          naba gaura-carita guṇa bhubane prakāśi

 
     Text 1 (Refrain) Advaitacandra is my Lord. His heart is overwhelmed with ecstatic spiritual love for Lord Gaura. From His reddened eyes tears flow without stop.
     Text 2 His bodily hairs stand erect. How many suns do His effulgent limbs eclipse? He walks like a graceful elephant. His smiles delight the heart. His splendid teeth are like pearls.
     Text 3 His roar robs the lion’s roar of its pride. His roar makes Kali-yuga tremble and demons flee. His power and glory blunt the threefold sufferings and delight the hearts of the world’s people.
     Text 4 He is an ocean of mercy flooding the four directions. He makes even the fallen sinners float in the nectar of devotional service. What does the fool Narahari dāsa know of His blissful glories? Lord Advaita brought Lord Gaura’s pastimes to this world.

 
Song 114 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 śāntipura-pati        parama sundara
          carita bara līlā yāta
bhāba-bhare ati          matta anukhana
          bipula pulakita gāta
Text 2 prabala kali-mada          damana ghana ghana
          ghora garaji bibhora
gaura-hari hari          bhaṇata kampa-i
          girata sahacara kora
Text 3 abannī ghana gaḍi          yata nirupama
          dhūli-dhūsara deha
kañja locana        jhara-i jhara jhara
          janu sa śāṅana meha
Text 4 dīna dukhita          nehāri karu
          karuṇā bhubane paracāra
dāsa narahari       pahuṁka bali
          balihari parama udāra

 
     Text 1 Lord Advaita is Śāntipura’s master. He is graceful and glorioous. His pastimes are glorious. The hairs of His body stand erect. Moment after moment He is overcome with the ecstasy of spiritual love. 
     Text 2 Ferociously roaring, He crushes powerful Kali-yuga’s pride. Chanting, “Gaura-Hari! Hari!”, He trembles. He hugs His companions.
     Text 3 He falls to the ground. His peerless body is covered with dust. Tears stream from His lotus eyes, tears like monsoon rains from a pair of clouds.
     Text 4 Seeing how the people have become poor, fallen, and unhappy, He mercifully preaches the spiritual truth to all the worlds. Narahari dāsa surrenders to supremely magnanimous and glorious Lord Advaita.

 
Song 115 (Karṇāṭa-rāga)
 

Text 1 śrīmad adwaita muda-sadana guṇa-bhūpa
kanaka-bhūdhara-garaba-hārī bara-rūpa
Text 2 jhalakata su-lalita abirala pulaka pānti
saghane garajata gaura-prema-rase māti
Text 3 bidita brahmāṇḍa madhi bikrama apāra
prabala pāṣāṇḍa kula dala-i anibāra
Text 4 bhaba-bhaya-bibhañjana mahā-karuṇā-dhāma
patita-pābana pahuṁka nichani ghanaśyāma

 
     Text 1 Glorious Lord Advaita is the abode of blisses, the king of virtues. His glorious form robs the golden mountain of its pride.
     Text 2 In the ecstasy the hairs stand erect on His glorious graceful form. Wild with bliss by tasting the nectar of love for Lord Gaura, He loudly roars.
     Text 3 In this world His power has no peer. Without stop He breaks the powerful blasphemers into pieces.
     Text 4 He breaks apart all fear of this world of birth and death. He is the abode of great mercy. Ghanaśyāma dāsa worships Lord Advaita, the purifier of the fallen.

 
Song 116 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya deba deba maheśwara rūpa
adwaita ācārya līlā-rasa bhūpa
Text 2 yāra huhuṅkāre gaurāṅga-prakāśa
yāra lāgi gaura-līlā-bikāśa
Text 3 śuklā saptamīte śubha māgha māse
janamila yeha kubera aurase
Text 4 nābhā-nandana śrīmad adwaita pahuṁ
dāsa narahari pade mati rahu

 
     Text 1 Glory to glorious Lord Advaita! He is an incarnation of Lord Sadāśiva. He is the king of nectar pastimes.
     Text 2 Because of His loud calls lord Gauranga came to this world. It is He who brought Lord Gaura’s pastimes ot this world.
     Text 3 On the śukla-sapatamī of the auspicious month of Māgha He took birth in this world as Kuvera Paṇḍita’s son.
     Text 4 In his heart Narahari dāsa places all his thoughts at the feet of Nābhā-devī’s son, Lord Advaita.

 
Song 117 (Bhūpālī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya jaya sītā-pati pahuṁ mora
kanakācala jini mūrati ujora
Text 2 abirata gaura prema-rase māti
jhalamala abirala pulaka pānti
Text 3 gara gara aṅga athira anibāra
jhara-i nayana janu suradhunī-dhāra
Text 4 hasa-i madhura mṛdu gada gada bāṇā
japa-i ki ko-u marama nāhi jāni
Text 5 dīna hīna pāmara patita nehāri
kara-i kore bhuja-yuga pasāri
Text 6 birata se-i ratana anupāma
bañcita karama-doṣe ghanaśyāma

 
     Text 1 Glory, glory to Lord Advaita, Sītā’s husband. He is my master. His glorious form defeats the golden mountain.
     Text 2 Tasting the nectar fop love for Lord Gaura, He is wild with bliss, bliss without stop. The hairs always stand in ecstasy on His effulgent glorious form.
     Text 3 He is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. His body is always restless. From His eyes flow tears like a flooding celestial Gaṅgā.
     Text 4 He sweetly smiles. Overcome with ecstasy, He speaks broken words in a choked voice. What ecstasy does He feel as He chants the holy names? Now one has the power to know His heart.
     Text 5 Seeing the poor fallen people, He hugs them in his arms.
     Text 6 He gives to everyone a peerless jewel. Only to Ghanaśyāma dasa He did not give that jewel. Only Ghanaśyāma dāsa, because of his past evil deeds, was cheated of that jewel.

 
Song 118 (Gujjarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 ki bhābe bibhora mora adwaita gosāñī re
          o duṭī nayāne bahe lora
madhura madhura hāsi o cānda-badane re
          saghane balaye gorā gorā
Text 2 śirīṣa kusuma jini tanu anupāma re
          bipula pulaka tāhe śohe
ki chāra kuñjara-gati atiśaya śobhā re
          bhaṅgīte bhubana-mana mohe
Text 3 śirete sundara śikhā pabane uḍāya re
          mālatīra mālā gale dole
ājānu-lambita duṭī bāhu pasāriyā re
          patite dhariyā kare kole
Text 4 brahmāra durlabha prema bhakati ratana re
          jane jane yāce kata rūpe
narahari hena kṛpāmaya prabhu pāñā re
          nā bhaji majila bhaba-kūpe

 
     Text 1 Ah! With what kind of ecstasy is my Lord Advaita now overcome? Tears stream from His eyes. Ah! A sweet sweet smile rests on His moonlike face. “Gaura! Gaura!”, He chants.
     Text 2 Ah! Glorious with its hairs standing erect in ecstasy, His peerless form defeats the śirīṣa flowers. Ah! His graceful motions charm the hearts of all the world, motions that make the graceful elephants’ motions seem worthless like a pile of ashes.
     Text 3 Ah! His graceful śikhā flutters in the breeze. A jasmine garland sways to and fro on His neck. Ah! His long arms reach to His knees. He hugs the fallen souls. 
     Text 4 Ah! How many times does He again and again beg the people to please accept His gift of the jewel of pure devotional service, a gift even Brahmā finds difficult to attain? Ah! Narahari dāsa did not worship merciful Lord Advaita, That is why Narahari dāsa remains trapped in the blind well of repeated birth and death.

 
Song 119 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 nācaye adwaita prema-rāśi
gorā-guṇa-rabe nā jāne dibā-niśi
Text 2 gorā gorā balite ki sukhe
bihare māgaye kata lakha lakha mukha
Text 3 gorā bali māre mālasāṭa
bhaye kāmpe bali palā-ite nāhi bāṭa
Text 4 gorā nāme ki bhāba hiyāya
pulaka-balita tanu saghana dolāya
Text 5 parikara se nā rase māti
gāya gorācāndera carita kata bhāti
Text 6 kibā khola karatāla dhwani
kulera baudhāri kānde se śabada śuni
Text 7 bhubana bharila onā yaśa
dīna-hīna patita pāmara preme bhāse
Text 8 narahari jībana ki sukha
hena dayāmaya pahuṁ caraṇe bimukha

 
     Text 1 Filled with spiritual love, Lord Advaita dances. Rapt in chanting Lord Gaura’s glories, He does not know if it is day or night.
     Text 2 How much joy does He feel as He chants, “Gaura! Gaura!”? How many thousands and millions of mouths does He pray to attain, so He can properly chant Lord Gaura’s glories?
     Text 3 He beats His chest and chants, “Gaura!” Seeing no way to escape, Kali-yuga trembles in fear. 
     Text 4 What ecstasy fills His heart as Lord Advaita chants Lord Gaura’s holy names? The hairs of His body stand erect. He sways to and fro. 
     Text 5 Have His companions not also become wild by tasting the nectar of spiritual love? How many of Lord Gauracandra’s pastimes do they praise in song?
     Text 6 Hearing the kholas and karatālas, even the ladies weep in ecstasy.
     Text 7 Lord Advaita’s glories fill the worlds. Now the poor, the fallen, the fools, and the sinners all float in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 8 How can anyone turn away from the feet of merciful Lord Advaita, Lord Advaita who is Narahari dāsa’s very life?

 
Song 120 (Aśābarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 dekha adwaita guṇera maṇi
bhakati ratana      kari bitaraṇa
          jagate karaye dhani
Text 2 kibā bhābe pulakita hiyā
gorā gorā buli      nāce bhuja tuli
          ghana kaṅkhatāli diyā
Text 3 duṭī nayane ānanda-dhārā
pulaka balita       tanu su-lalita
          jhalake kanaka pārā
Text 4 mukhe jharaye amiyā-rāśi
ki naba bhaṅgīte         cāhe cāri bhite
          madhura madhura hāsi
Text 5 pahuṁ bedi parikara sāje
madhura su-sware         gāya dhīre dhīre
          khola karatāla bāje
Text 6 tāhā śuni ke dhairaja bandhe
dīna hīna yata      tāṁrā unamata
          narahari paḍu dhānde

 
     Text 1 Look at Lord Advaita, who possesses the jewels of virtues. He freely gives away the precious jewel of pure devotional service. In this way He makes the whole world wealthy in devotion.
     Text 2 The hairas of His body stand etect. His heart is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. Raising His arms, He chants, “Gaura! Gaura!” and dances. 
     Text 3 Flooding tears of bliss flow from His eyes. The hairs stand erect on His body glistening like gold.
     Text 4 From His mouth flows a stream of nectar. From the four directions everyone gazes at His graceful motions and his sweet sweet smile.
     Text 5 Surrounding Lord Advaita on four sides, His companions play the khola and karatālas. With sweet voices they gently slowly sing.
     Text 6 Hearing them, who can remain peaceful and composed? Even the poor sinners are now wild with bliss. Seeing all this, Narahari dāsa does not understand how all this is happening. He is completely puzzled.

 
Song 121 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 ki bhābe adwaita-          cānda adabhuta 
          lampha de-i bīra-dāpe
huṅkāra garjana          kare ghana ghana
          bhayete pāṣaṇḍa kampe
Text 2 aṭṭa aṭṭa hāse        ki rasa prakāśe
          keha nā pāya re thā
aruṇa-nayāne        cāya cāri pāne
          pulaka bharaye gā
Text 3 bhubana-mohana        gorā-guṇa gaṇa
          śunaye yāhāra mukhe
du-bāhu pasāri      tāre kore kari
          nācaye parama sukhe
Text 4 pada-tala tāle       mahī-tala hāle
          bhaṅgī ki upamā tāya
nija bāhu bale      balī kali-kāle
          ghanaśyāma yaśa gāya

 
     Text 1 What ecstasy fills Lord Advaitacandra? With heroic power He wonderfully leaps. When He roars the blapshemers tremble in fear. 
     Text 2 What sweet nectar does He taste as He loudly loudly laughs? No one has ever tasted a sweet nectar like that. With reddish eyes He looks in the four directions. The hairs of His body stand erect.
     Text 3 With His mouth He describes Lord Gaura’s glories, glories that charm all the worlds. Whomever He hugs in His arms dances in spiritual bliss.
     Text 4 His footsteps make the earth tremble. What metaphor can I speak to describe His graceful motions? The power of His arms defeats powerful Kali-yuga. In this way Ghanaśyāma dāsa sings Lord Advaita’s glories.

 
Song 122 (Ṭori-rāga)
 

Text 1 adwaita guṇa-maṇi      abanī karu dhani
          bhakati-dhana ghana bitaraṇe
saṅgete priya-gaṇa       ānande nimagana
          nācaye gorā-guṇa kīratane
Text 2 ki naba bhaṅgī-bhare       madana-mada-hare
          jhalake nirupama ruci chaṭā
śirīṣa phula jini        mṛdula tanu-khāni
          tāhe bipula pulakera ghaṭā
Text 3 tilaka śobhe bhāle         mālatī-mālā gale
          dolaye yajña-sūtra netra-lobhā
atula bhuja tuli         phiraye heli duli
          caraṇa cāru cālani ki śobhā
Text 4 saghane gaura-hari         bolaye ucca kari
          jharaye sudhā jāni mukha-cānde
karuṇā cāhanite          ke pāre thira haite
          patita narahari heri kānde

 
     Text 1 Lord Advaita has the jewel of viretues. Freely giving away the great treasure of pure devotional service, He has made the whole world wealthy. Surrounded by devotees chanting Lord Gaura’s glories, He dances, plunged in spiritual bliss.
     Text 2 His graceful motions robs Kāmadeva’s pride. His glistening splendor is without peer. His gentle form defeats the śirīṣa flower. The hairs of His body stand erect.
     Text 3 Tilaka adorns His forehead. A jasmine garland and sacred-thread sway to and fro on His neck. Every eye yearns to gaze on Him. Raising His peerless arms and swaying to and fro, He dances. What graceful glory rests in His feet!
     Text 4 “Gaura-Hari!”, He loudly calls. Nectar flows from His moonlike mouth. What fallen sinner, once receiving His merciful glance, can remain peaceful? At Lord Advaita gazing, fallen Narahari dāsa weeps.

 
Song 123 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 sītā-nātha mora adwaitacānda
premamaya mahā mohana-phānda
Text 2 yāhāra huṅkāre prakaṭa gorā
nityānanda saha ānande bhorā
Text 3 anupama guṇa karuṇā sindhu
patita adhama janāra bandhu
Text 4 tri-jagata mājhe dwitīya dhātā
saṅkīrtana dhana dulaha dātā
Text 5 braja-līlā-rase bhāsibe ye
acyuta-janakake bhajuka se
Text 6 narahari pahuṁ ye nāhi bhaje
se-i abhāgiyā bhubana mājhe

 
     Text 1 My Lord Advaitacandra, who is Sītā’s husband, has set a great trap of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 2 Because of His loud calls, Lord Gaura came to this world. With Lord Nityānanda as His companion, Lord Advaita is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 3 His virtues are peerless. He is an ocean of mercy. He is the friend of the fallen.
     Text 4 He is a second Brahmā in the midst of the three worlds. He freely gives away the rare treasure of saṅkīrtana.
     Text 5 They who wish to float in the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s Vraja pastimes should first worship Lord Advaita, who is like a father to the infallible Lord.
     Text 6 Anyone who will not worship Lord Advaita becomes very unfortunate in this world.

 
Song 124 (Māyūra-rāga)
 

Text 1 māghe śuklā-tithi          saptamīte ati
          uthalaye mahā ānanda-sindhu
nābhā garbha dhanya      kari abatīrṇa
          haila śubhā-kṣaṇe adwaita-indu
Text 2 kubera paṇḍita        haiyā haraṣita
          nānā dāna dwija daridre diyā
sūtikā-madnire      giyā dhīre dhīre
          dekhi putra-mukha juḍāya hiyā
Text 3 nabagrāma-bāsī        loka dhāñā asi
          paraspara kahe nā dekhi hena
kibā puṇya-kāle          miśra bṛddha-kāle
          pā-ilena putra-ratana mena
Text 4 puṣpa-bariṣaṇa        kare sura-gaṇa
          alakhita rīti upamā nahu
jaya jaya dhwani         bharala abanī
          bhaṇe ghanaśyāma maṅgala bahu

 
     Text 1 On the śuklā saptamī of the month of Māgha the great ocean of bliss overflowed. At that moment, when all the stars were auspicious, Lord Advaitacandra descended to this world and was born from Nābhā-devī’s womb.
     Text 2 Overjoyed, Kuvera Pandita gave many different gifts to the poor brāhmaṇas. Slowly, slowly he approached the maternity-room. Gazing at his son’s face, he felt his heart filled with cooling bliss.
     Text 3 The people of Navadvīpa all ran there. Amongst themselves they each declared, “Never have I seen any child like this. At this auspicious moment Kuvera Paṇḍita has attained a jewel of a son.”
     Text 4 The demigods showered flowers. Never had anyone seen any glory like the infant Lord Advaitacandra’s. His glory has no peer. The whole world was filled with sounds of, “Jaya! Jaya!” Ghanaśyāma dāsa describes these auspicious pastimes.

 
Song 125 (Bhūpālī-rāga)
 

Text 1 māgha saptamī śukla-pakṣa śubha-kṣaṇa kṣaṇa bhūri
prakaṭa prabhu adwaita sundara kayala mali-mada dūri
Text 2 dhā-i calu saba loka peṭhi kubera-bhabana majhāra
bipula pulaka nirakhi bālaka deta jaya jaya kāra
Text 3 bhāṭa-gaṇa ghana bhaṇata yaśa gāyata guṇī muda-māti
sughaḍa bādaka-bṛnda bāyata bādya kata kata bhānti
Text 4 karata nartaka nṛtya ughaṭata thaitā taka taka thona
dāsa narahari pahuṁka janama bilasa baraṇaba kona

 
     Text 1 In the month of Māgha, on the śuklā saptamī, at an auspicious moment, glorious and graceful Lord Advaita was manifest in this world. At that moment Kali-yuga’s arrogant pride was cast far away.
     Text 2 All the people ran to Kuvera Paṇḍita’s home. As they gazed at the newborn child, the hairs on their bodies stood erect with joy. “Jaya! Jaya!”, they exclaimed.
     Text 3 The poets sang of the child’s great glories. They were wild with bliss. How many glorious melodies did the musicians play on their instruments?
     Text 4 “Thaitā taka taka thona!”, the dancing of the dancers declared. In this way Narahari dāsa describes something of Lord Advaita’s glorious birth-pastimes.

 
Song 126 (Kalyāṇa-rāga)
 

Text 1 kubera paṇḍita        ati karaṣita
          dekhiyā putrera mukha
kari jāta-karma          ye āchila dharma
          bāḍaye manera sukha
Text 2 saba su-lakṣaṇa       baraṇa kāñcana
          kanaka-kamala-śobhā
ājānu-lambita       bāhu su-balita
          jaga-jana-mano-lobhā
Text 3 nābhi su-gabhīra      parama sundara
          nayana kamala jini
aruṇa caraṇa        nāma darapaṇa
          jini kata bidhumaṇi
Text 4 mahā-puruṣera         cihna manohara
          dekhiyā bismita sabe
bujhi iha haite          jagata tāribe
          e-i kare anubhabe
Text 5 yata pura-nārī       śiśu-mukha heri
          ānanda-sāgare bhāse
nā dharaye hiyā          puna puna giyā
          nirakhaye animiṣe
Text 6 tāhāra mātāre         kāre parihāre
          kahe hena suta yāra
tāra bhāgya-sīmā         ki diba upamā
          bhubane ke sama tāra
Text 7 eteke bacana          saba nārī-gaṇa
          kahe gada gada bhāṣa
jagata-tāraṇa       bujhala kāraṇa
          dāsa baiṣṇabera āśa

 
     Text 1 Gazing at his newborn son’s face, Kuvera Paṇḍita was delighted. As he performed the jāta-karma and other religious ceremonies, the joy in his heart grew more and more.
     Text 2 That son had all auspicious features. His complexion was the color of gold. He was splendid like a golden lotus. His graceful arms reached to His knees. The hearts of the world’s people yearned to attain Him.
     Text 3 His navel was very deep. His handsomeness was sublime. His eyes defeated the lotus flowers. His reddish feet defeat how many mirrors, how many moonstone jewels?
     Text 4 Seeing His charming features, features marked with the signs of an exalted personality, everyone was filled with wonder. Every person thought, “This person will deliver all the worlds.”
     Text 5 Gazing at the newborn infant’s face, the village ladies felt themselves float in an ocean of bliss. Their hearts were not peaceful. Again and again they came to look. They gazed with unblinking eyes.
     Text 6 Outside of the mother’s presence, the ladies said amongst themselves, “To have a son like this she must have come to highest summit of good fortune. To whom can we compare her? Who is her equal in this world?”
     Text 7 Their voices choked in ecstasy, all the ladies spoke in this way. They knew that this child would deliver all the worlds. Vaiṣṇava dāsa yearns to attain the association of Lord Advaita.

 
Song 127 (Bhāṭiyāri-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya jaya advaita acārya mahāśaya
abatīrṇa haila jībe ha-iya sadaya
Text 2 māgha māsa śukla-pakṣa saptamī dibase
śāntipura āsi prabhu ha-ila prakāśe
Text 3 sakala mahānta mājhe āge āguyāna
śiśu-kāle thu-ila pitā kamalākṣa nāma
Text 4 kali-kāla-sāpe jībe karila garāsa
dekhi biṣa baidya-rūpe ha-ilā prakāśa
Text 5 yāhāra huṅkāre gorā ā-ilā abanī
baiṣṇaba maribe tāra la-iyā nichani

 
     Text 1 Glory, glory to Lord Advaita Acārya Mahāśaya, who mercifully descended to this world to deliver the fallen souls.
     Text 2 In the month of Māgha, on the śuklā saptamī, Lord Advaita was manifest in the town of Śāntipura
     Text 3 He is the leader of all the saintly devotees. When He was a child His father gave Him the name Kamalākṣa (Lotus-eyed).
     Text 4 Seeing the conditioned souls were bitten by the snake of Kali-yuga, He became a physician to save them from the poison.
     Text 5 His loud calls brought Lord Gaura to this earth. Vaiṣṇava dāsa worships Him.

 
Song 128 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 bhābera ābeśe rahu         sītā-pati mora pahuṁ
          yogāsane basiyā āchila
haṭhāt ki bhāba mane          huhuṅkāra garajane
          akasmāt uṭhi dāṇḍā-ilā
Text 2 (Refrain) āniyāchi āniyāchi abanī-maṇḍalī
jagata tāribe ye-i         nadīyā udaya se-i
          ihā bali nāce bāhu tuli
Text 3 tāṁhāra uddaṇḍa nṛtya      bhū-kampana ha-ila martte
          dharaṇī dharite nāre bhāra
śāntipura-nātha saṅge         nara-nārī nāce raṅge
          yena bhela ānanda-bājāra
Text 4 adwaitera huhuṅkāre        sapta swarga bheda kaire
          parabyome lāgila jhaṅkāra
mahāprabhu-āgamana       jānileka tri-bhubana
          balarāmera ānanda-apāra


     Text 1 Filled with the ecstasy of spiritual love, my Lord Advaita sits in a yoga-āsana. His heart overcome with ecstasy, He suddenly roars. Suddenly He jumps up.
     Text 2 (Refrain) “I brought Him! I brought Him to the circle of the earth! He will deliver all the worlds! He has come to Nadīyā!” With these words, Lord Advaita raises His arms and dances.
     Text 3 From His wild dancing the earth trembles. The earth cannot bear the pressure of His footsteps. The men and women around Lord Advaita also joyfully dance. The place has become a marketplace of spiritual bliss.
     Text 4 Lord Advaita’s roar cracks open the seven Svarga worlds. The sound of His roar reaches ot the wpiritual sky. Now the three worlds know Lord Mahāprabhu has come. Now Balarāma dāsa floats in a shoreless ocean of bliss.




Part 1F The Devotees' Prayers

 
Song 129 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 gaurāṅga tumi more dayā nā chāḍiha
āpana kariyā rāṅgā caraṇe rākhiha
Text 2 tomāra caraṇa lāgi saba teyāginu
śītala caraṇa pāñā śaraṇa la-inu
Text 3 e kule o kule muñi dinu tilāñjali
rākhiha caraṇe more āpanāra bali
Text 4 bāsudeba deba ghoṣa kahe caraṇe dhariyā
kṛpā kari rākha more pada-chāyā diyā


     Text 1 O Lord Gaurāṅga, please don't withold Your mercy from me. Please give me shelter at Your reddish feet.
     Text 2 I gave up everything to approach Your feet. I take shelter at Your cooling feet.
     Text 3 I place three handsful of water and sesame at the funeral of my past emotional attachemnt to my kinsmen. Now I am attached to You alone. Please give me shelter at Your feet.
     Text 4 Vāsudeva Ghoṣa says: O Lord, I grasp Your feet. Please be kind and give me protection in the shade of Your feet.

 
Song 130 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 āre mora gaurāṅga soṇā
pā-iyāchi tomāre kata kariyā kāmanā
Text 2 āpana baliyā mora nāhi kona jana
rākhaha caraṇa-tale kariyā āpanā
Text 3 tomāra badane kibā cāndera tulanā
deha prema-sudhā-rasa rahuka ghoṣaṇā
Text 4 kamala jiniyā tomāra śītala caraṇa
bāsu ghoṣa deha chāyā tāpita e jana


     Text 1 O Lord Gaurāṅga, my golden treasure! How much have I yearned to attain You!
     Text 2 I do not say that anyone else is my shelter. Please give me shelter at the soles of Your feet.
     Text 3 How can the moon be equal to Your glorious face? Please give me the nectar of love for You. Please declare that I am Yours. 
     Text 4 Your cooling feet defeat the lotus flowers. Please give the shade of Your feet to Vāsu Ghoṣa, who suffers in the heat of materialistic life.

 
Song 131 (Kedāra-rāga)
 

Text 1 gaurāṅgacānda hera nayanera koṇe
śaraṇa la-inu tomāra śītala caraṇe
Text 2 diyāchi tomāre dāya āmāra keha nā-i
tumi nā dayā karile yāba kāre ṭhā-i
Text 3 prabhu nityānanda karaha karuṇā
kātara ha-iyā ḍāke dīna-hīna janā
Text 4 pūrbe pāpī tarā-ile ebe nā tarā-o
pāpiṣṭha uddhāra ebāra jagate dekhā-o
Text 5 tomāra kṛpā nā pā-iyā beḍā-i kāndiyā
pūrabe diyācha prema jagate yāciyā
Text 6 se karuṇā prakāśiyā uddharaha more
śuniyāchi dayāra ṭhākura dekhuka saṁsāre
Text 7 gaurāṅga nitā-i more nā kara nairāśa
dante tṛṇa dhari kahe narahari dāsa


     Text 1 O Lord Gaurāṅgacandra, please glance at me from the corner of Your eye. I take shelter of Your cooling feet.
     Text 2 Everything I possess I give to You. I keep nothing for myself. If You do not give Your mercy to me, where shall I go to take shelter?
     Text 3 O Lord Nityānanda, please give Your mercy to me. This poor, fallen, distraught person calls out to You.
     Text 4 In the past You delivered many sinners. Now You will not deliver them? Please show all the worlds that even now You will deliver the sinners.
     Text 5 If I cannot attain Your mercy I will weep in great anguish. In the past You freely gave the gioft of ecstatic spiritual love. Indeed, You begged everyone in the world to please accept it.
     Text 6 Please show Your mercy and deliver me. I have heard of your great mercy. O Lord, please cast Your glance of mercy on me in this world of birth and death.
     Text 7 O Lord Gaurāṅga! O Lord NItāi! Please do not destroy my hopes! Placing a blade of straw between his teeth, Narahari dāsa speaks these words.

 
Song 132 (Tuḍī-rāga)
 

Text 1 eka bāra karuṇā kara caitanya nitā-i
mora sama pātakī āra tri-bhubane nā-i
Text 2 muñi ati mūḍha-mati māyāra naphara
e-i saba pāpe mora tanu jara jara
Text 3 mleccha adhama yata chila anācārī
tā saba haite yadi mora pāpa bhārī
Text 4 aśeṣa pāpera pāpī jagā-i mādhā-i
tā-sabāre uddharila tomāra du-bhā-i
Text 5 locana bale muñi adhame dayā naila kene
tumi nā karile dayā ke karibe āne


     Text 1 O Lord Caitanya and Lord Nitāi, please be merciful to me this time. In the three worlds there is no sinner like me.
     Text 2 I am a great fool. I have been Māyā's servant. Every sin fills my body.
     Text 3 My sins are more weighty and grave than the sins of all the mlecchas, than all who are falen and ill-behaved.
     Text 4 You delivered the two brotheers Jagāi and Mādhāi even though they had committed every possible sin.
     Text 5 Locana dāsa says: I am very fallen. Why will You not give mercy to me? If You will not give mercy to me, then where will You find a better candidate for your mercy?

 
Song 133 (Dhanaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) gaurāṅga patita-pābana tuyā nāma
kali-jība yata      āchila kṛta-pātakī
          de-oli sabe nija-ṭhāma
Text 2 ā-caṇḍāla abadhi      tohāri guṇe kāndaye
          prema-pulake nāhi ora
hari-nāma-sudhā-rase          jaga-jana pūrala
          dina rajanī rahu bhora
Text 3 bidyā kula dhana mada      yada āchila bipada
          chāḍiyā tohari guṇa gāya
nā dekho pāṣaṇḍa jana         sabhā-i uttama mana
          saṅkīrtane gaḍāgaḍi yāya
Text 4 yadi bā āchaye keha       aśeṣa pāpera deha
          nā māne nā śune gorā-guṇa
ballabha-dāsera kathā         marame marama byathā
          mukhe tāra de-o kāli cūṇa


     Text 1 (Refrain) O Lord Gaurāṅga, You bear the name Patita-pāvana (purifier of the fallen). All the sinners of Kali-yuga You give shelter in Your own spiritual abode.
     Text 2 Including even the caṇḍālas, everyone weeps with love for You. The hairs of their bodies stand erect. Their love for You has no end. The people of the world are plunged in the nectar of Lord Hari's holy names. Day and night they are overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. 
     Text 3 Shunning the calamity that is pride in material education, fame, and wealth, everyone sings Your glories. No blasphemers are anywhere to be seen. Everyone is saintly at heart. Overcome by ecstasy in saṅkīrtana, everyone rolls on the ground. 
     Text 4 If anyone remains with sins still in his body, that person must not have heard or honored Lord Gaura's glories. Vallabha dāsa says: Such a person feels torment in his heart of hearts. Such a person finds black dust in his mouth.

 
Song 134 (Dhanaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) gaurāṅga pātakī uddhāra karuṇāya
sādhu mukhe śuni āmi          patita-pābana tumi
          uddhāriyā leha nija pāya
Text 2 roga-śokamaya haya         biṣama biṣaya-bhaya
          paḍiyā rahilum māyā-jāle
ke hena karuṇā jana      tāre kāre nibedana
          uddhāra pā-iba kata kāle
Text 3 śarīrera mājhe yata        saba haila vairimata
          keha kāra niṣedha nā māne
yatanā yamera ghara      śuniyā lāgaye ḍara
          hari-kathā nā śuninu kāṇe
Text 4 sādhu-saṅga nā karinu          āpani āpana khā-inu
          satata kumati-saṅga-doṣe
daśane dhariyā tṛṇa      kare e-i nibedana
          akiñcana e ballabha-dāse


     Text 1 (Refrain) O Lord Gaurāṅga! O kind savior of the sinners! From the saointly devotees' mouths I heard that You are called Patita-pāvana (the purifier of the fallen), that You deliver the sinners and give them the gift of pure love for You.
     Text 2 I have fallen into this fearful horrible world filled with sufferings and diseases. I stay in Māyā's trap. O Lord, who is merciful like You? I appeal to You: Please deliver me! How much time must pass before I am delivered?
     Text 3 I am trappeed in this material body. Now all my enemies assemble and attack me. Who will stop them? I do not know. Hearing of torments in Yamarāja's realm, I tremble in fear. Alas, still I will not use my ears to hear of Lord Hari.
     Text 4 I do not associate with devotees. I wish only my own personal benefit. Always I associate with wicked-hearted people. Poverty-stricken Vallabha dāsa places a blade of grass between his teeth and makes this appeal before You, O Lord.

 
Song 135 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 āre mora āre mora gaurāṅga gosāñi
dīne dayā toma binā kare hena nā-i
Text 2 e-i ta brahmāṇḍa mājhe yata reṇu prāya
ke gaṇibe pāpa mora gaṇana nā yāya
Text 3 manuṣya durlabha janma nā ha-ibe āra
tomā nā bhajiyā kainu bhāṇḍera ācāra
Text 4 hena prabhu nā bhajinu ki gati āmāra
āpanāra mukhe dilāma jwalanta aṅgāra
Text 5 kena bā āchaye prāṇa ki sukhe lāgiyā
ballabha dāsiyā kena nā gela mariyā


     Text 1 O! O! O Lord Gaurāṅga! O my master! Who but You is merciful to the poor fallen souls? No one is merciful like You.
     Text 2 Someone may be able to count all the atoms in the universe, but who can count all my sins? My sins are beyond counting.
     Text 3 I will not get this rare human birth again. I did not worship You. I tried only to cheat others.
     Text 4 O Lord, I did not worship You. What will become of me? Into my own mouth I tossed a glowing coal.
     Text 5 Why do I live? What happiness will I find here? Why does Vallabha dāsa not die?

 
Song 136 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 gaura pahuṁ nā bhajiya manu
prema-ratana dhana helāya hārānu
Text 2 adhane yatana kari dhana teyāginu
āpanāra karama-doṣe āpani ḍubinu
Text 3 biṣama biṣaya biṣa satata khā-inu
gaura-kīrtana-rase magana nā hainu
Text 4 sat-saṅga chāḍiyā kainu asata bilāsa
te-kāraṇe karama-bandhane lāge phāṁsa
Text 5 emana gaurāṅgera guṇe nā kāndila mana
manuṣya durlabha janma haila akāraṇa
Text 6 kena bā āchaye prāṇa ki sukha lāgiyā
ballabha dāsiyā kena nā yāya mariyā


     Text 1 I did not worship Lord Gaura. The precious jewel of ecstatic spiritual love I carelessly threw away.
     Text 2 I renounced that spiritual wealth. I struggled to become a spiritual pauper. Now I am plunged into a misfortune I created by my own actions.
     Text 3 I always drink the horrible deadly poison of material sense gratification. I will not dive into the nectar of chanting Lord Gaura's glories.
     Text 4 I spurn the association of saintly devotees. I sport with evil persons. That is why I am now bound by the ropes of karma and the noose of karma is now slipped around my neck.
     Text 5 My heart does not weep when it hears Lord Gaura's glories. This rare human birth has been useless to me.
     Text 6 Why do I continue to live? What happiness will I find in this kind of life? Why does this Vallabha dāsa not die.

 
Song 137 (Suha-i-rāga)
 

Text 1 dayāra prabhu mora nabadwīpa-candra
prema-sindhu abatāra ānanda-kanda
Text 2 abatari nija prema kari āswādana
se-i prema diyā prabhu tarila bhubana
Text 3 patita durgati jane bilā-ila tāhā
pātrāpātra bicāra nā-i muñi śuni ihā
Text 4 e-i tarasāya pāpī kare nibedane
e rādhāmohana māge tomāra caraṇe


     Text 1 My master is the moon of Navadvīpa. He is the Lord of mercy. He is the root of spiritual bliss. He is an ocean of ecstatic spiritual love descended to this world.
     Text 2 Descending to this world, He relished the sweet taste of ecstatic spiritual love. He freely gave away that love to others. in this way He delivered all the world.
     Text 3 He gave away that love. He gave it to the fallen misled people. He did not consider who was a fit candidate to receive and who was not. This I have heard.
     Text 4 A certain sinner now begs to be delivered. O Lord, Rādhāmohana dāsa falls at Your feet. He places his request before You.

 
Song 138 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 bhakta-gaṇa-śrī-caraṇe          mora e-i nibedane
          sabe āśirbāda kara more
caitanya baliba mukhe         caitanya baliba sukhe
          tāre bhaji janma-janmāntare        
Text 2 śrī-guru-caraṇa-padma      biṣaya āśraya sadma
          tāhā gati jībana maraṇe
prabhu chila rāmacandra       jāhnabā-caraṇa-dwandwa
          swa-gaṇa caitanya yāra mane
Text 3 kāla-sarpa-bhayaṅkara      premānanda-hīna nara
          anātha ḍākiche gaura-hari
prema-dāsa ageyāne       premāmṛta de-i dāne
          kṛpā kara ātma-sātha kari


     Text 1 I place a request before the glorious feet of the devotees. O devotees, please bless me. Please bless me that my mouth will chant the name Caitanya, that I will always be delighted to chant the name Caitanya, and that I will worship Lord Caitanya birth after birth.
     Text 2 Bless me that I will take shelter of my spiritual master's lotus feet, and that his feet will be my goal in life and death. Bless me that Rāmacandra dāsa will be my master, Ramacandra who took shelter of Jāhnavā's feet. Bless me that I will consider association with his disciples to be my very life.
     Text 3 A certain person terrified of the snake of time, a person who does not know spiritual bliss and spiritual love, a person without a master or a shelter, calls out "Gaura-Hari!" O Lord, please be merciful to that person, the fool Prema dāsa. Please give him the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Please accept him as one of Your associates.

 
Song 139 (Barāḍī-rāga)
 

Text 1 hari hari āra ki emana daśā habe
gaurāṅga balite aṅga pulake pūribe
Text 2 nitā-i balite kabe nayāne baibe nīra
adwaita balite kabe ha-iba asthira
Text 3 caitanya nitā-i āra pahuṁ sītānātha
dakiyā mūrchita haiyā paḍiba bhūmite
Text 4 se nāma śrabaṇe laite ha-iba cetana
uṭhiyā gaurāṅga bali kariba garjana
Text 5 śrī-nanda-kumāra saha bṛṣabhānu-sutā
śrī-bṛndābanete līlā kaila yathā tathā
Text 6 se-i saba līlā-sthala dekhiyā dekhiyā
se līlā smaraṇa kari paḍiba kāndiyā
Text 7 śrī-rāsa-maṇḍala kabe darśana kariba
hṛdaye sphuribe līlā mūrchita ha-iba
Text 8 prema-dāsa kahe kabe habe hena dina
gaurāṅgera bhakti-pathera haba udāsīna


     Text 1 Hari! Hari! Will I ever attain the condition where the hairs of my body stand erect of I say the name, “Gauraṅga!"
     Text 2 When will tears stream from my eyes when I say, “Nitāi!" When will I become wild with ecstasy when I say, "Advaita!"
     Text 3 When, calling out, "Caitanya! Nitāi! Advaita! O my masters!", will I fall unconscious to the ground.
     Text 4 When, hearing the Lord's holy names, will I regain consciousness, jump up, and roar, "Gaurāṅga!"
     Text 5 Śrī Nandakumāra (Lord Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Vṛṣabhānusutā (Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī) enjoyed many pastimes in Vṛndāvana.
     Text 6 When will I gaze and gaze at all those pastime-places? When, remembering Their pastimes, will I fall to the ground and weep?
     Text 7 When will I see the rāsa-dance circle? When, that pastime suddenly manifest in my heart, will I fall unconscious?
     Text 8 Prema dāsa says: When will I renounce this world and follow the path of devotion Lord Gaurāṅga taught? When will that day come?

 
Song 140 (Barāḍī-rāga)
 

Text 1 hari hari nitā-i kabe karuṇā karibe
saṁsāra-bāsanā mora kabe dūra habe
Text 2 kabe bā kāṅgāla-beśe bṛndābane yāba
śyāma-kuṇḍa rādhā-kuṇḍa nayane heriba
Text 3 baṁśī-baṭera chāyāya giyā jībana juḍāba
kabe gobardhana-mūle gaḍāgaḍi diba
Text 4 māyā-moha puruṣa-deha kabe bā chāḍiba
sakhīra anugā haiyā caraṇa sebiba
Text 5 śrī-rūpa-mañjarī-sakhira āśraya la-iba
bāma-pāśe rahi aṅge cāmara ḍhulāba
Text 6 ekāsane yugala-kiśora basā-iba
eka mālā duhuṁ gale kabe bā parāba
Text 7 kāṅgāla haiyā braje giyā kabe bā bhramiba
ghare ghare mādhukuri bhikṣā māgi khāba 
Text 8 prema dāsa kahe kabe hena bhāgya habe
gaurāṅga balite mora pāpa prāṇa yābe


     Text 1 Hari! Hari! When will Lord Nitāi be merciful to me? When will material desires flee far away from me?
     Text 2 When, wearing the garments of a beggar, will I live in Vṛndāvana? When will I see Śyāma-kuṇḍa and Rādhā-kuṇḍa with my own eyes?
     Text 3 When, attaining the shade of the Vaṁśī-vāṭa tree, will I feel my life filled with cooling bliss? When, at the foot of Govardhana Hill, will I roll on the ground?
     Text 4 When will I give up this human body made of māyā's illusions? When, attaining the form of a follower of the gopīs, will I serve the feet of the Divine Couple?
     Text 5 When will I take shelter of Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī? When, standing at her side, will I fan the Divine Couple with a camara whisk?
     Text 6 When will give the Divine Couple a sitting place on a single throne. When will I place a single flower garland around Their necks?
     Text 7 When, now become a baggar, will I wander in Vrndavana? When will I eat by going house to house and begging like a madhukari.
     Text 8 Prema dāsa says: When will I become fortunate in these ways? When, calling out, "Gaurāṅga!", will I leave this body made of sins?

 
Song 141 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) hari hari aiche bhāgya hoyaba hāmāra
sahacara saṅge      raṅge pahuṁ gauraka
          heraba nadīyā-bihāra
Text 2 suradhunī-tīre        naṭana-rase pahuṁ mora
          kīrtana kariba bilāsa
so kiye hāma        nayana bhari heraba
          pūraba cira abhilāṣa
Text 3 śrībāsa-bhabane yāba        nija-gaṇa saṅgahi
          baiṭhana āpana ṭhāma
ḍāhine nityānanda        chatra dhari mastake
          paṇḍita gadādhara bāme
Text 4 taba ko-i mohe        le-i tāhā yā-oba
          heraba so mukha-canda
pulakahi sakala          aṅga pari pūraba
          pā-oba prema-ānanda
Text 5 jananī-sambodhane          yabe ghare āyaba
          kara-bahu bhojana pāna
rāmānanda ānande         tabahu nehāraba
          sa-phala karaba du-nayāna


     Text 1 (Refrain) Hari! Hari! When will I become fortunate? When will I see Lord Gaura enjoy pastimes in Nadīyā with His associates?
     Text 2 When will I fill my eyes with the sight of my Lord tasting the nectar of dancing in kīrtana on the Gaṅgā's banks? When will this long-cherished desire be fulfilled?
     Text 3 When will I see Lord Gaura sitting ona  throne in Śrīvāsa's house? Standing at His right, Lord Nitāi will hole a parasol over Lord Gaura's head. Gadādhara Paṇḍita will stand at Lord Gaura's left.
     Text 4 Whoever goes there will see Lord Gaura's moonlike face. The hairs on that person's body will stand erect. That person will attain the ecstasy of spiritual love. 
     Text 5 When, called by Mother Śacī, will I attain many handsful of remnants from Lord Gaura's meal? When will Ramananda joyfully gaze at Lord Gaura? Then Rāmānanda's two eyes will bear fruit.

 
Song 142 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) haha mora ki chāra adṛṣṭa
yabe gaura prakaṭila          āmāra janama naila
          teṁ-i muñi adhama papiṣṭha
Text 2 nā herinu gauracanda      nā herinu nityānanda
          nā herinu adwaita gosāñi
ṭhākura śrī-sarakāra          nā herinu pada tāra
          nā herinu śrībāsa gadā-i
Text 3 ki mora karmera lekhā      se saba nahila dekhā
          eka āmi kena janaminu
saba abatāra sāra        śrī-gaurāṅga abatāra
          nā dekhinu kena nā marinu
Text 4 prabhura priya swa-gaṇa         ṭhākura baṁśībadana
          suta-suta ha-om muñi tāra
ahe gaura nityānanda          tabe kena mati manda
          rāmacandra ati durācāra


     Text 1 (Refrain) Alas! Alas! What thing has fate brought me? It brought me something useless like a pile of ashes. When Lord Gaura manifested His pastimes I was not born. I am the lowest, the most sinful.
     Text 2 I did not see Lord Gauracandra. I did not see Lord Nityānanda. I did not see Lord Advaita. I did not see the feet of Narahari Sarakāra Ṭhākura. I did not see Śrīvāsa and Gadādhara. 
     Text 3 Because of my past karma, fate has written that I would not see any of them. Why was I born alone, away from them? I did not see Lord Gaurāṅga, the best of avatāras. Why have I not died?
     Text 4 I am the grandson of Vaṁśīvādana Ṭhākura, who was a dear associate of the Lord. O Lord Gaura! O Lord Nityānanda! Why was the misbehaved fool Rāmacandra dāsa not born then?

 
Song 143 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 prabhura lāgiyā       yaba kon deśe
          eka more sandhāna kabe
gaurāṅga-caraṇa          daraśana pāba
          hena bhāgya mora habe
Text 2 gorā mora pati        gorā mora gati
          gorā sarabasa dhana
yadyapi taṁhāre          nā pā-i dekhite
          tejiba chāra jībana
Text 3 pākhī haiyā prāṇa          yā-ibe uḍiyā
          ye deśe pahuṁra bāsa
satata pahuṁra      nikaṭe rahibe
          ha-iyā taṁhāra dāsa
Text 4 gaurāṅga-caraṇa-      dhūlite miśibe
          e chāra śarīra mora
kahe rāmacandra          pāda-padma-madhu
          āswādi rahiba bhora


     Text 1 When will I visit the places where Lord Gaurāṅgs went? When will I see Lord Gaurāṅgs's footprints? When will I become fortunate like this?
     Text 2 Lord Gaura is my master. Lord Gaura is the goal of my life. Lord Gaura is my only treasure. If I cannot see Him I will give up this life worthless like a pile of ashes.
     Text 3 My life breath will become like a bird. Flying in the sky, it weill go to the place where Lord Gaura stays. I will always stay near the Lord. I will be His servant. 
     Text 4 Let the ashes of my body be sprinkled on the dust of Lord Gaura's footprints. Rāmacandra dāsa says: There I will stay, overcome with bliss, tasting the nectar at the lotus flower of Lord Gaura's feet.

 
Song 144 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 gaurāṅga-prema-bādale      ḍobe saba prema-jale
          nadī nālā khāla bila sakali
āmāra kapāla bhāṅgā      marumaya śukano ḍāṅgā
          mora hiyā nā ḍube ekali
Text 2 (Refrain) hari hari he gaurāṅga kena e adhame bāma
kāṅgāle karuṇā kara      bāreka nayane hera
          de-o mahā-mantra hari-nāma
Text 3 ajāmila nistārila          jagā-i mādhā-i uddhārila
          cāpala gopāle kaila trāṇa
yabana mleccha caṇḍāle        nāma-prema sabe dile
          ki doṣe adhame haila bāma
Text 4 adhama patita āmi          patita-pābana tumi
          more prabhu nā karoṁ nairāśa
dānte ghāsa kari ebe          tomāra karuṇā māge
          abhāgiyā e ballabha-dāsa


     Text 1 In Lord Gaurāṅga's monsoon of ecstatic spiritual love every river, canal, and watercourse is flooded with the waters of spiritual love. Now everyone is plunged in those wtares of spiritual love. Alas! I am a madman. My head is sick and broken. That is why I stay alone on this dry hilltop. That is why my heart alone is not plunged in the flooding waters of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 2 (Refrain) Hari! Hari! Gaurāṅga! Why have I become so fallen? O Lord, please be kind to this beggar. This one time please cast Your merciful glance upon him. Please give him the mahā-mantra of Lord Hari's holy names.
     Text 3 You delivered Ajāmila. You saved Jagāi and Mādhāi. You protected Cāpala Gopāla. To the yavanas, melcchas, and caṇḍālas You gave ecstatic love for the holy name. What offense have I committed that I am so fallen and so far away from You? 
     Text 4 I am very fallen. But You are the purifier of the fallen. O Lord, please don't crush my hopes. Placing a blade of grass between his teeth, unfortunate Vallabha dāsa begs You for mercy.

 
Part 2 songs Glorifying Lord Govinda

 
Song 145 (Lalita-rāga)
 

Text 1 kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa        kamaleśa kṛpāmaya
          keśi-mathana kaṁsāri
keśaba kāliya-      damana karuṇāmaya
          kālindī-kūla-bihārī
Text 2 gopīnātha        gopa-pati-nandana
          gobinda giribara-dhārī
gokulacandra        gopāla gahana-cara
          gopī-gaṇa-mano-hārī
Text 3 ghana-tanu sundara         ghora-timira-hara
          ghoṣata yata ghana-śyāma
campaka gaurī       cita-hara cañcala
          catura catur-bhuja nāma
Text 4 cakroddhārī      cakrī cānura-hara
          cakra-pāṇi cita-cora
śrī-pati śrī-dhara       śrīvatsa-lāñchana
          śrī-mukha-candra-cakora
Text 5 asāra saṁsāre         sāra kari māni
          hari-pade nāhi abhilāṣa
iha para jībana          gela akāraṇa
          royata gokula dāsa


     Text 1 Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa! Master of the lotus flowers! O merciful one! O crusher of Kesi! O enemy of Kamsa! O Keśava! O Lord who defeated Kāliya! O merciful Lord who plays on the Yamunā's banks! 
     Text 2 O master of the gopis! O son of the gopa king! O Govinda! O lifter of Govardhana Hill! O moon of Gokula! O Gopāla! O inconceivable Lord! O Lord who steals the gopis' hearts!
     Text 3 O handsome Lord! O Lord who removes the dense darkness of this world! O Lord dark like a monsoon cloud! O Lord weho steals the hearts of the gopīs fair like campaka flowers! O intelligent, restless, mischeivous Lord! O Lord who bears the name Catur-bhuja (four-armed)!
     Text 4 O Lord who holds the cakra! O Lord who defeats Canura! O Lord whose hand holds the cakra! O Lord who steals the devotees' hearts! O husband of Goddess Lakṣmī! O master of all opulences! O Lord who bears the Śrīvatsa mark! O Lord whose face is like a moon whose light the cakora-bird devotees sip!
     Text 5 Alas! I thought the worthless things in this world of birth and death were my great treasure. I did not yearn to attain Lord Hari's feet. My life will soon be gone, gone without any good thing come from it. That is why Gokula dāsa weeps. 

 
Song 146 (Lalita-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaga-jībana      jagannātha janārdana
          yadu-pati jaladhara-śyāma
yaśodā-nandana       jagata-durlabha-dhana
          jalada jalada-ruci-dhāma
Text 2 acyutopendra          adhokṣaja ati-bala
          ajitādbhuta-rūpa abatārī
amala-kamala-āṅkhi       akhila-bhubana-pati
          anupama atanu-bihārī
Text 3 tri-bhubana-tāraka         tri-tāpa-bimocana
          tanu jini taruṇa tamāla
daitya-damana       dāmodara debakī-nandana
          dīna-bandhu dīna-dayāla
Text 4 nanda-nandana         nayanānanda nāgara
          niti naba nīrada-kānti
pītāmbara paramānanda         pramoda puruṣottama 
          pada-nakha-bidhu-pānti
Text 5 baṁśī-badana bana-mālī          balānuja bhubana-mohana 
          bhuta-bhaba-bhaya-nāśa
manohara madana-         mohana madhusūdana
          gā-ota gokula-dāsa


     Text 1 O life of the worlds! O master of the worlds! O Lord who rescues the devotees from a host of troubles! O king of the Yadus! O Lord dark like a monsoon cloud! O delight of Yaśodā! O treasure difficult to find in this world! O abode of splendor glorious like a monsoon cloud! 
     Text 2 O infallible Lord! O younger brother (Vāmana) of Indra! O Lord beyond the perception of material senses! O supremely powerful Lord! O unconquerable one! O Lord whose form is wonderful! O Lord weho descends to the material world! O Lord whose glistening eyes are lotus flowers! O master of all the worlds! O peerless one! O Lord who enjoys amorous pastimes!
     Text 3 O savior of the three worlds! O Lord who rescues the devotees from the three miseries! O Lord whose form is like a young tamāla tree! O Lord who crushes the demons! O Lord whose waist was bound by a rope! O delight of Devakī! O friend of the poor and wretched! O Lord merciful to the poor and wretched! 
     Text 4 O delight of Nanda! O Lord who are a delight for the eyes! O hero! O Lord splendid like a new monsoon cloud! O Lord glorious in yellow garments! O Lord filled with transcendental bliss! O delightful Lord! O supreme person! O Lord whose toenails glisten like a row of moons!
     Text 5 O flute-player! O Lord decorated with a forest garland! O younger brother of Balarāma! O Lord who enchants all the worlds! O Lord who destroys the devotees' fear of taking birth again in this world! O charming Lord! O Lord more charming than Kāmadeva! O killer of Madhu, Gokula dāsa sings Your glories.

 
Song 147 (Bihāgaḍā-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) hare hare gobinda hare
kāliya-mardana      kaṁsa-nisūdana
          debakī-nandana rāma hare
Text 2 matsya kacchapa-bara       śūkara narahari
          bāmana bhṛgu-suta rakṣa-kulāre
śrī-baladeva bauddha          kalki nārāyaṇa
          deba janārdana śrī-kaṁsāre
Text 3 keśaba mādhaba        yādaba yadu-pati
          daitya-dalana duḥkha-bhañjana śaure
golaka-indu gokula-       candra gadādhara
          garuḍa-dhwaja gaja-mocana murāre
Text 4 śrī-puruṣottama       parameśwara prabhu
          parama-brahma parameṣṭhī aghāre
duḥkhite dayāṁ kuru      deba debakī-suta
          durmati paramānanda parihāre


     Text 1 (Refrain) Hari! Hari! Govinda! Hari! O crusher of Kāliya! O killer of Kaṁsa! O delight of Devakī! O Rāma! O Hari!
     Text 2 O Matysa! O Kūrma! O Varāha! O Nṛsiṁha! O Vāmana! O Paraśurāma! O enemy of the demons! O Balarāma! O Buddha! O Kalki! O Nārāyaṇa! O Lord who rescues the devotees from a host of troubles! O enemy of Kaṁsa!
     Text 3 O Kesava! O Madhava! O Yadava! O king of the Yadusa! O Lord who rips the demins into shreds! O Lord who breaks sufferings into pieces! O descendant of King Śūrasena! O Lord like a moon shining in this world! O Lord like a moon shining in Gokula! O Lord who holds a mace! O Lord who flies a banner marked with Garuḍa! O Lord who delivered Gajendra! O enemy of Mura!
     Text 4 O supreme person! O supreme controller! O master! O Supreme Brahman! O Supreme Lord! O enemy of Agha! O Lord, O son of Devakī, please be merciful to miserable, troubled, wicked-hearted Paramānanda dasa!

 
Song 148 (Bihāgaḍā-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) jaya jaya śrī-janārdana hari
jaya rādhikā-ballabha         bhubana-durlabha
          kaṁsāsura-dhwaṁsa-kārī
Text 2 jaya gopī-bimohana         rādhikā-ramaṇa
          śrī-bṛndāraṇya-bihārī
jaya jaya yadu-pati          agatira gati
          pūtanā-baka-aghārī
Text 3 jaya papa-bināśana         duṣkṛta-nāśana
          garuḍāsana-śobhā-kārī
jaya yaśodānandana       ānanda-bardhana 
          ānanda-ghana-rūpa-dhārī
Text 4 jaya papa-bimocana         tapa-nirāsana
          jībera tri-tāpa-hārī


     Text 1 (Refrain) Glory, glory to You, O Lord Hari, O Lord Janārdana! Glory to You, O beloved of Rādhā, O treasure difficult to find in this world, O killer of the demon Kaṁsa! 
     Text 2 Glory to You, O enchanter of the gopīs, O Lord who enjoys pastimes with Rādhā, O Lord who enjoys pastimes in Vṛndāvana! Glory, glory to You, O master of the Yādavas, O shelter of the shelterless, O enemy of Pūtanā, Baka, and Agha!
     Text 3 Glory to You, O destroyer of sins, O killer of the demons, O Lord who gloriously sits on Garuḍa! Glory to You, O delight of Yaśodā! O Lord who brings great delight, O Lord whose form is filled with bliss!
     Text 4 Glory to You, O savior form sin, O destroyer of sufferings, O Lord who removes the threefold miseries from the spirit souls!

 
Song 149 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya śiba sundara          biśwa parāt-para
          paramānandānanda-kārī
Text 2 jaya jaya śrīla       rāma raghunandana
          janaka-sutā-rati-kānta
sura nara bānara         khacara niśākara
          yachu guṇa gāya ananta
Text 3 durbādala naba        śyāmala-sundara
          kañja-nayana raṇa-bīra
bāme dhanur-dhara        dāhiṇe niśita śara
          jaladhi koṭi gabhīra
Text 4 śrī-pada pāduka      dharu bharatānuja
          cāmara chatra nichoḍi
śiba caturānana          sanaka sanātana
          śatamukha raha kara-joḍi
Text 5 bhakata ānanda        māruta nandana
          caraṇa-kamala karu sebā
gobinda dāsa        hṛdaye abadhāraṇa
          hari nārāyaṇa debā


     Text 1 Glory to You, O handsome auspicious Lord, O greatest of all great persons in the worlds, O most delightful of delightful persons!
     Text 2 Glory, glory to You, O handsome Lord Rāma, O descendant of Raghu, O beloved of Janaka's daughter, O Lord whose glorious mercy to the demigods, humans, monkeys, witches, and night-roving demons is praised by Lord Ananta Śeṣa!
     Text 3 Glory to You, O Lord handsome and dark like a new monsoon cloud, O lotus-eyed one, O hero on the batllefield, O Lord who hold a bow in Your left hand and a sharp arrow in Your right hand, O wise Lord deeper than millions of oceans!
     Text 4 Glory to You, O Lord whose sandals were worshiped by Your younger brother Bharata, worshiped with a parasol and a cāmara whisk, O Lord before whom Śiva, Brahmā, Sanaka, Sanātana, and hundred-faced Ananta stand with folded palms!
     Text 5 Glory to You, O bliss of the devotees, O Lord whose lotus feet are served by Hanumān! O Hari! O Nārāyaṇa! O Supreme Lord! In his heart Govinda dāsa is rapt in thinking of You.

 
Song 150 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 dhvaja-vajrāṅkuśa-paṅkaja-kalitam
vraja-vanitā-kuca-kuṅkuma-lalitam
Text 2 vande girivaradhara-pada-kamalam
kamalā-kara-kamalāñcitam amalam
Text 3 mañjula-maṇi-nūpura-ramaṇīyam
acapala-kula-ramaṇī-kamanīyam
Text 4 ati-lohitam ati-rohita-bhāṣam
madhu madhupī-kṛta-govinda-dāsam


     1 and Text 2 I offer my repsectful obeisances to Lord Giridhārī's lotus feet, feet markwed with the signs of the flag, thunderbolt, elephant-goad, and lotus, feet gracefully anointed with the kunkuma of the vraja-gopis' breasts, splendid feet worshiped by Goddess Lakṣmī's lotus hands, . . .
     Text 3 . . . graceful feet decorated with jewel anklets, feet the saintly, determined, beautiful gopīs yearn to attain, . . .
     Text 4 . . . reddish feet praised by glorious prayers, feet like lotus flower, lotus flowers that have tranformed Govinda dāsa into a bumblebee eager to taste their nectar.

 
Song 151 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya jaya gopīnātha madana-mohana
yugala-kiśora jaya rasika-ramaṇa
Text 2 jaya rādhā-ballabha muralī-adhara
jaya braja-binoda prema-sudhākara
Text 3 mādhaba giridhara gopī-cira-hārī
lalita tri-bhaṅga nāgara banoyāri
Text 4 rati-sukha-sāgara braja-subilāsī
rūpa-rasāyana gokula-bāsī
Text 5 braja-pati bāla lāla mada-nāyaka
parama-prabīṇa prema-sukha-dāyaka
Text 6 śyāmera bāme ki pyārī śohe
śrī-gopāla dāsa ki mana mohe


     Text 1 Glory, glory to You, O master of the gopīs, O Lord more charming than Kāmadeva! Glory to You, O Divine Couple who taste the nectar of trascendental pastimes!
     Text 2 Glory to You, O beloved of Rādhā, O Lord who place the flute to Your lips! Glory to You, O Lord who enjoy pastimes in Vraja! Glory to You, O nectar moon of spiritual love!
     Text 3 Glory to You, O husband of the goddess of fortune, o lifter of Govardhana Hill, O Lord who robs the gopīs' garments, O graceful threefold-bending amorous hero adorned with forest flowers!
     Text 4 Glory to You, O ocean of amorous pastimes, O Lord who enjoys pastimes in Vraja, O Lord whose form is nectar, O Lord who resides in Gokula!
     Text 5 Glory to You, O master of Vraja, O playful boy, O hero of amorous pastimes, O most wise and learned Lord, O giver of transcendental bliss and love!
     Text 6 O dark Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is the affectionate and glorious girl at Your left? O Lord, who has Gopala dāsa's heart become enchanted by seeing You?

 
Song 152 (Gurjarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya jaya guru gosāñī-śrī-caraṇa sāra
yāhā haite haba pāra e bhaba-saṁsāra
Text 2 manera ānande bala hari bhaja bṛndābana
śrī-guru baiṣṇaba pāya māja-iyā mana
Text 3 jaya rūpa sanātana bhaṭṭa raghunātha
śrī-jība gopāla bhaṭṭa dāsa raghunātha
Text 4 jaya e-i chaya gosāñīra karuma caraṇa bandana
yāhā haite bighna nāśa abhīṣṭa pūraṇa
Text 5 jaya rasa-nāgarī jaya nanda-lāla
jaya jaya madana-mohana śrī-gopāla
Text 6 jaya śacī-suta gaurāṅga-sundara
jaya nityānanda padmābatīra koṅara
Text 7 jaya jaya sītā-nātha adwaita gosāñī
yāhāra karuṇā-bale gorā-guṇa gā-i
Text 8 jaya jaya śrībāsa jaya gadādhara
jaya swarūpa rāmānanda premera sāgara
Text 9 jaya jaya sanātana jaya śrī-rūpa
jaya jaya raghunātha prāṇera swarūpa
Text  jaya gaura-bhakta-bṛnda dayā kara more
sabāra caraṇa-dhūli dhari nija śire
Text 11 jaya jaya nīlācala-candra jagannātha
mo pāpire dayā kari kara ātma-sātha
Text 12 jaya jaya gopāla deba bhakata-batsala
naba ghana jini tanu parama ujjwala
Text 13 jaya jaya gopīnātha prabhu prāṇa mora
purī gosāñīra lāgi yāra nāma kṣīra-cora
Text 14 śrī-guru-baiṣṇaba-pāda-padma kari āśa
nāma saṅkīrtana kahe narottama dāsa


     Text 1 Glory, glory to the glorious feet of the spiritual master and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, feet that enable to us cross to the farther shore of the ocean of birth and death!
     Text 2 With a joyful heart please chant, "Hari!" Please worship Vṛndāvana. Plunge your heart into meditation on our spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas.
     Text 3 Glory to Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. 
     Text 4 Please bow down before the feet of these six Gosvāmīs. Their feet will destroy obstacles and fulfill desires.
     Text 5 Glory to Śrī Rādhā, the heroine of nectar pastimes! Glory to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is Nanda's son! Glory, glory to the cowherd boy Kṛṣṇa, who is more enchanting than Kāmadeva! 
     Text 6 Glory, glory to handsome Lord Gaurāṅgasundara, who is Śacī's son! Glory to Lord Nityānanda, who is Padmāvaṭi's son!
     Text 7 Glory, glory to Lord Advaita Gosāñī, who is Sītā's husband! By the power of His mercy I chant Lord Gaura's glories.
     Text 8 Glory, glory to Śrīvāsa! Glory to Gadādhara! Glory to Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāmānanda Rāya, who are like oceans of ecstatic spiritual love!
     Text 9 Glory to Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī! Glory to Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, who is Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's very life! 
     Text 10 Glory to Lord Gaura's devotees! O devotees, please be merciful to me. I take the dust of all your feet. I place that dust upon my head.
     Text 11 Glory, glory to Lord Jagannātha, the moon of Nīlācala! O Lord, please be kind and accept this sinner as one of Your personal associates.
     Text 12 Glory, glory to Lord Gopāla, who loves the devotees, and whopse glorious form is more splendid than new monsoon clouds!
     Text 13 Glory, glory to Lord Gopīnātha, who is like my life and breath! Iśvara Purī Gosvāmī explained that this Deity bears the name Kṣīra-cora.
     Text 14 The lotus feet of his spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas the only goal he yearns to attain, Narottama dāsa sings this song of holy names.

 
Song 153 (Gurjarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya jaya madana gopāla baṁśī-dhārī
tri-bhaṅga bhaṅgimā ṭhāma caraṇa-mādhurī
Text 2 jaya jaya śrī-gobinda-mūrti manohara
koṭi candra jini yāra baraṇa sundara
Text 3 jaya jaya gopīnātha mahimā prabala
tamāla śyāmala aṅga pīna bakṣaḥ-sthala
Text 4 jaya jaya mathurā-maṇḍala kṛṣṇa-dhāma
jaya jaya gokula yāra golaka ākhyāna
Text 5 jaya jaya dwādaśa bana kṛṣṇa-līlā-sthāna
śrī-bana lauha bhadra bhāṇḍīra bana nāma
Text 6 mahābane mahānanda pāya braja-bāsī
yāhāte prakaṭa kṛṣṇa swarūpa prakāśi
Text 7 jaya jaya tālabana khadira bahulā
jaya jaya kumuda kāmyabane kṛṣṇa-līlā
Text 8 jaya jaya madhubana madhu-pāna-sthāna
yāṁhā madhu-pāne matta haila balarāma
Text 9 jaya jaya sarba-śreṣṭha śrī-bṛndābana
debera agocara sthāna kandarpa-mohana
Text 10 jaya jaya lalitā-kuṇḍa jaya śyāma-kuṇḍa
jaya jaya rādhā-kuṇḍa pratāpa pracaṇḍa
Text 11 jaya jaya mānasa-gaṅgā jaya gobardhana
jaya jaya dāna-ghāṭa līlā sarbottama
Text 12 jaya jaya nanda-ghāṭa jaya akṣara-baṭa
jaya jaya cīra-ghāṭa yamunā nikaṭa
Text 13 jaya jaya keśi-ghāṭa parama mohana
jaya baṁśī-baṭa rādhā-kṛṣṇa manorama
Text 14 jaya jaya rāma-ghāṭa parama nirjana
yāṁhā rāsa-līlā kaila rohiṇī-nandana
Text 15 jaya jaya bimala-kuṇḍa jaya nandīśwara
jaya jaya kṛṣṇa-keli pābana-sarobara
Text 16 jaya jaya yābaṭa grāma abhimanyālaya
sakhī saṅge rā-i yāṁhā sadā birājaya
Text 17 jaya jaya bṛṣabhānu-pura nāme grāma
jaya jaya saṅkeṭa rādhā-kṛṣṇa-līlā-sthāna
Text 18 śrī-guru-baiṣṇaba-pāda-padma kari āśa
nāma saṅkīrtana kahe narottama dāsa


     Text 1 Glory, glory to Lord Madana-Gopāla, who plays a flute, whose threefold-bending form is the abode of handsomeness and grace, and whose feet are the abode of sweetness!
     Text 2 Glory, glory to the charming form of Lord Govinda, whose handsome splendor defeats millions of moons!
     Text 3 Glory, glory to glorious powerful Lord Gopīnātha, whose chest os broad and whose limbs are dark like a tamāla tree!
     Text 4 Glory, glory to Mathurā-maṇḍala, Lord Kṛṣṇa's abode! Glory, glory to Gokula, which is famous in this world!
     Text 5 Glory, glory to the twelve forests where lord Kṛṣṇa enjoys pastimes, forests that include Śrīvana, Lauhavana, Bhadravana, and Bhāṇḍīravana! 
     Text 6 Glory to Mahāvana, where the people of Vraja attain great bliss. It was there that Lord Kṛṣṇa made His form visible in this world.
     Text 7 Glory, glory to Tālavana, Khadiravana, and Bahulāvana! Glory, glory to Kumudavana and Kāmyavana, where Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoys many pastimes!
     Text 8 Glory, glory to Madhuvana, the place where the Lord drinks honey! It is there that Lord Balarāma becomes intoxicated by drinking honey.
     Text 9 Glory, glory to Śrī Vṛndāvana, the best of all the forests! That place is more enchanting than Kāmadeva. Even the demigods cannot understand that place.
     Text 10 Glory, glory to Lalitā-kuṇḍa! Glory to Śyāma-kuṇḍa! Glory, glory to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is supremely glorious!
     Text 11 Glory, glory to Mānasa-gaṅgā! Glory to Govardhana! Glory, glory to Dāna-ghāṭa, where the Lord enjoys the most sublime pastimes!
     Text 12 Glory, glory to Nanda-ghāṭa! Glory to Akṣara-vaṭa! Glory, glory to Cīra-ghāṭa, near the Yamunā! 
     Text 13 Glory, glory to Keśi-ghāṭa, which is supremely charming! Glory to Vaṁśī-vaṭa, which delights the hearts of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa!
     Text 14 Glory, glory to Rāma-ghāṭa, which is very secluded! It is there that Lord Balarāma enjoys the rāsa dance.
     Text 15 Glory, glory to Vimala-kuṇḍa! Glory to Nandīśvara! Glory, glory to Pāvana-sarovara, where Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoys many pastimes!
     Text 16 Glory, glory to Yāvaṭa-grāma, Abhimanyu's home! Rādhā and Her friends are gloriously manifest there always.
     Text 17 Glory, glory to the village named Vṛṣabhānu-pura! Glory, glory to Saṅkeṭa, where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoy many pastimes!
     Text 18 The lotus feet of his spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas the only goal he yearns to attain, Narottama dāsa sings this song of holy names.

 
Song 154 (Gurjarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya jaya braja-bāsī śreṣṭha nanda-rāja
jaya jaya brajeśwarī śreṣṭha gopī mājha
Text 2 jaya jaya rohiṇī-nandana balarāma
jaya jaya rādhā-kṛṣṇa swayaṁ rasa-dhāma
Text 3 jaya jaya rādhā sakhī lalitā sundarī
sakhīra parama śreṣṭha rūpera mādhurī
Text 4 jaya jaya śrī-biśākhā campakalatikā
raṅga-debī sudebī tuṅgabidyā indurekhā
Text 5 jaya jaya rādhānujā anaṅga-mañjarī
tri-bhubana jini yāra aṅgera mādhurī
Text 6 jaya jaya paurṇamāsī bali yogamāyā
rādhā-kṛṣṇa līlā karāna yini ācchādiyā
Text 7 jaya jaya bṛndā-debī kṛṣṇa-priyatamā
jaya jaya bīrā sakhī sarba-manorama 
Text 8 jaya jaya ratna-maṇḍapa ratna-siṁhāsana
jaya jaya rādhā-kṛṣṇa saṅge gopī-gaṇa
Text 9 śuna śuna āre bhā-i karita prārthanā
braje rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sebā karaha bhābanā
Text 10 chāḍi anya karma asat ālāpane
braje rādhā-kṛṣṇa karaha bhābane
Text 11 iha saba līlā-sthāna ye kare smaraṇa
janme janme śire dharoṁ tāṁhāra caraṇa
Text 12 śrī-guru-baiṣṇaba-pāda-padma kari āśa
nāma saṅkīrtana kahe narottama dāsa


     Text 1 Glory, glory to King Nanda, the best of Vraja's people! Glory, glory to Vraja's queen, who is the best of the gopīs!
     Text 2 Glory, glory to Lord Balarāma, who is Rohiṇī's son! Glory, glory to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, the abode of all sweetness!
     Text 3 Glory, glory to beautiful Lalitā, who is Rādhā's friend! She is the best of Rādhā's friends. Her form is filled with sweet grace and charm.
     Text 4 Glory, glory to Śrī Viśākhā, Campakalatikā, Raṅga-devī, Sudevī, Tuṅgavidyā, and Indurekhā!
     Text 5 Glory, glory to Anaṅga-mañjarī, who is Rādhā's younger sister! The sweet charm and grace of her form defeats the three worlds.
     Text 6 Glory, glory to Paurṇamāsī, whom I declare to be Yogamāyā herself. With careful discretion He makes arrangements for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's pastimes.
     Text 7 Glory, glory to Vṛndā-devī, who is very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa! Glory, glory to Vīrā-sakhī, who delights every heart!
     Text 8 Glory, glory to the jewel pavilion and the jewel throne! Glory, glory to the gopīs that are Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's friends and associates!
     Text 9 Listen, listen, O my brother. Meditate on service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. Pray that you will attain service to Them there.
     Text 10 Turn away from all other duties. Turn away from useless gossip. Meditate on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Vraja.
     Text 11 Birth after birth I place on my head the feet of anyone who meditates on all these pastime places.
     Text 12 The lotus feet of his spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas the only goal he yearns to attain, Narottama dāsa sings this song of holy names.

 
Song 155 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya jaya gobinda gopāla gadādhara
kṛṣṇacandra kara kṛpā karuṇā-sāgara
Text 2 jaya guru gobinda gopeśa giridhārī
śrī-rādhikāra prāṇa-dhana mukunda murāri
Text 3 hari-nāma bine re gobinda nāma bine
biphale manuṣya janma yāra dine dine
Text 4 dina yāya bṛthā kaje rātra yāya dine
nā bhajilāma rādhā-kṛṣṇa-caraṇārabinde
Text 5 kṛṣṇa bhajibāra tare saṁsāre ā-inu
michā māyāra baddha haiyā bṛkṣa samāna hainu
Text 6 kāla-kali pāpa-prapañca prāktana-baśe
nāhi maje haya jība kṛṣṇa-nāma rase
Text 7 kṛṣṇa-nāma bhaja jība āra saba miche
palā-ite patha nā-i yama āche piche
Text 8 kṛṣṇa-nāma hari-nāma baḍa-i madhura
ye-i jana kṛṣṇa bhaje se baḍa catura
Text 9 ye nāma śrabaṇe haya pāpa bimocana
dwija hari-dāsa kahe nāma-saṅkīrtana


     Text 1 Glory, glory to You, O Lord Govinda, who protect the cows and hold a mace. O Lord Kṛṣṇacandra, O ocean of mercy, please be merciful to me.
     Text 2 Glory to You, O Lord Govinda, O master, O master of the cowherd boys, O lifter of Govardhana Hill, O Śrī Rādhikā's life-treasure, O giver of liberation, O enemy of Mura!
     Text 3 If one does not chant Lord Hari's holy names or Lord Govinda's holy names, day after day one passes this human birth without any good result.
     Text 4 My days and nights I passed in fruitless labor. I did not worship Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet.
     Text 5 I came to this world of birth and death to worship Lord Kṛṣṇa. Alas! I was bound by māyā's illusions. I was made dull and stunted like a tree.
     Text 6 My past karma pushed me into Kali-yuga's sins. In this life i did not dive into the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names.
     Text 7 O people, please worship Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. All else is an illusion. Don't walk by the path where Yamarāja will follow you.
     Text 8 Lord Kṛṣṇa's name and Lord Hari's name are very sweet. He who worships Lord Kṛṣṇa is very wise.
     Text 9 He in whose ear Lord Kṛṣṇa's name enters becomes free of sins. In this way the brāhmaṇa Hari dāsa chants the glories of the holy name.

 
Song 156 (Gurjarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) kabe prabhu anugraha habe
biṣaya-bāsanā-pāśa       kabe moha habe nāśa
          kabe āmi bṛndābane yāba
Text 2 e saṁsāre duḥkha-phala          se ānanda mahā-bala
          jāniyā yā-iba se-i sthāna
saba duḥkha palā-ibe          gaḍāgaḍi diba yabe
          rāsa-sthalī yamunā-puline
Text 3 kṛṣṇa-mūrti gobardhana          mahā-bhāgye daraśana
          mora kiye habe hena karma
kṛṣṇera rādhikā yaiche        śrī kuṇḍa tāhāra taiche
          kāya mane kabe habe marma
Text 4 kuṇḍa-yuge snāna kari      se-i sthāne yadi mari
          tabe bujhi mora habe gati
tumi prabhu dayāmaya          e rādhā-mohana kaya
          siddha kara e-i ta kākuti


     Text 1 (Refrain) When will the Lord be merciful to me? When will the noose of material desires around my neck be cut? When will I go to Vṛndāvana?
     Text 2 The material world bears suffering as its only fruit. I shall go to a place where I know there is only intense bliss. Then all material sufferings will flee far away. I will go to the rāsa-dance arena on the Yamunā's banks. There I will roll on the ground.
     Text 3 If I become fortunate I will see the Deity of Lord Krsna on Govardhana Hill. Will I be able to do that? When will my body, mind, and heart run to Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa?
     Text 4 I know the destination I will attain if I bathe in those two kuṇḍas and die in the place around them. Rādhāmohana dāsa says: O Lord, You are very merciful. Please grant me these perfections. In a voice choked with emotion I beg this of You.

 
Song 157 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) nidānera bandhu tumi śuniyāchi hari
muñi pāpī durācāra         sādhana-bhajana-hīna
          pariṇāma bhābi ebe mari
Text 2 ghora bṛddha-kāla ā-ila         anta-danta saba gela
          durbāsanā gela nā kebala
dhabala ha-ila keśa      tamu aṅgera beśa
          mu-i prabhu abujha pāgala
Text 3 jāni e māṭira deha         māṭite-i ghuri phiri
          antime-o haiyā yabe maṭi
kintu ki biṣama bhula         candana sugandha taila
          tāhāra hariyā paripāṭī
Text 4 janama āndhala ye-i        se yadi gartete paḍe
          dhari tule ye thākaye kāche
nayāna thākite ye        bhaba-kūpe ḍube mare
          tāra āra ki sahāya āche
Text 5 kintu hari bhaba-roge      taba nāma-mahauṣadhi
          śāstra āra sādhu mukhe śuni
diyāchi tomāte bhāra          gopālere kara pāra
          diyā hari caraṇa-taraṇī


     Text 1 (Refrain) O Lord Hari, I have heard that You are the friend of persons on the verge of death. I am a sinner. I am very ill-behaved. I have no spiritual activities and no devotion. Now I am on the verge of death.
     Text 2 Horrible old-age has come to me. My teeth and everything else are all gone. Only my wicked material desires have not gone away. My hair is white. Still I decorate this body with nice garments. O Lord, I have become a fool, a madman.
     Text 3 I know this body is only made of clay. For some time the clay of this body turns this way and that, but in the end it returns to the earth from which it came. What a mistake I made! I carefully anointed this body with sandal paste and fragrant oils. 
     Text 4 If a person blind from birth falls into a deep hole, he is helpless. Someone else must pull him out. In the same way if a person with eyes to see falls into the well of this world of birth and death, he will drown unless someone comes to save him.
     Text 5 O Lord Hari, I am tormented by the disease of living in this world of birth and death. Your holy name is the medicine for that disease. This I have heard from the scriptures and from the mouths of the saintly devotees. O Lord Hari, I take shelter of You. To Gopāla dāsa please give the boat of Your feet. In that boat carry him to the farther shore of this world of birth and death.

 
Song 158 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 sakala baiṣṇaba gosā-i dayā kara more
dante tṛṇa dhari kahe e dīna pāmare
Text 2 śrī-guru-caraṇa āra śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya
pāda-padma pā-oya-iyā more kara dhanya
Text 3 tomā sabāra karuṇā binā iha prāpti naya
biśeṣa ayogya muñi kahila niścaya
Text 4 bañcha-kalpa-taru ha-o karuṇā-sāgara
e-i te bharasā muñi dhari ye antara
Text 5 guṇa leśa nāhi mora aparādhera sīmā
āmā uddhariyā loke dekhā-o mahimā
Text 6 nāma-saṅkīrtana ruci āra prema-dhana
e rādhā-mohane deha ha-iyā sa-karuṇa


     Text 1 O saintly Vaiṣṇavas, please be merciful to me! Placing a blade of grass between his teeth, a poor wretch speaks these words.
     Text 2 Please give to me the great treasure that is taking shelter of the feet of the spiritual master and the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya.
     Text 3 Without your mercy I cannot attain thats helter. I am very unqualified to attain that shelter. That is certain.
     Text 4 You are all kalpa-taru trees. You are oceans of mercy. I have faith in that. That faith I keep in my heart.
     Text 5 I have no virtues. I stand at the apex of all offenses. If you can deliver even fallen me, you will show your great glories to the world.
     Text 6 Therefore please kindly give to this Rādhāmohana dāsa the gift of attraction to chanting the Lord's holy names. Please give to him a great treasure of ecstatic spiritual love.

 
Song 159 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 rādhā-nātha baḍa aparūpa līlā
kiśora kiśorī du-i eka mile nabadwīpe prakaṭiyā
Text 2 rādhā-nātha baḍa aparūpa se
śrī-caitanya nāme hīna-jane dayā tapata-kāñcana de
Text 3 rādhā-nātha saṅgī aparūpa tāra
nitā-i adwaita śrībāsa swarūpa rāya rāmānanda āra
Text 4 rādhā-nātha ki kahiba taba raṅga
sanātana rūpa raghunātha lokanātha bhaṭṭa-yuga saṅge
Text 5 rādhā-nātha e saba bhakata meli
nā kaila kīrtana ābeśe nartana prema-dāna kutuhali
Text 6 rādhā-nātha baḍa abhāgiyā mu-i
se-kāle thākitu prema-dāne pā-itu kena nā karila tu-i
Text 7 rādhā-nātha baḍa-i rahila duḥkha
janama ha-ila takhana nahila dekhite nā pā-inu sukha
Text 8 rādhā-nātha ki jāni kahite āmi
gaurasundara dāsera bharasā uddhāra kariba tumi


     Text 1 Rādhā's master enjoys very wonderful pastimes. A teenage boy and a teenage girl have joined together in a single form, a form manifest in Navadvīpa.
     Text 2 Rādhā's master is very wonderful. Now He calls Himself by the name Śrī Caitanya. His form is splendid like molten gold. He is very merciful to the poor fallen souls.
     Text 3 Rādhā's master has wonderful companions. His companions include Lord Nitāi, Lord Advaita, Śrīvāsa, Svarūpa Dāmodara, and Rāmānanda Rāya.
     Text 4 O master of Rādhā, how can I describe Your pastimes with Sanātana Gosvāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Lokanātha Gosvāmī, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī? 
     Text 5 O master of Rādhā, meeting with the devotees, You enjoy pastimes of kīrtana. Overcome with ecstatic love, you dance. There is a great tumult. You give everyone the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. 
     Text 6 O master of Rādhā, I am very unfortunate. Why was I not present at that time to receive Your gift of ecstatic spiritual love? 
     Text 7 O master of Rādhā, I am very unhappy. I was not born at that time. I did not attain the happiness of seeing You.
     Text 8 O master of Rādhā, what do I know to speak about You? Gaurasundara dāsa simply has faith that You will deliver him.

 
Song 160 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 rādhā-nātha dekhite lāgiche bhaya
tanu-bala hrāsa āra buddhi-nāśa kakhana ki jāni haya
Text 2 rādhā-nātha sakali chāḍiyā gela
dānta ānta gela badhira ha-ila nayane nā dekhi bhāla
Text 3 rādhā-nātha tumi se karuṇā-sindhu
tomā binā āra kebā uddhāribe tumi sakalera bandhu
Text 4 rādhā-nātha āge saba nibedaya
maraṇamaya byādhi-grasta haya smaraṇa nāhika raya
Text 5 rādhā-nātha āra kichu nāhi bhaya
bṛṣabhānu-sutā-caraṇa-sebane pāche kṛpā nāhi haya
Text 6 rādhā-nātha e-i nibedayi āmi
bṛṣabhānu-sutā-pade dāsī kari aṅgīkāra kara tumi 
Text 7 rādhā-nātha e-i mora abhilāṣa
nibhṛta nikuñje nija pade leha e gaurasundara dāsa


     Text 1 O master of Rādhā, I am afraid even to look. My bodily strength is much less. My intelligence is destroyed. What do I know now?
     Text 2 O master of Rādhā, everything has gone away. My teeth are gone. My digestion is gone. My hearing is bad. I do not see well. 
     Text 3 O master of Rādhā, You are an ocean of mercy. But for You, who will deliver me? You are the friend of everyone.
     Text 4 O master of Rādhā, I have told You everything. Now I am in the grip of a fatal disease. Now I cannot remember anything.
     Text 5 O master of Rādhā, I am not afraid. Please be merciful and allow me to serve the feet of Vṛṣabhānu's daughter.
     Text 6 O master of Rādhā, I place this prayer before You. Please accept me. Please make me a gopī maidservant at the feet of Vṛṣabhānu's daughter.
     Text 7 O master of Rādhā, that is my desire. Please make this Gaurasundara dāsa into a gopī, a gopī that in s secluded forest grove has fallen in love with Your feet.

 
Song 161 (Sāraṅga-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) teja mana hari-bimukhanki saṅga
yāka saṅgahi        kumati upajatahi
          bhajana ki paḍata bibhaṅga
Text 2 satata asata patha         le-i yo yāyata
          upajata kāminī saṅga
śamana-dūta         paramāyu parakhata
          dūra sañe nehāra-i raṅga
Text 3 ata eba se hari-nāma       sāra parama madhu
          pāna karaha choḍi bhaṅga
hari-caraṇa-saroruha          māti rahuṁ
          gopala-dāsa-mana bhṛṅga


     Text 1 (Refrain) Shun, O my heart, people who have turned their faces away from Lord Hari. Association with them will give birth to wicked thoughts. Association with them will break into pieces your devotion to the Lord.
     Text 2 Association with them will make you walk always on the wrong path, will make you associate with women who are filled with lust, will make the Yamadūtas happy as they watch you from afar.
     Text 3 Therefore please shun the association of such persons. instead please sip the sweet honey of lord Hari's holy names. Ah! Gopāla dāsa's heart has now become a bumblebee intoxicated by tasting the honey at the lotus flower of Lord Hari's feet.

 
Song 162 (Aśābarī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) bhaja mana nanda-kumāra
bhābiyā dekhaha bhā-i gati nāhi āra
Text 2 dhana jana putra ādi kebā āpanāra
ata eba karaha mana hari-pada sāra
Text 3 ku-saṅga chāḍiyā sadā sat-saṅge thāka
parama nipuṇa iha nāma bali ḍāka
Text 4 tāra nāma-līlā-gāne sadā ha-o matta
se caraṇa-dhana pābe ha-iba kṛtārtha
Text 5 rādhā-mohana bale mana ki baliba tore
saṁsāra yātanā āra nāhi deha more


     Text 1 (Refrain) O my heart, please worship Nanda's son. O my brother, please gaze at Him with great love. There is no shelter but Him.
     Text 2 What are wealth, followers, sons, and all else to you? O my heart, please stay at Lord Hari's feet.
     Text 3 Always turn from bad association. Associate with the saintly devotees. Very carefully chant the Lord's holy names.
     Text 4 Always be intoxicated by the singing the Lord's holy names and glorifying the Lord's pastimes. Then you will attain the treasure that is the Lord's feet. You will attain the goal of life.
     Text 5 Rādhāmohana dāsa says: O my heart, this I ask of you. Please do not do anything that will keep me in the torments of this world of birth and death.

 
Song 163 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 (Refrain) bhaja mana satata ha-iyā nirdwandwa
rādhā-kṛṣṇa parama-sukha-dāyaka rasamaya paramānanda
Text 2 cañcala biṣaya-biṣa        sukha māni khā-osi
          nā jānasi iha mati manda
para-kāle nikaṭa         maraṇa-duḥkha-deyaba
          bujhaha abahuṁ karu āndha
Text 3 mohe duḥkha-bhāgī          karaṇa naha samucita
          to hāma janama bandhu
nija duḥkha jāni         abahuṁ smaraṇa karu
          yo tuhuṁ karuṇāka sindhu
Text 4 o pada-paṅkaja-       prema-sudhā pibi pibi
          dūra kara nija duḥkha-kanda
e rādhā-mohana kaha      tejaha micha-i moha
          yaichana hata nija bandha


     Text 1 (Refrain) O my heart, please turn away from the dualities of this world. Always worship Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, who are sweet like nectar, who are filled with bliss, and who delight the devotees.
     Text 2 O my heart, you are a fool. You do not know anything. You think drinking the poison of fickle material sense gratification will make us happy. Please know that in the course of time that poison becomes a monster. It brings torment and death. It makes one blind.
     Text 3 O my heart, it is not right that you make me suffer in this way. You and I have been friends from birth. Aware that material sense gratification will bring only torment, you should meditate on the person who is like an ocean of mercy.
     Text 4 Sip, sip the sweet nectar of love for His lotus feet. Throw far away the sense gratification that becomes the root of torments. This Rādhāmohana dāsa says: Turn away from the illusions of this world, illusions that will keep us bound in this prison.

 
Song 164 (Bhāṭiyāri-rāga)
 

Text 1 brajendra-nandana          bhaje ye-i jana
          sa-phala jībana tāra
tāhāra upamā        bede nāhi sīmā
          tri-bhubane nāhi āra
Text 2 emana mādhaba         nā bhaje mānaba
          kakhana mariyā yābe
se-i se adhama      prahāriyā yama
          raurabe kṛmite khābe
Text 3 tārapara āra          pāpī nāhi chāra
          saṁsāra jagata mājhe
kona kāle tāra      gati nāhi āra
          micha-i bhramicha kāje
Text 4 locana dāsa      bhakati āśa
          hari guṇa kahi likhi
hena rasa sāra      mati nāhi āra
          tāra mukha nāhi dekhi


     Text 1 They who worship Lord Kṛṣṇa attain the goal of life. Their lives are fruitful. In the Vedas no one is their equal. In all the three worlds no one is their equal.
     Text 2 They who do not worship Lord Kṛṣṇa are the lowest of the low. When they die Yamarāja will punish them. They will go to the hell named Raurava, where they will be eaten by worms.
     Text 3 These persons are sinners. They are worthless like a pile of ashes. In this world of birth and death no one is more of a sinner than they. They have no good destination. They are bewildered. They work in vain.
     Text 4 I, Locana dāsa, yearn to attain devotion to Lord Hari. I speak and write of Lord Hari's glories. I will not even look at the face of anyone who does not find delight in tasting the sweet nectar of Lord Hari's glories.

 
Song 165 (Śrī-rāga)
 

Text 1 śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhajana lāgi saṁsāre ā-inu
māyā-jāle bandī haiyā bṛkṣa samāna hainu
Text 2 sneha-latā beḍi beḍi tanu kaila śeṣa
kīḍā rūpe nārī tahe hṛdaye prabeśe
Text 3 phala-rūpe putra kanyā ḍāle bhāṅgī paḍe
kāla-rūpī bihaṅga upare bāsa kare
Text 4 khāḍite nā pā-ila gācha śukhā-iyā gela
saṁsārera dābānala tāhāte lāgila
Text 5 durāśā durbāsanā du-i uṭhe dhūmā-iyā
phukāra karaye locana marilāma pūriyā
Text 6 e-gā-o e-gā-o mora baiṣṇaba gosā-i
karuṇāra jala siñca tabe rakṣā pā-i


     Text 1 To worship Lord Kṛṣṇa I came to this world of birth and death. Then Māyā caught me in her net. Then I became dull and stunted like a tree.
     Text 2 The vine of material love coiled and coiled around me. Manifesting the form of a tree-boring insect, a woman entered my heart.
     Text 3 Manifesting the forms of fruits, sons and daughters grew on my branches and fell to the ground. Manifesting the form of a bird, time made its nest in my branches.
     Text 4 Gradually I became dry and withered. I could hardly stand erect. Then the blazing forest fire of birth and death came.
     Text 5 Wicked desires and false hopes were the two streams of smoke that at once arose. This Locana dāsa called out, “I am dying!
     Text 6 "Save me! Save me, O Vaiṣṇava Gosāi! Throw upon me the water of your mercy and save me!"

 
 
Song 167 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 hari hari āmāra emana daśā habe
biṣama dāruṇa biṣa jañjāla ṭuṭibe
Text 2 dārā sukha-bhoge mu-i haba birakata
śaraṇa la-iba śuka baiṣṇaba bhāgabata
Text 3 karaṅga kothāli hāte galāya kānthā diyā
mādhukuri māgi khāba braja-bāsī haiyā
Text 4 saṁsāra-sukhera mukhe anala jwāliyā
thuthu kariyā kabe yā-ibe chāḍiyā
Text 5 jāti kula abhimāna sakala chāḍiba
gopālera āśā kata dibase phaliba


     Text 1 Hari! Hari! I will attain that state. The power of this horrible poison will be broken.
     Text 2 I will renounce the joys of houshold life. I will take shelter of the Bhāgavatam that is Śukadeva's book and the many Bhāgavatams that are the Vaiṣṇavas.
     Text 3 I will reside in Vraja. A pathwork cloth around my neck and a bowl in my hand, I will beg as a madhukari. In that way I will eat.
     Text 4 When will I spit far away the flames of material sense gratification that burn in my mouth?
     Text 5 I will renounce my family, social station, pride, and everything else. Ah! After how many days will Gopāla dāsa's desire be fulfilled?

 
Song 168 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 hari he dayāla mora jaya rādhā-nātha
bāra bāra e-i bāra laha nija sātha
Text 2 bahu yoni bhrami nātha la-inu śaraṇa
nija guṇe kṛpā kara adhama-tāraṇa
Text 3 jagata-tāraṇa tumi jagata-jībana
tomā chāḍā kara nāhi he rādhā-ramaṇa
Text 4 bhubana-maṅgala tumi bhubanera pati
tumi upekṣile nātha ki ha-ibe gati
Text 5 bhābiyā dekhinu e-i jagata mājhāre
tomā binā keha nā-i e rāme uddhāre


     Text 1 O master of Rādhā! All glory to You! O Lord Hari! Please be merciful to me! Again and again and again I beg: Please accept me as one of Your associates!
     Text 2 O Lord, wandering in this world, I took shelter of many different wombs. O deliverer of the fallen, please be merciful to me.
     Text 3 You are the savior of the worlds. You are the life of the worlds. O Lord Rādha-ramaṇa, please do not turn away from me.
     Text 4 You are the auspiciousness of the worlds. You are the master of the worlds. What will happen to persons who turn from You?
     Text 5 I have carefully observed this world. O Lord, none but You can deliver this Rāma dāsa.

 
Part 3 Longer songs Glorifying Lord Gaurāṅga

 
Song 169 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 aśeṣa guṇera nidhi gaurāṅga-sundara
ānande bibhora sadā nadīyā-nāgara
Text 2 indu jini badanera śobhā manohara
īśwara brahmādi yāre bhābe nirantara
Text 3 uddhārilā jaga-jane diyā prema-dhana
una pāpī tāpī nāhi kaila bicāraṇa
Text 4 ṛṇa śudhibāra prabhu śrīmatī rādhāra
rītimata nadīyāra haila abatāra
Text 5 lipta śrī-gaurāṅga-tanu śrī-haricandane
līlābatī nārī heri haya acetane
Text 6 emana dayālu prabhu nāhi habe āra
aikāntika kṛṣṇa-bhakti karila pracāra
Text 7 oḍhra-deśa yā-iyā prabhu bahu līlā haila
audārya-guṇete sārbabhauma nistārila 
Text 8 caturdaśa swarābalī ye kare kīrtana
acire labhaye se-i gaurāṅga-caraṇa
Text 9 śrī-jāhnabā rāmacandra-pada kari āśa
caturdaśa swarābalī gāya prema-dāsa


     Text 1 Lord Gaurāṅgasundara is the treasure-house of all transcendental virtuese. In the towns of Nadīyā He is always overcome with spiritual bliss.
     Text 2 His glorious handsome face defeats the moon. Śiva, Brahmā, and all the demigods always worship Him with ecstatic love.
     Text 3 Giving them the great treasure of ecstatic spiritual love, He delivers the people of the world. In giving that gift He makes no distinction betweeen the sinners and the austere tapasvīs.
     Text 4 Trying to repay the debt He owes Śrīmatī Rādhā, the Lord has descended to this world in Nadīyā and accepted the role of a devotee.
     Text 5 Lord Gaurāṅga's fair form is anointed with sandal paste. Seeing Him, the girls of Nadīyā are overcome with spiritual bliss and fall unconscious.
     Text 6 No one will ever be as merciful as Lord Gaurāṅga is. He preaches the glories of pure unalloyed devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa.
     Text 7 Lord Gaurāṅga went to Orissa and enjoyed many pastimes there. With great and generous mercy Lord Gaurāṅga delivered Sārvabhauma.
     Text 8 Anyone who chants these fourteen lines glorifying Lord Gaurāṅga will quickly attain Lord Gaurāṅga's feet.
     Text 9 Aspiring to attain the feet of Rāmacandra dāsa and Śrī Jāhnavā-devī, Prerma dāsa sings these fourteen lines glorifying Lord Gaurāṅga.

     Note: The first letters of the lines of this song follow the sequence of vowels in the Bengali alphabet (a, ā, i, ī, u, ū, ṛ, ṛ, l, l, e, ai, o, au).

 
Song 170 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 kali-yuge śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya abatāra
khelibāra prabandhe kaila khola karatāla
Text 2 gaḍāgaḍi yāna prabhu nija saṇkīrtane
ghare ghare hari-nāma dena sarba-jane
Text 3 uccaiḥ-sware kānde prabhu jībera lāgiyā
cetana karāna jībe kṛṣṇa-nāma diyā
Text 4 chala chala kare āṇkhi nayanera jale
jagata pabitra kaila gaura-kalebare
Text 5 jhala jhala mukha yena pūrṇa śaśadhara
emata ta dekhi nā-i dayāra sāgara
Text 6 ṭalamala kare aṅga bhābete bibhola
ṭhamake ṭhamake cale bale haribola
Text 7 ḍorahi kaupīna kṣīṇa kaṭira upare
ḍhaliyā ḍhaliyā paḍe gadādhera kroḍe
Text 8 āna parasaṅga gorā nā śune śrabaṇe
tāna mana gāna rase majā-iyā mana
Text 9 thira nāhi haya prabhura nayanera jala
dīna-hīna janere dhariyā deya kola
Text 10 dheyāṁiyā pūraba pirīti parasaṅga
nā jāni kāhāra bhābe ha-iyā tri-bhaṅga
Text 11 prema-rase bhāsā-iyā akhila saṁsāra
phuṭila śrī-bṛndābana suradhunī dhāra
Text 12 brahmā maheśwara yāre kare anweṣaṇa
bhābiyā nā pāna yāṁre sahasra-locana
Text 13 matta mātaṅga gati madhura mṛdu hāsa
yaśomati mātā yāṁra bhubane prakāśa
Text 14 ratipati jini rūpa ati manohara
līlā lābaṇya yāra ati anupama
Text 15 basudeba-suta se-i śrī-nanda-nandana
śacīra nandana ebe bale sarba-jana
Text 16 catur-bhuja rūpa haila aty-āścarya-maya
sābadhāna prāṇa-nātha gorā rasamaya
Text 17 hari hari bala bhā-i kara mahā-yajña
kṣiti-tale janmi keha nā haiya abijña
Text 18 e cautriśa padābalī ye kare kīrtana
dāsa narottama māge tāhāre caraṇa


     Text 1 In the Kali-yuga Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya descended to this world. He enjoyed kīrtana pastimes with khola and karatāla.
     Text 2 Chanting His own holy names, He rolled on the ground in ecstasy. Going from house to house, He gave to everyone the gift of Lord Hari's holy name. 
     Text 3 For the benefit of the jīvas, the Lord loudly wept in the ecstasy of spiritual love. Giving them the gift of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names, He revived the jīvas.
     Text 4 Tears of ecstatic spiritual love flowed from His eyes. His fair spiritual form purified all the worlds.
     Text 5 His glorious face shone like the full moon. No one had ever seen an ocean of mercy like Him.
     Text 6 Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, His body trembled. Dancing and dancing as He went, He chanted, “Haribol!"
     Text 7 A kaupīna rested on His slender waist. Staggering and staggering as He walked, He fell at Gadādhara's side.
     Text 8 Lord Gaurāṅga's ears never listened to anything but descriptions of Lord Kṛṣṇa. His heart was plunged in the nectar of songs glorifying Lord Kṛṣṇa.
     Text 9 He could not be peaceful. Tears of ecstatic spiritual love flowed from Lord Gaurāṅga's eyes. The Lord hugged the poor fallen souls.
     Text 10 He meditated on the loving pastimes He previously enjoyed with His associates, pastimes He enjoyed as Lord Kṛṣṇa. Who was the person with a threefold-bending form standing before Him? He did not know.
     Text 11 He made the whole world float in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. On the Gaṅgā's banks He manifested the beautiful spiritual world of Vṛndāvana.
     Text 12 Brahmā, Śiva, and all the demigods search for Him. Thousand-eyed Indra meditates on Him but cannot find Him.
     Text 13 He walked like a graceful intoxicated elephant. His gentle smile was sweet. In His home Mother Yaśodā was present.
     Text 14 His charming form defeated Kāmadeva. His handsomeness and playfulness were without peer.
     Text 15 Everyone says that Lord Kṛṣṇa, who was the son of Vasudeva and the son of Nanda, has now become Śacī's son. 
     Text 16 He manifested a wonderful six-armed form. Lord Gaura is sweet like nectar. He is the master of my life.
     Text 17 O my brothers, please chant, "Hari! Hari!" Please perform a great yajña of chanting Lord Hari's holy names. Now that everyone chants the holy names, no one remains foolish and bewildered on the surface of the earth.
     Text 18 Narottama dāsa prays at the feet of anyone who chants these 34 lines.

     Note: The first letters of the lines of this song follow the sequence of consonants in the Bengali alphabet (k, kh, g, gh, ṅ, c, ch, j, jh, ñ, ṭ, ṭh, ḍ, ḍh, ṇ, t, th, d, dh, n, p, ph, b, bh, m, y, r, l, b, ś, ṣ, s, h, kṣ).

 
Song 171 (Kāmoda-rāga)
 

Text 1 jaya jaya gaura-hari śacīra nandana
śrī-caitanya biśwambhara patita-pābana
Text 2 jaya mahāprabhu gauracandra dayāmaya
adhama-tāraṇa nātha bahakta-āśraya
Text 3 jībera jībana gora karuṇā-sāgara
jagannātha-miśra-suta gaurāṅga-sundara
Text 4 premamaya prema-dātā jagatera guru
śrī-gaura gopāladeva bāñchā-kalpa-taru
Text 5 nityānanda ṭhākurera mahānanda-dātā
sarbābhīṣṭa pūrṇa-kārī sarba-citta-jñātā
Text 6 śrī-gadādharera prāṇa akhilera pati
lakṣmīra sarbaswa-dhana agatīra gati
Text 7 śrī-biṣṇupriyāra nātha nityānandamaya
sarba-guṇa-nidhi sarba-rasera ālaya
Text 8 jagadānandera priya nabadwīpa-candra
adwaita-ārādhya-kṛṣṇa puruṣa swatantra
Text 9 baṁśīra ballabha nabadwīpa sunāgara
bhubana-bijāyī sarba-jana-mugdha-kara
Text 10 rasikendra cūḍā-maṇi rasika su-ṭhāma
bhaktādhīna bhakta-priya sarbānanda-dhāma
Text 11 swarūpera sukha-dātā rūpera jībana
śrī-sanātanera nātha nitya sanātana
Text 12 śrī-jība-batsala prabhu bhakata-batsala
bhaṭṭa gosāñīra priya durbalera bala
Text 13 śrī-raghunāthera nātha śrībāsera bāsa
bhagabān bhakta-rūpa ananta-prakāśa
Text 14 lokanātha lokāśraya bhakata-rañjana
śrī-raghunātha dāsera hṛdayera dhana
Text 15 abhirāma ṭhākurera sakhā sarba-pātā
cintāmaṇi cintanīya hari-nāma-dātā
Text 16 parameśa parāt-para duḥkha-bimocana
jagā-i mādhā-i ādi pāpī uddhāraṇa
Text 17 rasa-rāja-mūrti rāmānanda-bimohana
sārbabhauma paṇḍitera garba bināśana
Text 18 amoghera prāṇa-dātā durjana-dalana
pūrṇa-kāma nirmalātmā lajjā-nikāraṇa
Text 19 paramātmā sārāt-sāra baiṣṇaba-jībana
sukha-dātā sukhamaya bhubana-bhābana
Text 20. biśwa-rūpa biśwa-nātha biśwa-bimohana
śrī-gaura gobinda bhakta-citta-surañjana
Text 21 nayanera abhirāma bhābuka-ramaṇa
bhakta-citta-cora bhakta-citta-binodana
Text 22 nadīyā-bihārī hari ramaṇī-mohana
dwija-kula-candra dwija-kula-pūjyatama
Text 23 su-kabi śrī-nidhi-dakṣa nayana-rañjana
bāreka āmāra hṛde deha śrī-caraṇa
Text 24 bhābuka sannyāsī saba jība-bistāraka
bhābuka janāra sukha-dātā su-nayaka
Text 25 pratāparuderara abhilāṣa pūrṇa-kārī
swarūpādi bhakatera sada ājñā-kārī 
Text 26 sarba-abatāra-sāra karuṇā-nidhāna
parama udāra prabhu more kara trāṇa
Text 27 ananta prabhura nāma ananta mahimā
anantādi debe yāre dite nāre sīmā
Text 28 gaurāṅga madhura nāma kara mana sāra
yāṁhā binā kali-yuge gati nāhi āra
Text 29 ye-i nāma se-i gorā jānahi niścaya
nāmera sahita prabhu satata āchaya
Text 30. gaura-nāma hari-nāma eka-i ye haya
bhāgabata bākya e-i kabhu mithyā naya
Text 31kara kara ore mana nāma-saṅkīrtana
pāpa tāpa dūre yābe pābe prema-dhana
Text 32gaura-nāma kṛṣṇa-nāma ati su-madhura
sadā āswādaye ye-i se saba catura
Text 33 śiba ādi ye-i nāma sadā kare gāna
se nāme bañcita haile kise habe trāṇa
Text 34 e-i śata aṣṭa nāma ye kare paṭhana
anāyāse pāya se-i caitanya-caraṇa
Text 35 śata āsta nāma ye-i karaye srabaṇa
tāra prati tuṣṭa sadā śacīra nandana
Text 36 śrī-jahnabā rāma-pada kariyā śaraṇa
śata āsta nāma gāya e śacīnandana


     Text 1 Glory, glory to Lord Gaura-Hari. He is Śacī's son. He is Śrī Caitanya. He is Viśvambhara. He is the purifier of the fallen.
     Text 2 Glory to the great Lord. He is glorious like a fair moon. He is merciful. He delivers the fallen. He is the Lord. He is the devotees' shelter.
     Text 3 He is the life of the jīvas. His complexion is fair. He is an ocean of mercy. He is Jagannātha Miśra's son. His fair limbs are handsome.
     Text 4 He is spiritual love personfiied. He is the giver of spiritual love. He is the guru of all the worlds. He is fair and glorious. He is Lord Gopāladeva Himself. He is a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree.
     Text 5 He is the giver of transcendental bliss to Nityānanda Ṭhākura. He fulfills all desires . He knows every heart.
     Text 6 He is Śrī Gadādhara's life. He is the master of all. He is the be-all-and-end-all for Goddess Lakṣmī. He is the shelter of the shelterless.
     Text 7 He is Śrī Viṣṇupriyā's husband. He is full of eternal bliss. He is a treasure-house of all transcendental virtues. He is the abode of all transcendental mellows.
     Text 8 He is dear to Jagadānanda. He is like a glistening moon in Navadvīpa. He is worshiped by Lord Advaita. He is Lord Kṛṣṇa HImself. He is the Supreme Person. He is supremely independent.
     Text 9 He is dear to Vaṁśī dāsa Ṭhākura. He is the hero of Navadvīpa. He is victorious in all the worlds. He enchants all people .
     Text 10 He is the crest jewel of the kings of rasikas. He is the shelter of the rasikas. He is controlled by His devotees. He is dear to His devotees. He is the abode of all bliss
     Text 11 He delights Svarūpa Dāmodara . He is the life of Rūpa Gosvāmī. He is the master of Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī. He is eternal.
     Text 12 He is affectionate to Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. He is the supreme master. He is affectionate to the devotees. He is dear to Gopala Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī Gosvāmī. He is the strength of the weak.
     Text 13 He is the master of Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. He is the abode where Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura takes shelter. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead manifest as a devotee. His manifestations have no end.
     Text 14 He is the master of the worlds. He is the shelter of the worlds. He delights the devotees. He is the treasure in Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's heart.
     Text 15 He is Abhirāma Ṭhākura's friend. He is everyone's protector. He is like a cintāmaṇi jewel. He is the object of meditation. He gives the gift of Lord Hari's holy names.
     Text 16 He is the supreme controller. He is greater than the greatest. He is the deliverer from suffering. He delivers Jagāi, Mādhāi, and a host of other sinners .
     Text 17 He is the personified king of rasa. He enchants Rāmānanda Rāya. He destroyed Sārvabhauma Paṇḍita's pride. 
     Text 18 He revived Amogha. He rips apart the demons. He fulfills all desires. He is supremely pure. He removes the devotees' shyness.
     Text 19 He is the Paramātmā. He is the best of the best. He is the life of the Vaiṣṇavas. He is the giver of bliss. He is full of bliss. He is the creator of all the worlds.
     Text 20. He is the universal form. He is the master of the universes. He enchants all the universes. He is handsome and fair. He is Lord Govinda Himself. He delights the devotees' hearts
     Text 21 He delights the eyes. He delights the devotees. He robs the devotees' hearts. He delights the devotees' hearts.
     Text 22 He enjoys pastimes in Nadīyā. He is Lord Hari Himself, Lord Hari who charms the gopīs. He is the moon of the brāhmaṇas. He is the most worshipable of all brāhmaṇas.
     Text 23 He is the greatest poet. He is a treasure of glory and handsomeness. He delights the eyes. O Lord, this one time please place Your glorious feet in my heart.
     Text 24 He is ausopicious and glorious. He delights the people. He is the greatest hero.
     Text 25 He fulfilled King Pratāparudra's desire. He always accepts the advice given by Svarūpa Dāmodara and other trusted devotees. 
     Text 26 He is the best of all avatāras. He is the abode of compassion. He is the most generous. O Lord, please protect me.
     Text 27 His holy names are limitless. His glories are limitless. Neither Lord Ananta nor any other deva can see the limits of His glories.
     Text 28 O Lord Gaurāṅga, please place Your sweet holy names in my heart. In the Kali-yuga there is no shelter but You.
     Text 29 Please know for certain that Lord Gaura is the same as His name. The Lord is always manifest whenever His holy name is spoken.
     Text 30. The name Gaura and the name Hari are one. This is the statement of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the devotees. Their words are never untrue.
     Text 31O my heart, please chant these holy names of the Lord. Then you will throw sins and sufferings far away. Then you will attain the treasure of ecstatic spiritual love.
     Text 32The name Gaura and the name Kṛṣṇa are both very, very sweet. Anyone who always tastes the nectar of these holy names is very wise.
     Text 33 Lord Śiva and the other demigods always sing these holy names. How will a person cheated of these holy names be saved?
     Text 34 Anyone who chants these 108 holy names will easily attain Lord Caitanya's feet.
     Text 35 Anyone who hears these 108 holy names always satisfies Śacī's son.
     Text 36 Taking shelter of the feet of Śrī Jāhnavā and Rāmacandra dāsa, Śacīnandana dāsa sings these 108 holy names.

 
Song 172 (Dhānaśī-rāga)
 

Text 1 bhādra-kṛṣṇa-aṣṭamīte debakī-udare
janmilena kṛṣṇacandra śrī-mathurā-pure
Text 2 śiśu-rūpe ālo kare kara andhakāre
mathurāya deba-gaṇa puṣpa-bṛṣṭi kare
Text 3 vasudeba thu-ila niyā nanda-ghoṣera ghare
nandera alaye kṛṣṇa dina dina bāḍe
Text 4 nanda-ghoṣa thu-ila nāma śrī-nanda-nandana
yaśodā rākhilena nāma yādu bāchā-dhana
Text 5 upānanda nāma rākhe sundara gopāla
braja-bālaka nāma rākhe ṭhākura rākhāla
Text 6 subala rākhila nāma ṭhākura kānā-i
śrīdāma rākhila nāma rākhala rājā bhā-i
Text 7 nanī-corā nāma rākhe yateka gopinī
kelesoṇā nāma rākhe rādhā-binodinī
Text 8 kubajā rākhila nāma patita-pābana hari
candrābalī thu-ila nāma mohana baṁśī-dhārī
Text 9 ananta rākhila nāma anta nā pā-iyā
kṛṣṇa-nāma rākhe garga dhyānete jāniyā
Text 10 kaṇva-muni nāma rākhe deba cakra-pāṇi
bana-mālī nāma rākhe banera hariṇī
Text 11 gaja-hastī nāma rākhe śrī-madhusūdana
ajāmila nāma rākhe deba nārāyaṇa
Text 12 purandara nāma rākhena deba śrī-gobinda
kuntī-debī rākhe nāma pāṇḍaba-ānanda
Text 13 draupadī rākhila nāma deba dīna-bandhu
pāpī tāpī rākhe nāma karuṇāra sindhu
Text 14 sudāma rākhilā nāma dāridrya-bhañjana
braja-bāsī nāma rākhe brajera jībana
Text 15 darpa-hārī nāma rākhe arjuna su-dhīra
paśupati nāma rākhe khaga-rāja-bīra
Text 16 yudhiṣṭhira nāma rākhe deba yadu-bara
bidura rākhila nāma kāṅgālera ṭhākura
Text 17 bāsuki rākhila nāma deba sṛṣṭi-sthiti
dhrubaloke nāma rākhe dhrubera sārathi
Text 18 nārada rākhilā nāma bhakta-prāṇa-dhana
bhīṣmadeba nāma rākhe lakṣmī-nārāyaṇa
Text 19 satyabhāmā nāma rākhe satyera sārathi
jāmbubatī nāma rākhe deba yuddhā-pati
Text 20. biśwāmitra nāma rākhe saṁsārera sāra
ahalyā rākhila nāma pāṣāṇa-uddhāra
Text 21 bhṛgu-muni nāma rākhe jagatera hari
pañca-mukhe rāma-nāma jape tripurāri
Text 22 kuñja-keśī nāma rākhe bali sadācārī
prahlāda rākhila nāma nṛsiṁha murāri
Text 23 daityāri dwārakā-nātha dāridrya-bhañjana
dayāmaya draupadīra lajjā-nibāraṇa
Text 24 swarūpe sabhāya haya golokete sthiti
baikuṇṭhe kṣīrodakaśāyī kamalāra pati 
Text 25 rasamya rasika nāgara anupāma
nikuñja-bihārī hari naba-ghana-śyāma
Text 26 śālagrāma dāmodara śrī-pati śrī-dhara
tāraka-brahma sanātana parama īśwara
Text 27 kalpa-taru kamala-locana hṛṣīkeśa
patita-pābana guru jñāna-upadeśa
Text 28 cintāmaṇi catur-bhuja deba cakra-pāṇi
dīna-bandhu debakī-nandana yadu-maṇi
Text 29 ananta kṛṣṇera nāma ananta mahimā
nāradādi byāsadeba dite nāre sīmā
Text 30. nāma bhaja nāma cinta nāma kara sāra
ananta kṛṣṇera nāma mahimā apāra
Text 31śaṅkha-bhari subarṇa go-koṭi kare dāna
tathāpi nā haya kṛṣṇa-nāmera samāna
Text 32ye-i nāma se-i kṛṣṇa bhaja niṣṭhā kari
nāmera sahita āchena āpani śrī-hari
Text 33 brahmā ādi deba yāre dhyāne nāhi pāya
ye hari bañcita haile ki habe upāya
Text 34 hiraṇyakaśipura udara-bidāraṇa
prahlāde karila rakṣā deba nārāyaṇa
Text 35 balira chailte prabhu ha-ilā bāmana
draupadīra lajjā hari kaila nibāraṇa
Text 36 aṣṭottara-śata nāma ye kare paṭhana
anāyāse pāya rādhā-kṛṣṇera caraṇa
Text 37 bhakta-bāñchā pūrṇa kara nandera nandana
mathurāya kaṁsa-dhwaṁsa laṅkāya rābaṇa
Text 38 bakāsura badha ādi kāliya-damana
dwija hari-dāsa kahe nāma-saṅkīrtana


     Text 1 In the month of Bhādra, during the eighth night of the kṛṣṇa-pakṣa, in the toen of Śrī Mathurā-pura, Lored Kṛṣṇacandra was born from Devakī's womb.
     Text 2 The effulgent new-born infant lit up the darkness in the prison cell. The demigods came to Mathurā and showered flowers upon Him.
     Text 3 Vasudeva took the infant and brought Him to Nanda's home in Vraja. At Nanda's home, the child grew day by day.
     Text 4 At Nanda's home the child became known as Nanda's son. Yaśodā called the child her charming treasure.
     Text 5 Upānanda called the child Sundara Gopāla (handsome cowherd boy). The children of Vraja called the Lord Rākhāla (the protector).
     Text 6 Subala called the Lord Kānā-i (Kṛṣṇa). Śrīdāmā called the Lord Rājā (king) and Bhā-i (brother).
     Text 7 The gopīs called the boy Navanīta-cora (butter thief). Rādhā's playful friends called Him Kelesoṇā (dark treasure).
     Text 8 Kubjā called Him Patita-pāvana (the purifier of the fallen) and Hari (He who takes away the devotees' sufferings). Candrāvalī called Him Mohana (charming) and Vaṁśī-dhārī (He who holds a flute).
     Text 9 She also called Him Ananta (endless). Rapt in meditation, Garga Muni named the boy Kṛṣṇa.
     Text 10 Kaṇva Muni gave the boy the names Deva (Lord) and cakra-pāṇi (He who holds the cakra in His hand). The does in the forest named Him Vana-mālī (He who wears a garland of forest flowers).
     Text 11 Gajendra called Him by the name Śrī Madhusūdana (the killer of Madhu). Ajāmila called the Lord by the name Nārāyaṇa. 
     Text 12 Indra called Him by the name Śrī Govinda. Kuntī-devī called Him by thr name Pāṇḍavānanda (the bliss of the Pāṇḍavas).
     Text 13 Draupadī called the lord by the name Dīna-bandhu (friend of the poor). The anguished sinners called Him by the name Karuṇā-sindhu (ocean of mercy).
     Text 14 Sudāmā Brāhmaṇa called HIm by the name Dāridrya-bhañjana (He who breaks poverty into pieces). The people of Vraja called Him by the name Vraja-jīvana (the life of Vraja).
     Text 15 Saintly Arjuna called Him Darpa-hārī (the remover of pride). Lord Śiva called Him Khaga-rāja-vīra (the hero-king of the demigods).
     Text 16 Yudhiṣṭhira called HIm Yadu-vara (the best of the Yadus). Vidura called Him Kāṅgāla-ṭhākura (the Lord of the beggars).
     Text 17 Vāsuki called the Lord Sṛṣṭi-sthiti (the creator and maintainer). The people of Dhruvaloka called the Lord by the name Dhruva-sārathi (Dhruva's chariot-driver).
     Text 18 Nārada called the Lord by the name Bhakta-prāṇa-dhana (the devotees' life-treasure). Bhīṣmadeva called the Lord by the name Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa.
     Text 19 Satyabhāmā called Him by the name Satyā-sārathi (Satyabhāmā's chariot-driver). Jāmbavatī called the Lord by the name Yuddhā-pati (the master of battle).
     Text 20. Viśvāmitra called Him by the name Saṁsāra-sāra (the best in all the worlds). Ahalyā called Him by ther name Pāṣāṇa-uddhāra (He who delivered Ahalyā from stone).
     Text 21 Bhṛgu Muni called Him by the name Jagad-dhari (the savior of the worlds). With his five mouths Lord Śiva chants the Lord's name Rāma.
     Text 22 Saintly Bali called Him by the name Kuñja-keśī. Śrī Prahlāda called HIm by ther names Nṛsiṁha and Murāri.
     Text 23 The Lord was also called by the names Daityāri (enemy of the demons), Dvārakā-nātha (Lord of Dvārakā), Dāridrya-bhañjana (He who breaks poverty into pices), Dayāmaya (merciful), and Draupadī-lajjā-nivāraṇa (He who removed Draupadī's shame).
     Text 24 In the world of Goloka the Lord manifests His original form. In the world of Vaikuṇṭha He is known as Kṣīrodakaśāyī (He who reclines on the ocean of milk) and Kamalā-pati (Lakṣmī's husband).
     Text 25 The Lord is also called by thr names Rasamaya (filled with nectar), rasika (expert at tasting nectar), Nāgara (hero), Anupama (peerless), Nikuñja-vihārī (He who enjoys pastimes in the forest groves), Hari (He who removes all that is inauspicious), and Nava-ghana-śyāma (He who is dark like a new raincloud).
     Text 26 The Lord is also known by the names Śālagrāma (He who is manifest as the Śālagrāma-śilā), Dāmodara (He whose waist was bound by a rope), Śrī-pati and Śrī-dhara (the husband of the goddess of fortune), Tāraka-brahma (the deliverer), Sanātana (eternal), and Parameśvara (the supreme controller).
     Text 27 He Lord is also known by the names Kalpa-taru (a kalpa-taru tree), Kamala-locana (lotus-eyed), Hṛṣīkeśa (the master of the senses), Patita-pāvana (the purifier of the fallen), Guru (the original spiritual master), and Jñānopadeśa (the original teacher).  
     Text 28 The Lord is also known by the names Cintāmaṇi (a cintāmaṇi jewel), Catur-bhuja (four-armed), Cakra-pāṇi (He who holds a cakra in His hand), Dīna-bandhu (the friend of the poor). Devakī-nandana (Devakī's son), and Yadu-maṇi (the jewel of the Yadus.
     Text 29 Lord Kṛṣṇa's names are endless. His glories are endless. Neither Nārada, Vyāsa, nor any of the sages know the end of Lord Kṛṣṇa's names and glories.
     Text 30. Therefore please chant Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names. Meditate on them. Think of Lord Kṛṣṇa's names as most precious and valuable. Lord Kṛṣṇa's names names are endless. The ocean of Lord Kṛṣṇa;s glories has no shore.
     Text 31One may give in charity ten million cows and a billion bharas of gold. But still that is not equal to chanting Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy name.
     Text 32Please worship Lord Kṛṣṇa with faith. Lord Kṛṣṇa is the same as His name. When His holy name is uttered, Lord Kṛṣṇa is personally present.
     Text 33 Rapt in meditation, Brahmā and the demigods cannot see Lord Kṛṣṇa. If Lord Kṛṣṇa wishes to cheat someone, what remedy exists to counteract His cheating?
     Text 34 Ripping up Kiraṇyakaśipu's belly, Lord Nārāyaṇa rescued Prahlāda.
     Text 35 To cheat Mahārāja Bali, Lord Kṛṣṇa manifested the form of Vāmana. Lord Kṛṣṇa removed Draupadī's shame.
     Text 36 Anyone who chants these 108 holy names easily attains the feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
     Text 37 Nanda's son fulfills the devotee's desires. In Mathurā He killed Kaṁsa. In Laṅkā He killed Rāvaṇa.
     Text 38 He killed Bakāsura and host of demons. He defeated Kāliya. The brāhmaṇa Hari dāsa sings this song of Lord Kṛṣṇa's holy names.

 
Part 4 Poems Glorifying Lord Gaurāṅga

 
Song 173  (Eight Prayers Glorifying Śacī's Son) 
 

Text 1 Śrī Śacītanayāṣṭaka
 ujjvala-varaṇa-gaura-vara-dehaṁ
     vilasita-niravadhi-bhāva-videham
tri-bhuvana-pāvana-kṛpāyāḥ lesāṁ
     taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

Text 2 gadgada-antara-bhāva-vikāraṁ
     durjana-tarjana-nāda-viśālam
bhava-bhaya-bhañjana-kāraṇa-karuṇaṁ
     taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

Text 3 aruṇāmbara-dhara-cāru-kapolaṁ
     indu-vinindita-nakha-caya-ruciram
jalpita-nija-guṇa-nāma-vinodam
     taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

Text 4 vigalita-nayana-kamala-jaladhāraṁ
     bhūṣaṇa-nava-rasa-bhāva-vikāram
gati-ati-manthara-nṛtya-vilāsaṁ
     taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

Text 5 cañcala-cāru-caraṇa-gati-ruciraṁ
     mañjīra-rañjita-pada-yuga-madhuram
candra-vinindita-śītala-vadanaṁ
     taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

Text 6 dhṛta-kaṭi-ḍora-kamaṇḍalu-daṇḍaṁ
     divya-kalevara-muṇḍita-muṇḍam
durjana-kalmaṣa-khaṇḍana-daṇḍaṁ
     taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

Text 7 bhūṣaṇa-bhūraja-alakāvalitaṁ
     kampita-bimbādhara-vara-ruciram
malayaja-viracita-ujjvala-tilakaṁ
     taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam

Text 8 nindita-aruṇa-kamala-dala-nayanaṁ
     ā-jānu-lambita-śrī-bhuja-yugalam
kalevara-kaiśora-nartaka-veśaṁ
     taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam


     Text 1 I offer my respectful obeisances to Śacī's glorious son. His form is effulgent and glorious. His form always glistens with ecstatic spiritual love. A tiny particle of His mercy purifies the three worlds.
     Text 2 I offer my respectful obeisances to Śacī's glorious son. Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, He speoaks broken words in a choked voice. His loud roar rebukes the demons. His mercy breaks into pieces all fear of the world of birth and death.
     Text 3 I offer my respectful obeisances to Śacī's glorious son. He wears saffron garments. His cheeks are graceful. His glistening fingernails and toenails defeat a host of moons. He enjoys pastimes of chanting His own glories and His own holy names.
     Text 4 I offer my respectful obeisances to Śacī's glorious son. A flood of tears streams from His lotus eyes. He is adorned with ornaments of the symptoms of the new nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Moving with slow grace, He enjoys pastimes of dancing.
     Text 5 I offer my respectful obeisances to Śacī's glorious son. His restless feet move with grace. His ankles sweetly jangle. His cooling face rebukes the moon.
     Text 6 I offer my respectful obeisances to Śacī's glorious son. His kamaṇḍalu and daṇḍa rest on His belt. His form is effulgent. His head is shaved.
     Text 7 I offer my respectful obeisances to Śacī's glorious son. His hair is decorated with dust. His splendid bimba-fruit lips tremble. His sanda-paste tilaka glistens.
     Text 8 I offer my respectful obeisances to Śacī's glorious son. His eyes rebuke the red lotus-petals. His graceful arms reach to His knees. His youthful form wears the garments of a dancer.

 
Song 174  (Prayers Glorifying Lord Caitanya's Holy Names)
 

Text 1 Śrī Caitanya-nāma-stotram
śrī-gaurāṅgaś cid-ānandaḥ
     kṛṣṇaś caitanya-vigrahaḥ
navadvīpa-nivāsī ca
     jagannātha-sutas tathā

Text 2 pūrṇottamaḥ paraṁ brahma
     sannyāsi-rūpa-dhārakaḥ
viśvambharo dīna-bandhur
     hari-nāma-pradāyakaḥ

Text 3 etad dvādaśa-nāmāni
     sakṛd eva paṭhen naraḥ
prema-bhaktir bhavet tasya
     śrī-gaurāṅga-prasādataḥ

Text 4 suvarṇa-varṇo hemāṅgo
     gaurāṅgaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ
abhyantare śyāma-varṇo
     vande tasya padāmbujam


     Text 1 Lord Caitanya has a fair complexion (śrī-gaurāṅga), He is full of spiritual bliss (cid-ānanda). He is Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself (kṛṣṇa), Kṛṣṇa who manifests the form of Caitanya (caitanya-vigraha). He resides in Navadvīpa (navadvīpa-nivāsī). He is Jagannātha Miśra's son (jagannātha-suta).
     Text 2 He is the most perfect and complete Lord (pūrṇottama). He is the Supreme Brahman (paraṁ brahma) manifesting the form of a sannyāsī (sannyāsi-rūpa-dhāraka). He is the maintainer of all the worlds (viśvambhara). He si the friend of the poor (dīna-bandhu). He gives the gift of Lord Hari's holy names (hari-nāma-pradāyaka). 
     Text 3 A person who even only once recites these twelve holy names attains, by Lord Gaurāṅga's mercy, ecstatic spiritual love and devotion for the Lord.
     Text 4 I offer my respectful obesiances to the lotus feet of the Lord, whose form is effulgent like gold (suvarṇa-varṇa and hemāṅga). His limbs are fair (gaurāṅga). He is Śacī's son (sacī-nandana). Within His heart He is dark Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself (abhyantare śyāma-varṇa).

 
Part 5 Poems Glorifying Lord Govinda

 
Song 175  (Eight Prayers Glorifying Lord Kṛṣṇa)
 

Text 1 Śrī Kṛṣṇāṣṭaka
śriyāśliṣṭo viṣṇuḥ sthira-cara-vapur veda-viṣayo
     dhiyāṁ sākṣī śuddho harir asura-hantābja-nayanaḥ
gadī saṅkhī cakrī vimala-ghana=mālī sthira-ruciḥ
     śaraṇyo lokeśo mama bhavatu kṛṣṇo 'kṣi-viṣayaḥ

Text 2 yataḥ sarvaṁ jātaṁ viyad-anila-mukhyaṁ jagad idaṁ
     sthitau niḥśeṣaṁ yo 'vati nija-sukhāṁśena madhu-hā
laye sarvaṁ svasmin harati kalayā yas tu sa vibhuḥ
     śaraṇyo lokeśo mama bhavatu kṛṣṇo 'kṣi-viṣayaḥ

Text 3 asūnāyamyādau yama-niyama-mukhaiḥ su-karaṇair
     nirudhyedaṁ cittaṁ hṛdi vilayam ānīya sakalam
yam īḍyaṁ paśyanti pravara-matayo māyinam asau
     śaraṇyo lokeśo mama bhavatu kṛṣṇo 'kṣi-viṣayaḥ

Text 4 pṛthivyāṁ tiṣṭhan yo yamayati mahīṁ veda na dharā
     yam ity ādau vedo vadati jagatām īśam amalam
niyantāraṁ dhyeyaṁ muni-sura-nṛṇāṁ mokṣa-dam asau
     śaraṇyo lokeśo mama bhavatu kṛṣṇo 'kṣi-viṣayaḥ

Text 5 mahendrādir devo jayati ditijān yasya balato
     na kasya svātantryaṁ kvacid api kṛtau yat-kṛtim ṛte
kavitvāder garvaṁ pariharati yo 'sau vijayinaḥ
     śaraṇyo lokeśo mama bhavatu kṛṣṇo 'kṣi-viṣayaḥ

Text 6 vinā yasya dhyānaṁ vrajati paśutāṁ śūkara-mukhāṁ
     vinā yasya jñānaṁ jani-mṛti-bhayaṁ yāti janatā
vinā yasya smṛtyā kṛmi-śata-janiṁ yāti sa vibhuḥ
     śaraṇyo lokeśo mama bhavatu kṛṣṇo 'kṣi-viṣayaḥ

Text 7 narāṭaṅkoṭṭaṅkaḥ śaraṇa-śaraṇo bhrānti-haraṇo
     ghana-śyāmo vāmo vraja-śiśu-vayasyo 'rjuna-sakhaḥ
svayam-bhūr bhūtānāṁ janaka ucitācāra-sukha-daḥ
     śaraṇyo lokeśo mama bhavatu kṛṣṇo 'kṣi-viṣayaḥ

Text 8 yada dharma-glānir bhavati jagatāṁ kṣobha-karaṇī
     tadā loka-svāmī prakaṭita-vapuḥ setu-dhṛg ajaḥ
satāṁ dhātā svaccho nigama-gaṇa-gīto vraja-patiḥ
     śaraṇyo lokeśo mama bhavatu kṛṣṇo 'kṣi-viṣayaḥ


     Text 1 I take shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the master of all the worlds. I pray that some day I will see Him with my own eyes. He is Lord Viṣṇu, embraced by the goddess of fortune. He is the witness residing in the bodies fo all moving and unmoving beings. He is supremely pure. He is the killer of the demons. His eyes are lotus flowers. He holds a club, conchshell, and cakra. He wears a glorious flower-garland. He is always blissful and handsome.
     Text 2 I take shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the master of all the worlds. I pray that some day I will see Him with my own eyes. From Him the sky, the wind, the universes, and all else were born. With a fragment of His own bliss He protects all the worlds. He killed the Madhu demon. At the time of cosmic devastation with a single fragment of His power He removes everything, taking it all within Him. He is all-powerful.
     Text 3 I take shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the master of all the worlds. I pray that some day I will see Him with my own eyes. The yamas, niyamas, senses, and all else rest within His heart. The wise philosophers see that He is the supreme object of worship, the magician that has manifested this world.
     Text 4 I take shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the master of all the worlds. I pray that some day I will see Him with my own eyes. Standing in this world, He controls the earth, although this truth even the earth itself does not understand. This the Vedas declare of Him. He is the master of all the nuniverses. He is supremely pure. He is the supreme controller. He is the supereme object of meditation. He gives liberation to the sages, demigods, and human beings.
     Text 5 I take shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the master of all the worlds. I pray that some day I will see Him with my own eyes. By His power Indra and the demigods defeat the demons. No one is independent of Him. Nothing ever happens without His sanction. He removes the pride of they who are proud of their learning or their victory over others. 
     Text 6 I take shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the master of all the worlds. I pray that some day I will see Him with my own eyes. A person who does not meditate on Him becomes a pig or some other beast. A person who does not know anything about Him becomes afraid of repeated birth and death. A person who does not remember Him is born as a worm for a hundred births. He is the all-powerful Lord.
     Text 7 I take shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the master of all the worlds. I pray that some day I will see Him with my own eyes. He cuts into pieces the fears and sufferings of the people. He is the best of all shelters. He is the remover of illusions. He is dark like a raincloud. He is graceful and handsome. He is the friend of the boys in Vraja. He is the friend of Arjuna. He is self-born. He is the father of all who are born. To all who act rightly He gives the gift of happiness.
     Text 8 I take shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the master of all the worlds. I pray that some day I will see Him with my own eyes. Whenevr there is a decline of religion and the people of the worlds are distrubed by troubles, then Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is the unborn master of the worlds and the upholder of religious principles, manifests His form in this world. He is the protector of the saintly devotees. He is effulgent, pure, and handsome. He is glorified in all the scriptures. He is the master of Vraja.


Song 176  (Eight Prayers Glorifying Lord Kṛṣṇa)
 

Text 1 Śrī Kṛṣṇāṣṭaka
bhaje vrajaika-maṇḍanaṁ samasta-pāpa-khaṇḍanaṁ
     sva-bhakta-citta-rañjanaṁ sadaiva nanda-nandanam
su-piccha-guccha-mastakaṁ su-nāda-veṇu-hastakam
     anaṅga-raṅga-sāgaraṁ namāmi kṛṣṇa-nāgaram

Text 2 manoja-garva-mocanaṁ viśāla-lola-locanaṁ
     vidhūta-gopa-śocanaṁ namāmi padma-locanam
karāravinda-bhūdharaṁ smitāvaloka-sundaraṁ
     mahendra-māna-dāraṇaṁ namāmi kṛṣṇa-vāraṇam

Text 3 kadamba-sūna-kuṇḍalaṁ su-cāru-gaṇḍa-maṇḍalaṁ
     vrajāṅganaika-vallabhaṁ namāmi kṛṣṇa-durlabham
yaśodayā sa-modayā sa-gopayā sa-nandayā
     yutaṁ sukhaika-nāyakam namāmi gopa-nāyakam

Text 4 sadaiva pāda-paṅkajaṁ madīya-mānase nijam
     dadhānam uttamālakaṁ namāmi nanda-bālakam
samasta-doṣa-śoṣaṇaṁ samasta-loka-poṣaṇaṁ
     samasta-gopa-mānasaṁ namāmi kṛṣṇa-lālasam

Text 5 bhuvo bharāvatārakaṁ bhavābdhi-karṇadhārakaṁ
     yaśomatī-kiśorakaṁ namāmi dugdha-corakam
dṛg-anta-kranta-bhaṅginaṁ sadā-sadāli-saṅginaṁ
     dine dine navaṁ navaṁ namāmi nanda-sambhavam

Text 6 guṇākaraṁ sukhākaraṁ kṛpākaraṁ kṛpāvaraṁ
     sura-dviṣan-nikandanaṁ namāmi gopa-nandanam
navīna-gopa-nāgaraṁ navīna-keli-lampaṭaṁ
     namāmi megha-sundaraṁ taḍit-prabhā-lasat-paṭam

Text 7 samasta-gopa-nandanaṁ hṛd-ambujaika-mohanaṁ
     namāmi kuñja-madhya-gaṁ prasanna-bhānu-śobhanam
nikāma-kāma-dāyakaṁ dṛg-anta-cāru-sāyakaṁ
     rasāla-veṇu-gāyakaṁ namāmi kuñja-nāyakam

Text 8 vidagdha-gopikā-mano-manojña-talpa-śāyinaṁ
     namāmi muñja-kānane pravṛddha-vahni-pāyinam
yadā tadā yathā tathā tathaiva kṛṣṇa-sat-kathā
     mayā sadaiva gīyatāṁ tathā kṛpā vidhīyatām

Text 9 pramāṇikāṣṭaka-dvayaṁ japaty adhītya yaḥ pumān
     bhavet sa nanda-nandane bhave bhave su-bhaktimān

 
     Text 1 Eternally I worship Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is Nanda's son, who is Vraja's sole ornament, who breaks all sins into pieces, and who delights the devotees' hearts. I offer my respectful obeisances to the hero Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose head is decorated with peacock feathers, whose hand holds a melodious flute, and who is an ocean of Kāmadeva's pastimes. 
     Text 2 I offer my respectful obeisances to lotus-eyed Lord Kṛṣṇa, who frees Kāmadeva of his pride, whose large eyes are very restless, and who shakes away the gopas' sadness. I offer my respectful obeisances to dark Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose lotus hand lifted Govardhana Hill, whose smiling glance is charming, and who ripped Indra's pride into shreds. 
     Text 3 I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is difficult to attain, who wears a kadamba-flower earring, the circle of whose cheeks is very charming, and who is the only beloved of Vraja's girls. I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is a playful cowherd boy, and who, in the company of Yaśodā, Nanda, and the gopa people, enjoys pastimes that delight them all.
     Text 4 I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is Nanda's small boy, and who eternally places His kuṅkuma-anointed lotus-feet in my heart. I offer my respectful obeisances to cheerful Lord Kṛṣṇa, who dries up all faults, makes all worlds prosper, and stays in the thoughts of all the gopa people.
     Text 5 I offer my respectful obeisances to the milk-thief Lord Kṛṣṇa, who removed the earth's burden, who is the captain of the ship to cross the ocean of birth and death, and who is Yaśodā's teenage son. I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is Nanda's son, who casts crooked glances from the corners of His eyes, who always stays with the gopīs, and who day after day enjoys newer and newer pastimes.
     Text 6 I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is a jewel-mine of transcendental qualities, a jewel-mine of transcendental blisses, a jewel-mine of mercy, who defeats the demigods' enemies, and who delights the cowherd people. I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is a young hero of the cowherd people, who is a playful young rake, who is handsome and dark like a monsoon cloud, and whose yellow garments glisten like lightning.
     Text 7 I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who delights all the cowherd people, who charms the devotees' lotus-hearts, who stays in forest groves, and who is splendid like a glistening sun. I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who fulfills all desires, whose sidelong glances are charming arrows, whose flute music is nectar, and who is the amorous hero of the forest groves. 
     Text 8 I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who reclines on the charming couch of the wise gopīs' hearts, and who drank up a forest fire in Muñjāṭavī forest. I pray that whenever and however I sing His glories, Lord Kṛṣṇa will be merciful to me.
     Text 9 I pray that whoever reads or recites these eight prayers will be fervently devoted to Nanda's son, devoted birth after birth.

 
Song 177  (Eight Prayers Glorifying Lord Govinda)
 

Text 1 Śrī Govindāṣṭaka
cid-ānandākāraṁ śruti-sarasa-sāraṁ sama-rasaṁ
     nirādhārādhāraṁ bhava-jaladhi-pāraṁ para-guṇam
ramā-grīvā-hāram vraja-vana-vihāraṁ hara-nutaṁ
     sadā taṁ govindaṁ parama-sukha-kandaṁ bhajata re
Text 1 His form is full of spiritual bliss. He is the sweet essence of the Vedas. He is sweet like nectar. He is supremely independent. He is the abode where everything rests. He carries the devotees to the farther shore of the ocean of birth and death. He is supremely virtuous. He is Goddess Lakṣmī's necklace. He enjoys pastimes in Vraja's forests. Śiva praises His glories. O people, please always worship Lord Govinda, the root of all bliss. 

Text 2 mahāmbhodhi-sthānaṁ sthira-cara-nidānaṁ divija-paṁ
     sudhā-dhārā-pānaṁ vihaga-pratiyānaṁ yama-ratam
mano-jñaṁ su-jñānam muni-jana-nidhānaṁ dhruva-padaṁ
     sadā taṁ govindaṁ parama-sukha-kandaṁ bhajata re

Text 3 dhiyā dhīrair dhyeyaṁ śravaṇa-puṭa-peyaṁ yati-varair
     mahā-vākyair jñeyaṁ tri-bhuvana-vidheyaṁ vidhi-param
mano-mānāmeyaṁ sapadi hṛdi neyaṁ nava-tanuṁ
     sadā taṁ govindaṁ parama-sukha-kandaṁ bhajata re

Text 4 mahā-māyā-jālaṁ vimala-vana-mālaṁ mala-haraṁ
     su-bhālaṁ gopālaṁ nihata-śiśupālaṁ śaśi-mukham
kalātītaṁ kālaṁ gati-haya-marālaṁ mura-ripuṁ
     sadā taṁ govindaṁ parama-sukha-kandaṁ bhajata re

Text 5 nabho-bimba-sphīṭaṁ nigama-guṇa-gītaṁ sama-gatiṁ
     suraughe samprītaṁ ditija-viparītaṁ puri-śayam
girā panthātītaṁ svadita-navanītaṁ naya-karaṁ
     sadā taṁ govindaṁ parama-sukha-kandaṁ bhajata re

Text 6 pareśaṁ padmeśaṁ śiva-kamalajeśaṁ śiva-karaṁ
     dvijeśaṁ deveśaṁ tanu-kuṭila-keśaṁ kali-haraṁ
khageśaṁ viśveśaṁ nikhila-bhuvaneśaṁ jaga-dharaṁ
     sadā taṁ govindaṁ parama-sukha-kandaṁ bhajata re

Text 7 ramā-kāntaṁ kāntaṁ bhava-bhaya-bhayāntaṁ bhava-sakhaṁ
     durāśāntaṁ śāntaṁ nikhila-hṛdi bhrāntaṁ bhuvana-pam
nivādāntaṁ dāntaṁ danuja-nicayāntaṁ su-caritaṁ
     sadā taṁ govindaṁ parama-sukha-kandaṁ bhajata re

Text 8 jagaj-jyeṣṭhaṁ śreṣṭhaṁ surapati-kaniṣṭhaṁ kratu-patim
     baliṣṭhaṁ bhūyiṣṭhaṁ tribhuvana-variṣṭhaṁ vara-vaham
sva-niṣṭhaṁ dharmiṣṭhaṁ guru-gaṇa-gariṣṭhaṁ guru-varaṁ
     sadā taṁ govindaṁ parama-sukha-kandaṁ bhajata re

 
     Text 1 His form is full of spiritual bliss. He is the sweet essence of the Vedas. He is sweet like nectar. He is supremely independent. He is the abode where everything rests. He carries the devotees to the farther shore of the ocean of birth and death. He is supremely virtuous. He is Goddess Lakṣmī's necklace. He enjoys pastimes in Vraja's forests. Śiva praises His glories. O people, please always worship Lord Govinda, the root of all bliss. 
     Text 2 He resides on the great ocean. He is the father of all moving and unmoving beings. He protects the demigods in the higher worlds. He is a flood of nectar. He rides on Garuḍa. He is pleased by devotion. He knows every heart. He knows everything. He is the sages' shelter. To Dhruva He gave an eternal abode. O people, please always worship Lord Govinda, the root of all bliss.
     Text 3 Fixing their intelligence on Him, the sages meditate on Him. Filling the cups of their ears, the ascetics drink the nectar of His glories. He is known by the great statements of the Vedas. He created the three worlds. He is the supreme ordainer of what shall be. The material mind has no power to measure Him. In a moment He manifests His youthful form in His devotee's heart. O people, please always worship Lord Govinda, the root of all bliss.
     Text 4 By His command Goddess Mahā-māyā weaves her net. He wears a splendid forest-flower-garland. He removes all sins. His forehead is graceful. He is a cowherd boy. He killed Sisupala. His face is like the moon. He is beyond time's touch. He is time itself. His motions are like a graceful swan. He is Mura's enemy. O people, please always worship Lord Govinda, the root of all bliss.
     Text 5 He is glorious like a full moon shining in the sky. His glories are sung by the Vedas. He is equal to all. He is pleased with the demigods. He is not pleased by the demons. He resides in Dvārakā-purī. He is beyond the pathway of material words. He relishes fresh butter. He is everyone's guide. O people, please always worship Lord Govinda, the root of all bliss.
     Text 6 He is the supreme controller. He is Goddess Lakṣmī's master. He is the master of Śiva and Brahmā. He brings auspiciousness. He is the brāhmaṇas' master. He is the demigods' master. His hair is fine and curly. He stops strife. He is Garuḍa's master. He is the master of the universes. He is the master of all the worlds. He maintains the universes. O people, please always worship Lord Govinda, the root of all bliss.
     Text 7 He is Goddess Lakṣmī's beloved. He is handsome. He ends all fear of this world of birth and death. He is the only friend in this world. He puts an end to all sinful deaires. He is supremely peaceful. He resides in every heart. He protects the worlds. He ends all debate. He is self-controlled. He brings the demons to their end. His actions are glorious. O people, please always worship Lord Govinda, the root of all bliss.
     Text 8 He is supreme in all the worlds. He is the greatest. He is Indra's younger brother Upendra. He is the master of all yajñas. He is the most powerful. He is the best. He is the most exalted in the three worlds. He is the granter opf benedictions. He is independent. He is religious. He is the best of all gurus. He is the supreme master. O people, please always worship Lord Govinda, the root of all bliss.

 
Song 178  (Eight Prayers Glorifying Nanda's Son
 

Text 1 Śrī Nanda-nandanāṣṭaka
su-cāru-vaktra-maṇḍalaṁ
     su-karṇa-ratna-kuṇḍalam
su-carcitāṅga-candanaṁ
     namāmi nanda-nandanam

Text 2 su-dīrgha-netra-paṅkajaṁ
     śikhī-śikhaṇḍa-mūrdhajam
anaṅga-koṭi-mohanaṁ
     namāmi nanda-nandanam

Text 3 su-nāsikāgra-mauktikaṁ
     svacchanda-danta-paṅktikam
navāmbudāṅga-cikkaṇaṁ
     namāmi nanda-nandanam

Text 4 kareṇa veṇu-rañjitam
     gatī-karīndra-gañjitam
dukūla-pīta-śobhanaṁ
     namāmi nanda-nandanam

Text 5 tri-bhaṅga-deha-sundaraṁ
     nakha-dyuti-sudhākaram
amūlya-ratna-bhūṣaṇaṁ
     namāmi nanda-nandanam

Text 6 su-gandha-aṅga-saurabhaṁ
     uro-virāji-kaustubham
sphurac-chrīvatsa-lañchanaṁ
     namāmi nanda-nandanam

Text 7 vṛndāvana-su-nāgaraṁ
     vilāsānuga-vāsasam
surendra-garva-mocanaṁ
     namāmi nanda-nandanam

Text 8 vrajāṅganā-su-nāyakaṁ
     sadā sukha-pradāyakam
jagan-manaḥ-pralobhanaṁ
     namāmi nanda-nandanam

Text 9 śrī-nanda-nandanāṣṭakaṁ
     paṭhed yaḥ śraddhayānvitaḥ
tared bhavābdhi-dustaraṁ
     labhet tad-aṅghri-yugmakam

 
     Text 1 The circle of His fcae is graceful and handsome. Jewel earrings adorn His graceful ears. Sandal paste anoints His graceful limbs. To Nanda's son I offer my respectful obeisances.
     Text 2 His large eyes are lotus flowers. A peacock feather decorates the hair of His head. He is more charming than millions of Kāmadevas. To Nanda's son I offer my respectful obeisances.
     Text 3 A pearl decorates the tip of His nose. His teeth are splendid. His form glistens like a new raincloud. To Nanda's son I offer my respectful obeisances.
     Text 4 A glorious flute rests in His hand. His motions are more graceful than the king of elephants'. He wears glistening yellow silk garments. To Nanda's son I offer my respectful obeisances.
     Text 5 His graceful form bends in three places. He is like a moon shining in the sky. He is adorned with priceless jewel ornaments. To Nanda's son I offer my respectful obeisances.
     Text 6 His limbs are fragrant. A Kaustubha jewel glistens on His chest. He bears the glorious Śrīvatsa mark. To Nanda's son I offer my respectful obeisances.
     Text 7 He is the playful hero of Vṛndāvana. His garments are glorious. He removed great Indra's pride. To Nanda's son I offer my respectful obeisances.
     Text 8 He enjoys pastimes with Vraja's girls. He is always delightful. He charms the hearts of all the worlds. To Nanda's son I offer my respectful obeisances.
     Text 9 I pray that the faithful person who reads or recites this Śrī Nanda-nandanāṣṭaka will cross the impassable ocean of birth and death and attain the feet of Nanda's son.

 
Song 179  (Eight Prayers Glorifying Lord Bindu-Mādhava) 
 

Text 1 Śrī Bindu-Mādhavāṣṭaka
 kalindajā-taṭāṭavī-latā-niketanāntara-
     pragalbha-ballavī-sphurad-rati-prasaṅga-saṅgatam
sudhā-rasārdra-veṇu-nāda-moda-mādhurī-mada-
     pramatta-gopa-go-vrajaṁ bhajāmi bindu-mādhavam

Text 2 gadāri=śaṅkha-cakra-śārṅga-bhṛc-catuṣ-karaṁ kṛpā-
     kaṭākṣa-vīkṣaṇāmṛtokṣitāmarendra=nandanam
sanandanādi-mauni-mānasāravinda-mandiraṁ
     jagat-pavitra-kīrti-daṁ bhajāmi bindu-mādhavam

Text 3 dig-īśa-mauli-nūtna-ratna-niḥsarat-prabhāvalī-
     virājitāṅghri-paṅkajaṁ natendu-śekharābjajam
dayā-maranda-tundilāravinda-patra-locanaṁ
     virodhi-yūtha-bhedanaṁ bhajāmi bindu-mādhavam

Text 4 payaḥ-payodhi-vīcikāvalī-payaḥ-pṛṣan-milad-
     bhujāṅga-puṅgavāṅga-kalpa-puṣpa-talpa-śāyinam
kaṭī-taṭī-sphuṭī-bhavat-pratapta-hāṭakāmbaraṁ
     niśāta-koṭi-pāṭanaṁ bhajāmi bindu-mādhavam

Text 5 anuśravāpahārakāvalepa-lopa-naipuṇī-
     payaścarāvatāra-toṣitāravinda-sambhavam
mahā-bhavābdhi-madhya-magna-dīna-loka-tārakaṁ
     vihaṅga-rāṭ-turaṅgamaṁ bhajāmi bindu-mādhavam

Text 6 samudra-toya-madhya-deva-dānavotkṣipad-dharā-
     dharendra-mūla-dhāraṇa-kṣamādi-kūrma-vigraham
durāgrahāvalipta-hāṭakākṣa-nāśa-śūkaraṁ
     hiraṇya-dānavāntakaṁ bhajāmi bindu-mādhavam

Text 7 virocanātma-sambhavottamāṅga-kṛt-pada-kramaṁ
     paraśvadhopasaṁhatākhilāvanīśa-maṇḍalam
kaṭhora-nīlakaṇṭha-kārmuka-pradāṛsitādi-dor-
     balānvita-kṣitī=sutaṁ bhajāmi bindu-mādhavam

Text 8 yamānujodaka-pravāha-satvarābhijitvaraṁ
     purāsurāṅganābhimāna-bhajjitopanāyakam
sva-maṇḍalāgra-khaṇḍanīya-yāvanāri-maṇḍalaṁ
     balānujaṁ gadāgrajaṁ bhajāmi bindu-mādhavam

Text 9 praśasta-pañca-cāmarākhya-vṛtta-bheda-bhāsitaṁ
     daśāvatāra-varṇanaṁ nṛsiṁha-bhakta-varṇitam
prasiddha-bindu-mādhavāṣṭakaṁ paṭhanti ye narāḥ
     su-durlabhaṁ bhajanti te manorathaṁ nirantaram

 
     Text 1 In a forest by the Yamunā's banks, in a cottage of vines, He enjoys amorous pastimes with the proud gopīs. With the fragrant sweetness of His nectar flute-melodies He makes the gopas and cows intoxicated with bliss. I worship Lord Bindu-Mādhava.
     Text 2 His four arms hold the club, conchshell, cakra, and Śāṛṅga bow. The nectar of His merciful glance is sprinkled on Arjuna. He is the lotus temple where the thoughts of Sanandana-kumāra and silent sages stay. His glories purify all the worlds. I worship Lord Bindu-Mādhava.
     Text 3 His lotus feet glisten with light flowing from the new jewel crowns of the dig-īśvara demigods. Moon-crowned Śiva and lotus-born Brahmā bow before Him. His eyes are lotus petals filled with the nectar of mercy. He breaks all enemies into pieces. I worship Lord Bindu-Mādhava.
     Text 4 He reclines on a bed of kalpa-flowers, a bed resting on the glorious snake-king Ananta Śeṣa's coils, coils splashed by the milk-ocean's waves. A garment splendid like molten gold is wrapped about His waist. He breaks into pieces His enemies' glistening sharp weapons. I worship Lord Bindu-Mādhava.
     Text 5 Descending to this world as Lord Matsya, and skillfully destroying the pride of a demon who had stolen the Vedas, He satisfied lotus-born Brahmā. He delivers the poor souls drowning in the ocean of repeated birth and death. He swiftly flies on the bird-king Garuḍa. I worship Lord Bindu-Mādhava.
     Text 6 Manifesting the form of Lord Kūrma, He held up the mountain-king Meru, which had been placed upon Him by the demons and demigods in the midts of the ocean. Manifesting the form of Lord Varāha, He killed the pride-anointed demon Hiraṇyākṣa. He put an end to the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu. I worship Lord Bindu-Mādhava.
     Text 7 On the head of Virocana's son Bali He placed His foot. With His e battle-axe He killed the demon kings of the earth. With Lord Śiva's great bow and other weapons in His powerful arms, He defated the earth's son Nāraka. I worship Lord Bindu-Mādhava.
     Text 8 He defated the Yamunā's swift current. The pride of the demons' wives He broke into pieces. His army defeated Kālayāvana's army. He is Balarāma's younger brother and Gada's elder brother. I worship Lord Bindu-Mādhava.
     Text 9 This Bindu-Mādhavāṣṭaka follows the description of the Lord's ten avatāras, a description given in the famous book named Pañca-cāmara, a book written by a devotee of Lord Nṛsiṁha. Anyone who reads or recites these prayers attains even rare or difficult-to-attain desires.

 
Song 180  (Eight Prayers Glorifying the Lord Hari's Holy Names)
 

Text 1 Śrī Hari-nāmāṣṭaka
 śrī-keśavācyuta mukunda rathāṅga-pāṇe
     govinda mādhava janārdana dānavāre
nārāyaṇāmara-pate tri-jagan-nivāsa
     jihve japeti satataṁ madhurākṣarāṇi

Text 2 śrī-deva-deva madhusūdana śārṅga-pāṇe
     dāmodarārṇava-niketana kaiṭabhāre
viśvambharābharaṇa-bhūṣita bhūmi-pāla
     jihve japeti satataṁ madhurākṣarāṇi

Text 3 śrī-padma-locana gadādhara padmanābha
     padmeśa padmapada pāvana padmapāṇe
pītāmbarāmbara-ruce rucirāvatāra
     jihve japeti satataṁ madhurākṣarāṇi

Text 4 śrīkānta kaustubha-dharārtaharābjapāṇe
     viṣṇo tri-vikrama mahī-dhara dharma-seto
vaikuṇṭha-vāsa vasudhādhipa vāsudeva
     jihve japeti satataṁ madhurākṣarāṇi

Text 5 śrī-nārasiṁha narakāntaka kānta-mūrte
     lakṣmī-pate garuḍa-vāhana śeṣa-śāyin
keśi-praṇāśana su-keśa kirīṭa-maule
     jihve japeti satataṁ madhurākṣarāṇi

Text 6 śrīvatsa-lañchana surarṣabha śārṅga-pāṇe
     kalpānta-vāridhi-vihāra hare murāre
yajñeśa yajñamaya yajña-bhug ādi-deva
     jihve japeti satataṁ madhurākṣarāṇi

Text 7 śrī-rāma rāvaṇa-ripo raghu-vaṁśa-keto
     sītā-pate daśarathātmaja rāja-siṁha
sugrīva-mitra mṛga-vedhana-cāpa-pāṇe
     jihve japeti satataṁ madhurākṣarāṇi

Text 8 śrī-kṛṣṇa vṛṣṇi-vara yādava rādhikeśa
     govardhanoddharaṇa kaṁsa-vināśa śaure
gopāla veṇu-dhara pāṇḍusutaika-bandho
     jihve japeti satataṁ madhurākṣarāṇi

Text 9 ity aṣṭakaṁ bhagavataḥ satataṁ naro yo
     nāmāntikaṁ paṭhati nityam ananya-cetāḥ
viṣṇoḥ param padam upaiti punar na jātu
     mātuḥ payodhara-rasaṁ pibatīha satyam

 
     Text 1 Master of Brahmā and Śiva! Infallible Lord! Giver of liberation! Lord who hold the wheel in Your hand! Lord who please the cows, land, and senses! Husband of Goddess Lakṣmī! Lord who saves the devotees from distress! Enemy of the demons! Lord Nārāyaṇa! Master of the demigods! Lord in whom the three worlds reside! O tongue, please always chant these sweet syllables.
     Text 2 Master of the demigods! Killer of Madhu! Lord who hold the Śārṅga bow in Your hand! Lord whose waist was bound with a rope! Lord who reside in the ocean! Enemy opf Kaitabha! maintainer of the worlds! Lord decorated with ornaments! Protector of the earth! O tongue, please always chant these sweet syllables.
     Text 3 Lotus-eyed Lord! Lord who holds a mace! O Lord with a lotus-navel! O Lord with lotus feet! O purifyer! O Lord with lotus hands! O Lord with yellow garments! O Lord adorned with splendid garments! O delightful Lord! O Lord who descended to this world! O tongue, please always chant these sweet syllables.
     Text 4 O beloved of Goddess Lakṣmī! O Lord decorated with a Kaustubha gem! O Lord who removes the devotees sufferings! O Lord with lotus hands! O all-pervading Lord! O Lord who surpassess all the three worlds! O maintainer of the earth! O bridge of religion! O Lord whose home is Vaikuṇṭha! O king of the earth! O son of Vasudeva! O tongue, please always chant these sweet syllables.
     Text 5 O Lord Nṛsiṁha! O Lord who put an end to Nārakāsura! -O Lord whose form is handsome! O husband of Goddess Lakṣmī! O Lord who flies on Garuḍa! O Lord who reclines on Śeṣa! O killer of Keśī! O Lord with graceful hair! O Lord with a glorious crown! O tongue, please always chant these sweet syllables.
     Text 6 O Lord who bears the Śrīvatsa mark! O best of the suras! O Lord whose hand grasps a conchshell! O Lord who at the kalpa's end enjoy pastimes on the great ocean! O Lord who remove all that is inauspicious! O enemy of Mura! O master of all yajñas! O Lord who are yajña personified! O enjoyer of all yajñas! O leader of all the devas! O tongue, please always chant these sweet syllables.
     Text 7 O glorious Lord Rāma! O enemy of Rāvaṇa! O flag of Raghu's dynasty! O husband of Sita! O son of Daśaratha! O lion of kings! O friend of Sugrīva! O Lord who, bow in hand, shot a deer! O tongue, please always chant these sweet syllables.
     Text 8 O all-attractive Lord Kṛṣṇa! O best of the Vrsnis! O descendent of Yadu! O matser of Rādhikā! O lifter of Govardhana Hill! O killer of Kaṁsa! O descendent of King Śūrasena! O protector of the cows! O Lord who hold a flute! O friend of the Pāṇḍavas! O tongue, please always chant these sweet syllables.
     Text 9 Anyone who with fixed concentration regularly chants or reads these eight stanzas glorifying the Supreme Lord's holy names will attain Lord Viṣṇu's supreme abode. Never again will that person drink the milk from a mother's breast. That is the truth.

 
Song 181  (Prayers Glorifying Lord Kṛṣṇa's Holy Names)
 

Text 1 Śrī Kṛṣṇa-nāmāvalī-stotra
 nāma-cintāmaṇe kṛṣṇa
     caitanya-rasa-vigraha
pūrṇa śuddha nitya muktā-
     bhinnātman karuṇāmaya

Text 2 śrī-kṛṣṇa sac-cid-ānanda
     pūrṇa-brahma sanātana
goloka-nātha gopeśa
     sarveṣāṁ maṅgalāspadam

Text 3 śrī-govinda vrajānanda
     gokulānanda-dāyaka
mukunda paramānanda
     vrajendra nanda-nandana

Text 4 śrī-śrī-vṛndāvanānanda
     yaśodānanda-vardhana
rādhā-govinda rādheśa
     rādhikā-prāṇa-vallabha

Text 5 śrī-rādhā-hṛdayānanda
     goṣṭhānanda priyaṁ-vada
nandātmaja cid-ānanda
     śrī-nanda-kula-bhūṣaṇa

Text 6 śrī-nanda-dulālāgrya
     gopīnāṁ nayanotpala
śrīmatī-rādhikā-kānta
     vrajendra vraja-mohana

Text 7 śālagrāma ghana-śyāma
     pūrṇānanda-pradāyaka
rāma kṛṣṇa jagad-iṣṭa
     goṣṭha-līlā-vinodaka

Text 8 śrī=gopi-mohana kṛṣṇa
     śrī-rādhā-ramaṇa prabho
īśvaras tvaṁ paramaḥ kṛṣṇa
     mano-'bhiṣṭa-pradāyaka
rādhā-nātha gopī-nātha
     śrī-rādhā-mano-mohana

Text 9 śrī-vaṁśī-vadanānanda
     veṇu-vādya-viśārada
śrī-śrī-rāsa-vihāriṁś ca
     ātmārāma jagan-maya

Text 10 yaśodā-prāṇa-māṇikya
     rādhikā-kaṇṭha-bhūṣaṇa
śrīmad-vṛndāvana-svāmin
     kiśora rāsa-nāyaka

Text 11 govardhana-dharānanda
     śrī-gopāla-cūḍāmaṇe
he dīna-dayārdra nātha
     pūtanā-gati-dāyaka

Text 12 govinda bāla mukunda
     navanītasya-taskara
brahmaṇya-deva brahmātman
     brahma-darpa-vighātaka

Text 13 devendra paramānanda
     govinda nanda-bālaka
rādhā-vinodinī-svāmin
     śrī-gopī-jana-vallabha

Text 14 acyuta kamalā-kānta
     devendra-pada-vandita
vāmana bali-darpa-ghna
     śrī-nṛsiṁha dayāmbudhe

Text 15 dāmodara dīna-bandho
     śrīdhara parameśvara
devakī-nandana kṛṣṇa
     cintāmaṇe jagat-pate

Text 16 śrīman-nārāyaṇa brahman
     śrī-pate puruṣottama
yādava mādhava deva
     keśava rāma rāghava

Text 17 mathureśa hṛṣīkeśa
     dvārikeśa janārdana
vāsudeva hayagrīva
     cakra-pāṇe gadādhara

Text 18 sarvāntar-yāmin govinda
     viśvādhāra jaganmaya
nārāyaṇa jagannātha
     śrī-viṣṇo śrī-janārdana

Text 19 śrī-kṛṣṇa puṇḍarīkākṣa
     viśvambhara jagad-guro
vidagdha catura dakṣa
     śrī-kṛṣṇa viśva-mohana

Text 20. sarveśvara jagat-pāla
     bhagavan hare īśvara
murāre kṛṣṇa kaṁsārin
     hatāri-gati-dāyaka

Text 21 karaṇaṁ karaṇaṁ deva
     tvam eva śaraṇaṁ prabho
dīna-bandho kṛpā-sindho
     gati-nātha gati-prada

Text 22 patita-pāvana nātha
     anādir ādir īśvara
yady ahaṁ nirguṇo hīnaḥ
     pāpiṣṭho 'py adhamādhamaḥ
tathāpi jagatāṁ nātha
     tvam eva śaraṇaṁ prabho

Text 23 mādṛśaḥ pātaki-śreṣṭho
     nāsti kṛṣṇa bhū-maṇḍale
ataḥ paraṁ prapanno 'haṁ
     prasīda dīna-vatsala

Text 24 hā kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho
     dīna-bandho dayāmaya
trāhi māṁ sarvato nātha
     tyaktuṁ nārhasi cāśritam

Text 25 rādhayā sahitaṁ nāma
     jihvāgre yasya vartate
satyaṁ satyaṁ punaḥ satyaṁ
     sa yāti paramaṁ padam

 
     Text 1 O Lord whose holy name is a cintāmaṇi jewel! All-attractive Lord Kṛṣṇa! Lord whose form is spiritual nectar! Perfect and pure Lord! Eternal Lord! Liberated Lord! Lord not different from Your holy name! Merciful Lord!
     Text 2 O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! Lord whose form is eternal asnd full of knowledge and bliss! Perfect and complete Brahman! Etyernal Lord! Master of Goloka! Master of the gopīs! Abode of aupsiciousness for all!
     Text 3 O Lord who please the cows, land, and senses! O bliss of Vraja! O Lord who delights Gokula! Giver of liberation! Supreme nliss! King of Vraja! Son of Nanda!
     Text 4 Bliss of Śrī Vṛndāvana! Delight of Yaśodā! Lord who delights Rādhā! Master of Rādhā! Lord dear as life to Rādhā!
     Text 5 Bliss of Rādhā's heart! Bliss of Vraja! Lord who speaks sweet words! Son of Nanda! Lord filled with spiritual bliss! Ornament of Nanda's family!
     Text 6 Glorious son of Nanda! Lotus-flower blooming in the gopīs' eyes! Beloved of Śrīmatī Rādhikā! King of Vraja! Lord who ecnhants Vraja!
     Text 7 Lord who is manifest as the Śālagrāma-śilā! Lord dark like a monsoon cloud! giver of perfect bliss! Rāma! Kṛṣṇa! Lord worshiped by all the worlds! Lord who enjoys pastimes in Vraja!
     Text 8 Enchanter of the gopīs! Kṛṣṇa! Lord who enjoys pastimes with Rādhā! O master! O Kṛṣṇa! You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. O Lord who fulfill the desires of every heart! Master of Rādhā! Master of the gopīs! Lord who enchants Rādhā's heart!
     Text 9 Lord who plays delightful flute-music! Expert flute-player! Lord who enjoys the rāsa-dance pastime! Self-satisfied Lord! Lord present everywhere in this world!
     Text 10 Ruby of Yaśodā's heart! Lord who is Rādhā's necklace! Master of glorious Vṛndāvana! Youthful Lord! Hero of the rasa-dance!
     Text 11 Lifter of Govardhana Hill! Supreme bliss! Crest jewel of the cowherd boys! O Lord melting with compassion for hte poor fallen souls! O master! O Lord who gave a transcendentasl destination to Pūtanā!
     Text 12 O Govinda! Child! Giver of liberation! Butter-thief! Lord whorshiped by the brahmanas! Lord who keep the brahmaṇas in Your heart! Lord who destroys Brahmā's pride!
     Text 13 King of the devas! Supreme bliss! Govinda! Son of Nanda! Master of playful Rādhā! Beloved of the gopīs!
     Text 14 Infallible Lord! Beloved of lotuslike Lakṣmī! Lord before whose feet the kings of the devas bow! Lord who was manifest as Vāmana! Lord who destroyed Bali's pride! Śrī Nṛsiṁha! Ocean of mercy!
     Text 15 O Lord whose belly was bound by a rope! Friend of the poor! Lord embraced by Goddess Lakṣmī! Supreme controller! Delight of Devakī! Kṛṣṇa! Cintāmaṇi-jewel! Master of the worlds!
     Text 16 Śrīmān Nārāyaṇa! Supreme Brahman! Master of Goddess Lakṣmī! Supreme person! Descendent of Yadu! Husband of Goddess Lakṣmī! Lord! Master of Brahmā and Śiva! Rāma! Descendent of Raghu!
     Text 17 Master of Mathurā! Master of the senses! Master of Dvārakā! Lord who rescue the devotees from distress! Son of Vasudeva! Hayagrīva! Lord who hold the cakra in Your hand! Lord who hold a club!
     Text 18 Lord present in every heart! Govinda! Resting-place of the worlds! Lord present everywhere in the universe! Nārāyaṇa! Jagannātha! Śrī Viṣṇu! Lord who rescue the devotees from troubles!
     Text 19 Śrī Kṛṣṇa! Lotus-eyed Lord! Maintainer of the worlds! Guru of the worlds! Intelligent one! Wise one1 Expert one! Śrī Kṛṣṇa! Lord who charm all the worlds!
     Text 20. Master of all! Protector of the universes! Supreme Personality of Godhead full of all opulences! Lord who remove all that is auspicious! Supreme controller! Enemy of Mura! Kṛṣṇa! Enemy of Kaṁsa! Lord who give liberation to the enemies You kill!
     Text 21 Cause of causes! Lord! O master! You are my shelter. O friend of the poor! Ocean of mercy! Master of liberation! Giver of liberation!
     Text 22 Purifier of the fallen! Master! Beginningless Lord! Origin of all! Supreme controller! Although I am worthless, lowly, sinful, the lowest of the low, still, O master of the worlds, You have become my shelter.
     Text 23 O Lord Krsna, in the circle of this earth no one is more sinful than I. Therefore I now surrender unto You. O Lord affectionate to the poor, please be merciful to me. 
     Text 24 O Krsna! O ocean of mercy! Friewnd of the poor! Merciful one! Please rescue me! O master of all, You should not reject a soul that has taken shelter of You.
     Text 25 A person on whose tongue the names of Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa stay will attain the spiritual world. That is the truth. It is the truth. It is the truth.

 