Song 1

Text 1
vṛndāvana dhāme āmi vase āchi ekā
e bhāvanā madhya madhya deya more dekhā
vṛndāvana dhāme-in vṛndāvana-dhāma; āmi vase āchi-I am seated; ekā-alone; e-is; bhāvanā-thought; madhya madhya-now and then; deya more dekhā-kindly appear to me.
My dear Lord Kṛṣṇa, as I sit here alone in Your holy abode of vṛndāvana-dhāma, absorbed in the following thoughts and mediations, kindly appear before me

Text 2
āche more strī - putra kanyā-nāti saba
kintu artha nāi bali’ bipala vaibhava
āche more-I have; strī-wife;putra-sons; kanyā-daughters; nāti-grandsons; saba-all; kintu-but; artha-welath; nāi-I have not; bali-since; bipala-fruitless; vaibhava-wealth.
I have a wife, son, daughter, grandchildren and everything, but since now I am without any wealth, everything is considered a failure. All those so-called opulences are now simply sources of frustration.

Text 3
prakritira nagnarūpa dekhāle śri kṛṣṇa
tava kṛpābale āja hayechi vitṛṣṇa
prakritira-of material nature; nagnarūpa-the naked form; dekhāle-you showed; śri kṛṣṇa-Oh! Lord Kṛṣṇa; tava-by your; kṛpābale-strength of mercy; āja-today; hayechi-I have become; vitṛṣṇa-disgusted.
My dear Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa! You have so kindly revealed to me the naked form of Your material energy, and today, by your causeless mercy, I have lost all taste for material enjoyment.

Text 4
yasyāhamanugṛhnāmi hariṣye taddhanam śanaiḥ
kṛpāmayera ei kṛpā bujihilāma kai?
yasyāhamanugṛhnāmi hariṣye taddhanam śanaiḥ-I gradually take away the wealth of those whom I love; kṛpāmayera-of He who is composed of mercy; ei-this; kṛpā-mercy; bujihilāma-understood; kai-have I? 
As you my Lord have stated: yasyāhamanugṛhnāmi hariṣye taddhanam śanaiḥ, “If I specially favor anybody, then I take away all his sources of income.” But have I really properly understood how You, the all merciful Lord, have bestowed this causeless mercy upon me?

Song 2

Text 1
arthahīna dekhi’ more cheḍeche sabāi
kutumba-ātmīya āra bandhujana bhāi
arthahīna-without money; dekhi-having seen; more-me; cheḍeche-rejected; sabāi-all; kutumba- ātmīya-relatives; āra-also; bandhu-friend; jana-people; bhāi-brother.
Seeing that I have no money, everyone has left me, including all my family members, relatives, close friends and brothers!

Text 2
duḥkha haya hāsi pāya, ekā vasi hāsi
māyāra saṁsāra ei kāke bhālavāsi
duḥkha haya-they are full of lamentation; hāsi pāya-feel inclined to laugh; ekā-alone; vasi hāsi-I remain alone and smile; māyāra- of maya; saṁsāra-family; ei-this; kāke-who; bhālavāsi-do I love.
However, although I am supposed to be unhappy, actually I am laughing. Indeed, sitting here alone in the holy abode of vṛndāvana I am laughing in great happiness! Who in this material life of so-called family, friendship, and love can be said to really love another?

Text 3
kothā gela mātā-pitā āra snehamaya
kothā gela jyeṣṭha yārā svajanādi haya
kothā-where; gela-went; mātā-pitā-mother and father; āra-also; snehamaya-loving; kothā-where; gela-went; jyeṣṭha-elders; yārā-who; svajanādi-relatives; haya-are.
Where are my affectionate mother and father now? Where are the other near and dear ones? Where have all the elder relatives and close family members gone?

Text 4
tādera khabara kebā deba more bala
nāme mātra tādera saṁsāra raye gela
tādera-their; khabara-news; kebā-who; deba-will give; more-to me; bala- please say; nāme mātra-only in name; tādera-their; saṁsāra- family; raye gela-has remained.
Tell me! Who is there who can give me information about their whereabouts today? What si left of their dear “family” at present? Now it exists in name only.

Song 3

Text 1
samudrena phenā yena kṣaṇe ṣṛṣti kṣaṇe laya
māyāra saṁsāre khelā seibhāve haya
samudrena-of the ocean; phenā-foam; yena-like; kṣaṇe-momentarily; ṣṛṣti–created; kṣaṇe–in one movement; laya–destroyed; mayara–illusory; saṁsāre–material world; khelā–play; seibhāve–like; haya–is.
Ocean foam is created in an instant by the action of the waves. Just as abruptly the foam is also disintegrated after a momentary existence. The “game” of illusory material family life and its affairs is like that; suddenly beginning and then terminating after a short existence.

Text 2
keha nahe pitā-mātā ātmiya-svajana
sabāi phenāra mato thāke alpakṣaṇa
keha nahe–no one is; pitā-mātā–father or mother; ātmīya-svajana–relative; sabāi–all; phenāra mato–like the foam; thāke-remain; alpakṣaṇa-a short time.
In truth, no one can actually be said to be a “father,” “mother,” “relative,” or dear “friend,” since everyone remains, as do the bubbles of foam in the ocean, for just a very short period of time.

Text 3
samudrera phenā yemana samudre miśaya
pañchabhūtera deha tathā haye yāya laya
samudrera-of the ocean; phenā-form; yemana-just as; samudre-in the ocean; miśaya-mixes; pañchabhūtera-made of five material elements; deha-body; tathā-in the same way; haye-being; yāya-goes; laya-destruction.
As a ocean foam finally merges back into the ocean water from where it came, similarly material bodies, which are temporary products of the material energy made of the five gross material elements (earth, water, fire, air, and sky), are also eventually destroyed by the actions of the material energy, and finally the elements of the dead body merge again with the total material elements. The temporary material body is certainly not the real person, nor even alive.

Text 4
kata deha eibhāve dharaye śarīrī
anitya śarīre mātra ātmiya tāhāri
kata-many; deha-bodies; eibhāve-in this way; dharaye-accepts; śarīrī-the possessor of the body, the soul; anitya-impermenant; śarīre-in the body; mātra-only; ātmīya-bodily relations; tāhāri-his.
There is a living spiritual force present in the body that is not the body, but which makes each body “alive”. That living force is the real self, the eternal spirit soul, which for the short period of one life temporarily possesses a particular material body, then leaves that body at “death” and enters into a new body and is born again, repeating

Song 4

Text 1
ātmīya sabāi bhāi, ātmāra sambandhe
ātmīyatā nāhi haya māyāmaya gandhe
ātmīya-relatives; sabāi -all; bhāi-brothers; ātmāra-the soul; sambandhe-in the relationship; ātmīyatā-being related; nāhi haya-is not; māyāmaya-illusory; gandhe-in the relationship.
In relation to the eternal self or spirit soul, every living entity is a relative to each other. Indeed, all are brothers! And in this real and eternal relationship there is not even the slightest hint or trace of material illusion.

Text 2
sakalera ātmā yini svayaṁ bhagavanā
tāṅhāra sambandhe visve sabāi samāna
sakalera-of all; ātmā-the soul; yini-who is; svayaṁ bhagavanā-the original personality of godhead; tāṅhāra sambandhe-by relationship with bhagavan; visve-in the universe; sabāi-all; samāna-of equal status.
The Soul of all souls is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. And in relation to Him everyone in the universe is equal.

Text 3
ātmīya tomāra bhāi, yata jīvakoti
kṛṣṇera sambandhe tāhā haya paripāti
ātmīya-relatives; tomāra-your; bhāi-brothers; yata-many; jīva-koti-innumerable living entities; kṛṣṇera sambandhe-in relationship with kṛṣṇa; tāhā-they; haya-become; paripāti-excellent.
It is clear that all the countless millions of individual souls (jīvas) present in all types of material bodies are related to one another as “brothers,” since everyone is forever an eternal part and parcel of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 4
‘kṛṣṇa bhuli sei jīva’ bhogavāñchā kare
māyāra saṁsāra tāi jāpatiyā dhare 
kṛṣṇa bhuli-forgetting Krsna; sei jīva-these souls; bhoga-vāñchā-desire for individual enjoyment; kare-do; māyāra-illusory; saṁsāra-material world; tāi-therefore; jāpatiyā dhare-embrace.
However, due to being overcome by desires for enjoying this material energy, the eternal living entity forgets the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, his eternal Master, and leaves His divine service, ‘kṛṣṇa bhuli sei jīva’ bhogavāñchā kare. Having forgotten his eternal relationship with Lord Kṛṣṇa, the fallen soul becomes conditioned and firmly bound by the material nature’s illusion, and thus falsely considers this material existence of temporary family relations, friendship, and so-called love to be real.

Song 5

Text 1
karmaphale āse saba nānā veśa dhari’
veśete majiyā thāke bhuliyā śrī hari
karma-phale-as a result of activities; āse-come; saba-all; nānā-various; veśa-clothing; dhari-wearing; veśete-in their clothing; majiyā thāke-remain enchanted; bhuliyā-forgetting; śrī hari-the Supreme Lord.
The living entity, although a pure spirit soul, is forced to take birth again and again in many different kinds of bodies as a reaction to his previous material activities, or karmas. Although these bodies are merely like external costumes or garments to the eternal soul, the embodied spirit soul becomes so infatuated and preoccupied by the experiences of enjoyment and suffering they provide that he forgets his eternal relationship with Śrī Hari (Kṛṣṇa), the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 2
ataeva māyā tāre deya bahū dukha
duḥkhe hābu dubu tabu tāhe māne sukha
ataeva-consequently; māyā-illusory energy; tāre-to them; deya-gives; bahū-many; dukha-miseries; duḥkhe-in misery; hābu dubu-rising and sinking; tabu-yet; tāhe-in that situation; māne-they consider; sukha-happiness.
Therefore Maya, the illusory material energy of Lord Kṛṣṇa, gives the conditioned soul various kinds of material suffering. In the midst of this suffering, sometimes the conditioned soul gets some momentary respite. Like criminals in olden times who were punished by being dunked in the water until they almost drowned, and then lifted at the last moment to get a breath of air only to be dunked again in the water, the conditioned soul is forced to suffer the reactions for his previous sinful activities, but when there is some temporary relief from the almost constant suffering of material life, he foolishly considers that to be happiness.

Text 3
cirarogī duḥkha-bhogī sayyāte śuiyā
‘bhāla āchi āja’ kahe hāsiyā hāsiyā
cirarogī-one who is sick for a long time; duḥkha-bhogī-one who is receiving much misery in life; sayyāte-on his bed; śuiyā-lying; bhāla āchi āja-I am well today; kahe-he says; hāsiyā hāsiyā-while laughing.
A terminally diseased person, bedridden and compelled to experience so many inconveniences and miseries, sometimes feels a little relief from pain; if someone were to ask at that moment, “How are you doing?” he may reply from his sick bed with a smile, “Today I am quite well!”

Text 4
hāsi pāya tāra ‘bhāla thākāra’ kathāya
mayābaddha jīvera bhāla eibhāve haya
hāsi pāya-he feels inclined to laugh; tāra-his; bhāla thākāra-being well; kathāya-talking about; māyā-baddha-bound by maya; jīvera-of the jīva; bhāla-state of being well; eibhāve-in this way; haya-is.
Hearing him say that he’s “doing well” even under those appalling conditions makes me smile at its absurdity. Although the actual condition of material life is miserable, a materially conditioned person considers it happiness when he gets some temporary or partial relief from suffering.

Song 6

Text 1
kata ‘plyāna’ kare tārā bhāla thākibāre
prakṛti bhāṅgiyā deya saba bāre bāre
kata-many; plyana kare-make plans; tārā-they; bhāla-well, comfortably; thākibāre-in order to live; prakṛti-material nature; bhāṅgiyā deya-breaks; saba-all; bāre bāre-time and time again.
How many “plans” they make just to “be well.” But this illusory material nature takes all these well-made plans and programs and simply breaks them apart again and again.

Text 2
“daivī hyesā guṇamayi” bhagavānera māyā
‘bhāla thākāra’ artha bujha bhāla ka’re bhāyā
daivī hyesā guṇa-mayi-composed of the three gunas and empowered by the Lord; bhagavānera-the Lord’s; māyā-external energy; bhāla thākāra-being well; artha-the meaning; bujha-please understand; bhāla kare-well; bhāyā-oh cousin.
Daivī hyesā guṇamayi – the material nature is the divine energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus she acts according to His desire. Then, my dear brother, kindly try to carefully understand what is the real significance of “being well” in this material world!

Text 3
keha ‘bhāla’ nāi hethā ‘tabu bhāla’ bale
eibhāve māyā saba baddhajīve chale
keha-anyone; bhāla-well; nāi-not; hethā-here; tabu-yet; bhāla-well; bale-they say; eibhāve-in this way; māyā-the external energy; saba-all; baddha-jīve-conditioned souls; chale-tricks.
No one is actually “well” here in the material world, yet they say “I am well.” This is the way Maya, the Lord’s illusory potency, bewilders the conditioned souls. Thus they accept temporary bodies through repeated birth and death.

Text 4
chalanāya bhuli jīva sarvadā maśagula
māyā lāgi mare tabu bhāṅge nāko bhula
chalanāya bhuli-being tricked; jīva-the souls; sarvadā-always; maśagula-engrossed; māyā lāgi-being conditioned; mare-suffer; tabu-even so; bhāṅge nāko bhula-remains illusioned.
Being bewildered in this way, the conditioned souls remain forgetful of their eternal, ever-blissful existence in devotional service of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and instead they are always busy serving their material senses trying to enjoy material sense gratification. Even though they are forced to leave their bodies against their will by the cruel hand of death, their bodies against their will by the cruel hand of death, their material illusion is not broken, and the conditioned soul remains bound in ignorance.

Song 7

Text 1
bāra bāra ‘plyāna’ kare bāra bāra bhāṅge
kakhana bhūmite paḍi kakhana ta’ paṅke
bāra bāra-again and again; plyāna kare-making plans; bāra bāra-again and again; bhāṅge-breaks; kakhana-sometimes; bhūmite-on earth; paḍi-fall; kakhana-some times to even; paṅke-the mud.
Thus the conditioned soul repeatedly makes new plans for becoming materially happy. Again and again these plans fail. Sometimes, in pursuit of happiness, the living entity falls down on the hard ground, experiencing great pain at impact, and sometimes he falls in the soft mud, experiencing less pain at impact.

Text 2
eirūpe brahmāṇda-bhari (jīva) karaye bramana
guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-nityadhana
eirūpe-this way; brahmāṇda-bhari-filling the universe; jīva-the souls; karaye bramana-wander; guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya-by the mercy of spiritual master and Kṛṣṇa; pāya-he receives; bhakti-nitya-dhana-the eternal treasure of devotional service.
In this way, the universes are filled with conditioned souls who are wandering all over these universes life after life. Only by the mercy of the bona-fide spiritual master and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, does the conditioned spirit soul receive the eternal treasure of pure devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 3
sei dhana mile yadi āra dhana chāḍe
anāyāse cale yāya saṁsārera pāre
sei-that; dhana-treasure; mile-is procured; yadi-if; āra-other; dhana-material treasure; chāḍe-given up; anāyāse-easily; cale-yāya-goes; saṁsārera pāre-over the material world.
If, upon receiving that eternal treasure of pure devotional service to Kṛṣṇa, the living entity gives up the temporary attachment to material objects, then that fortunate soul easily crosses over the bondage of this material world of repeated birth and death.

Text 4
bhavapāre āche cid-vaicitrya apāra
nitya śānti nitya sukhe karaya vihāra
bhava-pāre-beyond the material realm; āche-there is; cid-vaicitrya-spiritual variety; apāra-incomparable; nitya-eternal; śānti-peace; nitya-eternal; sukhe-in happiness; karaya vihāra-plays, enjoys.
There beyond the boundaries of this temporary material world is the eternal spiritual abode of the Lord, which is filled with incomparably wonderful transcendental variegatedness, an unlimited variety of spiritual opulences all inconceivably wonderful. There, in the spiritual world, the liberated soul relishes everlasting peace and eternal happiness.

Song 8

Text 1
bātula kahaye – “sethā saba nirākāra”
nirviśeṣa tini yena śunyera prakāra
bātula-crazy man; kahaye–says; sethā saba nirākāra-the spiritual realm is formless; nirviśeṣa-without variety; tini-he; yena-like; śunyera-voidness; prakāra-type.
The undeveloped intelligence of immature philosophers considers the Supreme Absolute Truth to be impersonal and devoid of qualities.

Text 2
rasera bhāṇḍāri tini “raso vai saḥ”
rasika bhāvuka seve hai tāṅra vaśa
rasera bhāṇḍari-reservoir of pleasure; tini-he; raso vai saḥ-he is the pleasure; rasika-of the rasa; bhāvuka-thoughtful men; seve-serve; hai-being; tāṅra vaśa-under his control.
Such philosophers do not know that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is storehouse of all transcendental mellows. The Vedic literatures emphatically describe the Supreme Absolute truth as raso vai saḥ, the source of all transcendental qualities, characteristics, and nectarean mellows of pure spiritual pleasures. Far from being impersonal, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is in fact the reservoir of transcendental rasa, or ecstatic mellow of personal loving exchanges. The pure devotees who serve the Lord in the different ecstatic mellows of devotional service are completely under the shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 3
sānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya rasa āra
sarvarasa śreṣṭha mādhurya rasa sāra
sānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya rasa-the four types of rasas; āra-and; sarva-rasa śreṣṭha-the best of all rasas; mādhurya rasa-conjugal love; sāra-the essence.
There in the spiritual world the pure devotees are engaged in the Lord’s loving devotional service in transcendental mellows starting from neutrality (sānta-rasa), servitude (dāsya-rasa), friendship (sakhya-rasa), paternal affection (vātsalya) and the topmost of all transcendental mellows of loving exchange, conjugal love (mādhurya-rasa), which contains all the essential characteristics of the other transcendental relationships.

Text 4
cid-jagate ‘rasa’ saba haya upādeya
māyāte tāra chāyāmātra kintu saba heya 
cid-jagate-in the spiritual world; rasa saba-all the rasas; haya-are; upādeya-excellent; māyāte-in the material world; tāra-its; chāyā-mātra-only the shadow; kintu-but; saba-all; heya-disagreeable.
The ecstatic mellows or loving exchanges existing in the spiritual world are all super-excellent and superb. This material world is expanded from the spiritual world, but is merely the shadow of that original spiritual world. All the eternal relationships that exist in the spiritual world are also represented in this material world in a limited or perverted way, just as the shadow of a real object has the complete outline of the object’s form, but doesn’t have the full detail and variety of the original.

Song 9

Text 1
kṛṣṇa yei bhaje sei hayata’ catura
māyā yei bhaje sei hayata’ ‘phatura’
kṛṣṇa yei bhaje-whoever worships Kṛṣṇa; sei-that person; haya-is; ta-indeed; catura-intelligent; māyā yei bhaje-who ever worships Maya; sei-that person; hayata-is indeed; phatura-destitute.
The most clever of all is one who worships Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. On the other hand, one who worships His external energy in the form of this material world, In due course of time certainly loses everything and is thus to be considered a less intelligent pauper.

Text 2
‘phatura’ haibāra lāgi anitya vilāsa
sambandha-jñāna-hīnera haya karma-banddha phāṅsa
phatura haibāra-of being destitude; lāgi-wanting; anitya-temporary; vilāsa-pastime; sambandha-jñāna-hīnera-for one who is devoid of knowledge of relationship with Kṛṣṇa; haya-becomes; karma-banddha-bondage resulting from material activities; phāṅsa-noose.
Just to become a pauper, all the temporary activities of this world are being performed. Thus the foolish materialists have forgotten the knowledge of their eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and by their hard labor they are simply weaving the noose to hang themselves, increasing their bondage to this material world day by day.

Text 3
arjuna karaye yuddha (āra) duryodhana kare
arjuna bhakta-śṛeṣṭa, duryodhana mare
arjuna-Arjuna; karaye yuddha-fights; āra-also; duryodhana-Duryodhana; kare-does; arjuna bhakta-śreṣṭa-Arjuna is the best of bhaktas; duryodhana mare-Duryodhana dies.
On the battlefield of Kurukṣetra, both Arjuna and Duryodhana were fighting, however their situations were completely different. Arjuna remained in the transcendental position through devotional service and was considered the best of all the devotees of the Lord. Duryodhana (the famous materialist) achieved his death.

Text 4
eka yuddha-kṣetre dui priyāpriya haya
buddhimāna loka yei bujhite pāraya
eka-one; yuddha-kṣetre-on the same battlefield; dui-two; priyā-one who is dear to the Lord; apriya-one who is not dear to the Lord; haya-is; buddhimāna-intelligent; loka-person; yei-who; bujhite-understands; pāraya-can.
Kindly consider that on the battlefield were both the dear most devotees of the Lord, who were victorious in all respects, and on the other side were the atheists, who achieved complete destruction. The purport of all these affairs is easily understood by persons endowed with true intelligence.

Song 10

Text 1
sambandha’ jāniyā yebā jīvana-yuddha kare
sei ta’ vāṅciyā thāke āra saba mare
sambandha-in relationship with God; jāniyā-knowing; yebā-whoever; jīvana-yuddha-battle of material existence; kare-performs; sei ta-he indeed; vāṅciyā thāke-remains alive; āra-others; saba-all; mare-perish.
One who knows his sambandha, or constitutional position in relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and engages in that consciousness in the day to day struggle or fight for existence, always survives by the mercy of the Lord, while others who have forgotten their eternal relationship with the Supreme Person are defeated by death.

Text 2
‘sambandha’ nā jāni’ yebā ān pathe dhāya
kṛṣṇapriti nāhi mile vṛthā janma yāya
sambandha-relationship; nā jāni-not knowing one’s relationship with the Lord; yebā-whoever; ān-other; pathe-on the paths; dhāya-pursues; kṛṣṇa-priti-love of Kṛṣṇa; nāhi mile-does not attain; vṛthā-useless; janma-human births; yāya-goes.
Moreover, those who are not conscious of their eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, traversing their own independent paths in material life, simply waste their lives because they fail to achieve pure love for Kṛṣṇa, which is the ultimate purpose of life and the highest perfection.

Text 3
kṛṣṇa se ‘sambandha’ ādi bhāla kare bujha
se sambandha rākhi tumi māyā sāthe yujha
kṛṣṇa-Kṛṣṇa; se sambandha ādi-different relationship with Kṛṣṇa; bhāla kare-with care; bujha-understand; se-that; sambandha-relationship; rākhi-keeping; tumi-you; māyā sāthe-with maya; yujha-fight.
Now, my friend, try to understand clearly how to act in relationship or sambandha to Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Maintaining that relationship through devotional service, you should declare war and fight with Maya, the material illusory energy.

Text 4
tāhā chāḍi’ haya yebā jñāna-karma-vīra
mokṣa nāhi pāya tārā haya ta’ asthira
tāhā-that; chāḍi-giving up; haya-is; yebā-whoever; jñāna-karma-vīra-the hero of fighter who takes shelter of jnana and karma; mokṣa-liberation; nāhi pāya-does not receive; tārā-they; haya-become; ta-just; asthira-agitated by frustration.
Keep in mind, one who thinks himself a great hero or warrior, due to his accumulation of jnana (material or spiritual knowledge) or karma (material acquisitions and fruitive results) and thereby gives up his direct relationship with Supreme Personality of Godhead as well as His shelter, fails to achieve liberation from material birth and death, and his attempts to achieve material happiness simply end in anxious frustration.

Song 11

Text 1
nāme-mātra mahādhīra, sakale aśānta
bhukti-mukti-sidhikāmīra indriya adānta
nāme-mātra-in name only; mahādhīra-famed for being peaceful and wise; sakale-all; aśānta-unpeaceful, unsatisfied; bhukti-mukti-sidhikāmīra-of those who desire enjoyment, liberation from material suffering or material mystic powers; indriya-the senses; adānta-uncontrolled.
Those persons who are desirous to material elevation, liberation from birth and death, or the mystic powers of the yogic system are in name only greatly advanced or wise. Actually, because their senses, including the mind, are not under control, they are unpeaceful and dissatisfied.

Text 2
adānta indriya nahe yogabale vasa
kata muni yogī saba hayeche vivaśa
adānta indriya-uncontrolled senses; nahe-not; yoga-bale-by the process of astanga yoga; vaśa-controlled; kata-many; muni-munis; yogī-yogis; saba-all; hayeche-became; vivaśa-helpless.
The uncontrolled senses cannot be controlled simply by the force of the mystic yoga process. How many great sages and yogis have fallen helpless to the agitation of their senses?

Text 3
hṛṣīkesa-sevā vinā hṛṣīka-damana
karamera phera saba bhuñjāya śamana
hṛṣīkesa-Lord of the senses; sevā-service; vīna-except for; hṛṣīka-senses; damana-control; karamera-of one activities; phera-course or turn; saba-all; bhuñjāya-enjoy; śamana-death.
Trying to control the senses without engaging them in the service of the Supreme Lord Hrisikesa, the master of the senses, simply leads one upon the path of material fruitive activities, and thus those bewildered souls simply achieve repeated birth and death for all their efforts.

Text 4
yogete indriya-saṁyama kabhu nāhi haya
āgama-purāṇe tāhā bhuri bhuri kaya
yogete-by yoga; indriya saṁyama-control of senses; kabhu nāhi haya-there is never; āgama-purāṇe-in Vedas and Puranas; tāhā-that; bhuri bhuri-many times; kaya-say.
Simply by the practice of the yogic system of meditation, without taking shelter of devotional service, one shall never be able to bring the material senses under complete control. Histories in the Vedic literature, including the Puranas, are filled with proofs of this fact.

Song 12

Text 1
yogīra āsane vasechila viśvāmitra
janma dila śakuntalā sundarī pavitra
yogīra-of the yogi; āsane-on the seat; vasechila-sat; viśvāmitra-Viswamitra; janma dila-caused the birth of; śakuntalā-Sakuntala; sundarī pavitra-beautiful and pure.
Viśvāmitra, the great yogi, sat upon his āsana (seat) in yogic meditation, but was distracted by desires for sense gratification when the heavenly society girl Menakā appeared before him. As a result, he left his meditation and fathered the beautiful and pure Sakuntala.

Text 2
eibhāve yogabhraṣta jñānīra ki kathā
karmī saba mūḍha-jana vyathita sarvathā
eibhāve-in this way; yoga-bhraṣta-fallen from the discipline of yoga; jñānīra-of the jnani; ki kathā-what to speak of; karmī saba-all those who engage in regulated activities for sense gratification; mūḍha-jana-foolish people; vyathita-suffer pain; sarvathā-always.
This is the example of yogis who practice the mystic yoga system, so what to speak of jñānīs, those who practice the self-realization process of mental speculation, which is inferior to the path of yoga? There is no possibility of their completely controlling senses. As far as the karmis, or frutive workers, are concerned, their success is out of the question, since they are foolishly absorbed in material activities and are always separate from the transcendental process of self realization.

Text 3
kṛṣṇa yāre kṛpā kari upadeśa dena
tini ta arjuna sama bhāgyavāna hana
kṛṣṇa-Kṛṣṇa; yāre-to whom; kṛpā kari-giving mercy; upadeśa-instruction; dena-gives; tini- to that person; arjuna-sama-like Arjuna; bhāgyavāna-greatly fortunate; hana-becomes.
Anyone who receives the instructions of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by His causeless mercy, and who follows them in his life is certainly as fortunate as Arjuna and therefore will achieve all success in life and return back home to Godhead.

Text 4
āpanār sukha-lāgi yebā yuddha kare
durjodhaner mato se savaṁśete mare
āpanār-personal; sukha-lāgi-sense gratification; yebā-whoever; yuddha kare-fights; durjodhaner mato-like duryodhan; se-that person; savaṁśete-along with his dynasty; mare-vanquished.
On the other hand, those who are motivated with desires for material happiness and thus engage in the battle of the hard struggle for existence neglect the transcendental path of devotional service to the Lord. They can be compared to the King Duryodhana, and as he did, in spite of their best efforts, they shall perish along with all their family members.

Song 13

Text 1
kṛṣṇera lāgiyā yebā nitya yuddha kare
ṛddhi-siddhi, jñāna tāra muṣṭira bhitare
kṛṣṇera-of Kṛṣṇa; lāgiyā-attaching oneself to; yebā-whoever; nitya-constantly; yuddha kare-fights against maya; ṛddhi-prosperity; siddhi-mystic powers; jñāna-knowledge; tāra-his; mustira bhitare-within his fist.
Anyone who regularly engages in the battle of controlling the material senses on behalf of Lord Kṛṣṇa, by engaging his senses in devotional service, easily achieves the perfections of material prosperity, mystic yogic powers, and transcendental knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Indeed, those perfections are resting in the palm of his hand.

Text 2
gītār upadeśa bhāi bujha bhāla kari
pāibe kṛṣṇera kṛpā bhajibe śrī hari
gītār-of the Bhagavad-gīta; upadeśa-teachings; bhāi-brother; bujha-please understand; bhāla kari-very well; pāibe-please accept; krsnera-Kṛṣṇa’s; kṛpā-mercy; bhajibe-please worship; śrī hari-the Lord.
My dear brother, I therefore request you to kindly understand the real meaning of the teaching of the Bhagavad-gīta, and by this understanding you will achieve the causeless mercy of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His pure devotional service, which is the highest perfection of life.

Text 3
sarvaguṇe susampanna bhaktajana haya
ahiṁsā akrodha tāṅra kāche kichu naya
sarva-guṇe-in all good qualities; susampanna-well equipped; bhakta-jana-the devotees; haya-are; ahiṁsā-non violence; akrodha-without anger; tāṅra kāche-beside him; kichu naya-nothing at all.
The pure devotees of the Lord possess all good qualities. For them, having good qualities such as non-violence or freedom from anger is nothing at all.

Text 4
bhaktadvāre jīve śikṣā dibena śrī hari
tāhāra sahāya haila ‘pārtha’ nāmadhārī
bhakta-dvāre-by means of the devotees; jīve-to the fallen souls; śikṣā dibena-teaches; śrī hari-the Lord; tāhāra sahāya-for helping him; haila-was; pārtha nāma-dhārī-the person with the name partha. 
Lord Kṛṣṇa teaches the conditioned souls through the via-medium of His devotees. Through the pure devotees the Lord instructs the conditioned souls who thus take on the role that Arjuna did, and receive transcendental knowledge, which destroys their ignorance and suffering in the battlefield of life.

Song 14

Text 1
sājila arjuna yena māyābaddha nara
mohitera nyāya haila pāṇdava-sodara
sājila-appeared as; arjuna-Arjuna; yena-like; māyā-baddha-materially conditioned; nara-man; mohitera nyāya-as if under illusion; haila-became; pāṇdava-sodara-brother amongst the Pandavas.
Lord Kṛṣṇa made Arjuna appear as if he were a materially conditioned man. Under illusion, Arjuna, the brother of the Pandavas… 

Text 2
ātmīya-svajana hiṁsā, pare rājya-bhoga
ithe kibā sukha-pārtha dekhāilā śoka
ātmīya-svajana hiṁsā-violence against relatives; pare-after; rājya-bhoga-enjoyment of the kingdom as a result of battle; ithi-in that; kibā-what; sukha-happiness; pārtha-Arjuna; dekhāilā-exhibited; śoka-lamentation.
…expressed his sorrow and grief, saying, “What kind of happiness can be gotten from being envious and violent against one’s own relatives and friends, and after killing them trying to enjoy ruling the kingdom?”

Text 3
seita’ ‘dehātma buddhi’ ātmīya-jñāna ka’re
kṣatriya haiyā snehe yuddhakṣetra chāḍe
seita-that; dehātma buddhi-on the basis of ones own body; ātmīya-jñāna kare-considering relatives; kṣatriya-warrior; haiyā-though being; snehe-out of affection; yuddhakṣetra-battlefield; chāḍe-give up.
Arjuna was demonstrating dehatma-buddhi, or the consciousness of bodily identification, by thinking that the familial ties of his material body were in fact related to him. Therefore, even though he was a ksatriya, or warrior, by caste and profession, he was abandoning the battlefield, being overwhelmed by material affection and sentiment.

Text 4
moha dhekhi’ kṛṣṇa tāṅ’ra karila nindana
ataeva arjuna kaila śiṣhyatva grahaṇa
moha-illusion; dhekhi-seeing; kṛṣṇa-Kṛṣṇa; tāṅra-his; karila nindana-criticized; ataeva-thereafter; arjuna-Arjuna; kaila śiṣhyatva grahaṇa-made himself the disciple of Kṛṣṇa.
Seeing Arjuna’s illusion, Lord Kṛṣṇa mercifully criticized him. Thereafter, Arjuna accepted the position of being the disciple of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Song 15

Text 1
śiṣya haiyā kare sei gītār-śravaṇa
ghucibe ajñāna āra saṁsāra-bandhana
śiṣya haiyā-putting oneself in the position of a disciple, submissive; kare-performs; sei-that; gītār-of the Bhagavad-gīta; śravaṇa-hearing; ghucibe-he will become free from; ajñāna-ignorance; āra-and; saṁsāra-material world; bandhana-bondage of material world.
Whoever listens to the instructions of the sacred Bhagavad-gīta submissively as a faithful disciple, from his bona-fide spiritual master, will certainly have all ignorance removed and be freed from the bondage of repeated birth and death in this material world.

Text 2
saṁsāra ghucila kintu bāhya-nyāsī naya
gītār tātparye gṛhī erūpa bhujhāya
saṁsāra-material world; ghucila-has become free from; kintu-but; bāhya-nyāsī-one who has renounced external activities; naya-is not; gītār-of the Bhagavad-gīta; tātparye-in the purport; gṛhī-the householder; e-rūpa-in this way; bhujhāya-understands.
Liberation from the bondage of this material world of repeated birth and death is achieved not by one externally in the renounced order of life, or sannyasa – the purport of Bhagavad-gīta is that even a gṛhastā, or a married man with house and family, can achieve the complete perfection of life by faithfully following the instructions of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 3
‘kariṣye vacanaṁ tava’ sei mantra-siddhi
ataeva yuddhe tāṅra ha’la yaśovṛddhi
kariṣye vacanaṁ tava-I will do as you say; sei-that; mantra-siddhi-perfection of all mantras; ataeva-therefore; yuddhe-in the battle; tāṅra-his; hala-was; yaśovṛddhi-increased.
The secret mantra for perfection in the Bhagavad-Gita is to state as Arjuna stated to the Superme Lord Kṛṣṇa: “I shall act according to Your Instruction.” Thus on the battlefield of Kurukṣetra, Arjuna’s fame and success simply increased.

Text 4
vaiṣṇava nirīha sava mālā japa kare
e kon vaiṣṇava arjuna saṁsāra-bhitare
vaiṣṇava-vaiṣṇavas; nirīha-peaceful; sava-all; mālā-beads; japa-kare-chant on; e-this; kon-what kind; vaiṣṇava-devotee; arjuna-Arjuna; saṁsāra-bhitare-within the material world.
If the only qualification of a vaiṣṇava is that he retires to a solitary place and chants Hare Kṛṣṇa maha-mantra silently on his meditational japa beads, then in this world what kind of a Vaisnava devotee of the Lord is Arjuna?

Song 16

Text 1
‘nirdvandva’ vaiṣṇava śudhu japa kare mālā
balaye eirūpa yā’rā khāya manakalā
nirdvandva-unoffending; vaiṣṇava-vaiṣṇava; śudhu-only; japa kare mālā-perform japa on beads; balaye eirūpa-saying in this way; yārā-those who; khāya mana-kalā-shown to be fools.
Those who say that in order to be a pure unadulterated vaiṣṇava devotee of the Lord one must not do anything except chant silently Hare Kṛṣṇa japa on his meditational beads, are foolishly bewildered by their own mental concoctions.

Text 2
vaiṣṇava nirīha, akṛtadroha, haita’ svabhāve
kintu nahe hīnavīrya yathā loka bhāve
vaiṣṇava-the Vaiṣṇava; nirīha-meek; akṛtadroha-without malice; haita-is in fact; svabhāve-by his very nature; kintu-but; nahe-is not; hīna-vīrya-without courage; yathā-as; loka-people; bhāve-may think.
A vaiṣṇava is certainly meek, unoffensive, and without malice to others as his natural quality, but this does not mean that the vaiṣṇava devotee of the Lord is without courage or strength, as common people may think.

Text 3
bhāratera dui yuddhe dui mahāśaya
vaiṣṇavera agraṇī tārā karila vijaya
bhāratera- of Bharata; dui-two; yuddhe-battles; dui-two; mahaśaya-personalities; vaiṣṇavera-the Vaiṣṇavas; agraṇī-leaders; tārā-they; karila vijaya-were victorious.
On this planet of Bharata there were two great wars which were fought during the presence of two incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There wars had two vaiṣṇavas, pure devotees of the Lord, fighting as the commander in chief of an army, and these devotees of the Lord were victorious. (Hanuman fought for Lord Ramacandra, and Arjuna fought for Lord Kṛṣṇa.)

Text 4
nijendriya tṛiptivāñchāya yuddha nāhi kare
vaiṣṇava baliyā tāi vidita saṁsāre
nijendriya-of ones own senses; tṛipti-vāñchāya-out of desire for satisfaction; yuddha-fight; nāhi-not; kare-perform; vaiṣṇava-baliyā-as devotees of the Lord; tāi-therefore; vidita-famous; saṁsāre-in the world.
These two pure devotees of the Lord did not fight in these wars out of desire for enjoying sense gratification for themselves. Rather they acted out of pure desire to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore they are renowned as great pure devotees throughout the entire material world.

Song 17

Text 1
vaiṣṇava nā dekhiyā bale vaiṣṇava niṣkriya
vaiṣṇava ‘prabhura’ sevāya sadāi sakriya
vaiṣṇava nā dekhiyā-not considering carefully who is vaiṣṇava; bale-they say; vaiṣṇava niṣkriya-the vaiṣṇava should be inactive; vaiṣṇava-the actual vaiṣṇava; prabhura-of the Lord; sevāya-in the service; sadāi-always; sakriya-active.
Those who have never seen a real Vaisnava devotee of the Supreme Lord say that Vaisnava are inactive, or should not perform any ordinary activities. This is a completely wrong idea because the Vaisnava pure devotees of the Lord are always engaged in various kinds of activities in devotional service for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 2
prāṇahīna kaniṣṭha sei sevā nāhi kare
pratiṣṭhāra tare thāke nirjanera ghare
prāṇahīna-devoid of life; kaniṣṭha-neophyte devotee; sei-that person; sevā-service; nāhi kare-does not perform; pratiṣṭhāra tare-on account of desire for fame; thāke-remains; nirjanera-solitary; ghare-place.
Actually it is the lifeless, neophyte kaniṣṭha devotee of the Lord who does not perform activities in devotional service to the Supreme Lord. And instead these neophyte devotees, being influenced by material desires for recognition as a great saintly person in the eyes of the common man, go to some secluded place and engage in chanting the holy names of the Lord in an unauthorized fashion.

Text 3
vaiṣṇava-praṇamya śrila nītyānanda rāya
māra khāya prema deya yathāya tathāya
vaiṣṇava-praṇamya-who should be bowed down to by all the devotees; śrila nītyānanda rāya-Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu; māra khāya-is beaten; prema-love of God; deya-gives out; yathāya tathāya-everywhere.
Take the example of Lord Śrī Nītyānanda Prabhu, who is worshipable by all the pure Vaisnava devotees of the Lord. Even though He was beaten by the very people He was preaching to, still he always remained active, distributing pure love for Kṛṣṇa (prema) anywhere and everywhere for the upliftment of the fallen souls in this material world.

Text 4
cakrapāṇi gourahari sethā karila śāsana
vaiṣṇava-vidveṣī tabe haila damana
cakrapāṇi-with cakra in His hand; gourahari-Lord Caitanya; sethā-there; karila-śāsana-punished; vaiṣṇava-vidveṣī-those who hate the devotees; tabe-then; haila damana-were subdued. 
Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to the rescue of Lord Nītyānanda, bearing his Sudarsana cakra weapon in His hand to those envious of His devotees, thus bringing them under His control. In this way, those inimical to the Vaisnava devotees of the Lord are always defeated by the mercy of Lord Caitanya.

Song 18

Text 1
āpani acari ‘prabhu’ jīvere śikhaya
āpana vañcaka yei sei nirjane bhajaya
āpani-himself; acari-setting the example by his actions; prabhu-the supreme Lord in the form of Śrī Caitanya; jīvere - to the jīvas; śikhaya-educates; āpana-oneself; vañcaka-cheating; yei-he who; sei-that person; nirjane-alone; bhajaya-performs his worship.
The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa has personally descended from the spiritual world in His form as a devotee, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, to teach the conditioned souls by His personal example how they should perform pure devotional service to Kṛṣṇa. He has also instructed that one should teach by one’s personal example. It is only the deluded persons who want to cheat themselves who do not faithfully follow the instructions of Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and leave His saṅkīrtan preaching movement to engage in solitary or secluded worship of the Lord known as “nirjana-bhajana”.

Text 2
jagat bhariyā gela jagāi-mādhāiye
nityānanda vaṁśa bāḍāya śiṣya-sampradāye
jagat-this universe; bhariyā gela-became filled; jagāi-mādhāiye-with people like Jagāi and Madhāi; nityānanda vaṁśa-the line from Nityānanda Prabhu; bāḍāya-increased accordingly; śiṣya-sampradāye-through disciplic succession.
At the time of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu there was one Jagāi and Madhāi, but now the whole world has become filled with degraded, misdirected persons of the caliber of Jagāi and Madhāi. But instead of following the footsteps of Lord Nītyānanda and delivering these degraded souls, those who claim to be in the Nītyānanda-vaṁsa, or a familial succession from Lord Nītyānanda’s disciples, simply try to increase their own succession of disciples.

Text 3
khāya dāya thāke veśa haye cintāhīna
vaiṣṇaver ucita nahe thākā dayāhina
khāya dāya-eat, drink (enjoy); thāke veśa-stays; haye cintāhīna-worriless; vaiṣṇaver-vaiṣṇava; ucita-expressed; nahe-not; thākā-to remain; dayāhina-without compassion.
They visit their disciples, get well fed and taken care of, and thus enjoy a comfortable life without any thought or anxiety. But it is not proper that a vaiṣṇava devotee of the Lord should be without mercy for the fallen conditioned souls. This is not a standard of advanced devotional service to the Lord.

Text 4
“mādhurya kādambinī” – grantha cakravartī gāya
siddhānta dekhaha tathā kibā tāṅra ‘rāya’
mādhurya kādambinī-mādhurya kadambinī; grantha-book; cakravartī-Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura; gāya-sings; siddhānta-conclusive proof; dekhaha-just see; tathā-their; kibā-what; tāṅra-his; rāyā-verdict.
In this regard, one should see what is the judgement given by the great vaiṣṇava spiritual master and ācārya Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his book Mādhurya Kādambinī as to the real standard of performing devotional service to the Lord, and study his philosophical conclusions.

Song 19

Text 1
bhakti ahaitikī haya svaprakāśita
nityasiddha vastu kintu āche āvarita
bhakti-devotional service; ahaitikī-causeless; haya-is; svaprakāśita-self revealed; nitya-siddha-eternally perfect; vastu-things; kintū-but; āche-is; āvarita-covered.
Causeless, spontaneous, pure devotional service to Kṛṣṇa the Supreme Personality of Godhead, self-manifests naturally in due course. However, the confidential transcendental characteristics of eternal perfection remain covered.

Text 2
madhyama-adhikārī-vaiṣṇava kṛpā ta’ kariyā
avaiṣṇave kare kṛpā bhakti jāgāiyā
madhyama-adhikāri-vaiṣṇava-the devotee at the second stage of advancement; kṛpā-ta-kariyā-being merciful; avaiṣṇave-to those who are not yet devotees; kare kṛpā-gives mercy; bhakti-devotional service; jāgaiyā-awakening.
A madhyama-adhikāri vaiṣṇava, or a devotee acting on the intermediate level of devotional service, out of their causeless mercy show compassion upon fallen non-devotees and awaken in their hearts the dormant devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 3
vaiṣṇavera vaśa hana svayaṁ bhagavāna
vaiṣṇavera kṛpāya mugdha haya āguyāna
vaiṣṇavera vaśa-controlled by the vaiṣṇavas; hana-is; svayaṁ bhagavāna-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vaiṣṇavera-of the Vaiṣṇavas; kṛpāya-by the mercy; mugdha-happy, pleased (fascinated?, charmed); haya-is; āguyāna-taking the lead.
Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme personality of Godhead, becomes controlled by the love of His pure devotees. The Lord Himself becomes even more enchanted by His devotee’s wonderful qualities of transcendental mercy and compassion towards the fallen souls.

Text 4
vaiṣṇava jāgāte pāre ghumanta jagat
tāṅrai kṛpāya haya pāpīrā bhakata
vaiṣṇava-the devotees; jāgāte pāre-can awaken; ghumanta-sleeping; jagat-universe; tāṅrai-his; kṛpāya-by mercy; haya-become; pāpīrā-the sinful people; bhakata-devotees.
A real vaiṣṇava devotee of the Lord is able to spiritually awaken the sleeping world of conditioned souls. By the causeless mercy of these pure devotees a sinful man is transformed into a devotee of the Lord.

Song 20

Text 1
ataeva tāṇra nahe ‘nirjana-bhajana’
kaniṣṭha-adhikāra ei jagat-vañcana
ataeva-therefore; tāṅra-his; nahe-is not; nirjana-bhajana-worship soley for ones own benefit; kaniṣṭha-adhikāra-the first stage service only; ei-this; jagat-vañcana-cheating the whole universe.
Therefore the real devotees of the Lord do not perform the so-called solitary worship of the Lord but always stay active in the saṅkīrtan movement of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. It is a cheating process of the kaniṣṭha adhikāri - the neophte or materialistic devotees of the Lord - to fool the world into believing that they are exalted devotees of the Lord.

Text 2
baḍa baḍa nāmajādā vaiṣṇava-sajjāya
pādrī sāheb āsi’ mile saba tāya
baḍa baḍa-very big; nāmajāda-famous; vaiṣṇava-sajjāya-in the dress of the devotee; pādri-Christian priest; sāheb-gentleman; āsi-coming; mile-joined; saba-all; tāya-with them.
They present themselves as great famous devotees of the Lord and decorate themselves with all the neccessary trappings and paraphernalia to look like a big devotee. But what do they do when the “Father” Christian missionary comes to the land of Kṛṣṇa and visits with all the people…

Text 3
puchila śrī kṛṣṇalīlā vṛndāvana-mājha
nā bhujāla tā’re tattva vaiṣṇava-samāja
puchila-asked; śrī kṛṣṇalīlā-about the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa; vṛndāvana-mājha-within vṛndāvana; nā-did not; bhujāla-let understand; tāre-to him; tattva-the actual truth; vaiṣṇava-samāja-the society of vaiṣṇavas.
…and asks what are the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa performed in the sacred land of vṛndāvana? Because the society of neophytes did not explain the real nature of Lord Kṛṣṇa to this “Father”, he gets the wrong understanding due to his poor fund of knowledge, and thus engages in blasphemy to the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Text 4
kaniṣṭha-adhikārī saba śāstra nāhi bhujhe
nirjane bhajanae śudhu ruti-cānā khuṅje
kaniṣṭha-adhikāri-neophte; saba-all; śāstra-scripture; nāhi bhujhe-do not understand; nirjane bhajanae-worship in a lonely place; śudhu-only; ruti-cānā-capatis and chick peas; khuṅje-look for. 
Actually these neophyte kaniṣṭha adhikāri devotees of the Lord don’t understand the conclusions of the revealed scriptures at all. For one engaged in their so-called renunciation, to perform some “advanced private worship”, all their activities reveal is a day today struggle for finding some capatis and dhal (bread and soup), and nothing more.

Song 21

Text 1
gurudeva balechila kaniṣṭha e-saba
etadine bhujhilama tāṅra vāṇī-raba
gurudeva-the spiritual master, Bhaktisiddhāta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura; balechila-said; kaniṣṭha-neophyte; e-saba-all these; etadine-after so many days; bhujhilama-I have understood; tāṅra-his; vāṇī-raba-his message.
My spiritual master, His Divine Grace Om Visnupada Paramahamsa Parivrajakācārya 108 Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Goswāmī Ṭhākura, said about all the above mentioned, superficially renounced “vaiṣṇavas” doing their individual separate worship, “They are all kaniṣṭha adhikāri, or neophyte materialistic devotees of the Lord.” After all these days suddenly I have understood the real purport of those words of my spiritual master.

Text 2
“sāstrayuktye sunipuṇa ḍṛḍha śraddhā yā’ra
uttama-adhikārī sei tarāya samsāra”
śāstra-yuktye-sastric injuctions; sunipuṇa-expert; ḍṛḍha-unflinching; śraddhā-faith; yāra-who; uttama-adhikāri-first class devotee; sei-that; tarāya-delivers; samsāra-material world.
My spiritual master is fully conversant with all the conclusions of the revealed scriptures, and he is a living and prefect examples of how to act in pursuance to the scripture. Moreover, he has intense and complete faith in that devotional service to Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He and others with the same qualities are topmost devotees of the Lord, known as uttama-adhikāris, and they are able to deliver the entire material creation by their causeless mercy.

Text 3
pattitapāvana tini jagatete khyāti
e’patite uddhāraha tabe ta’ sukhyāti
pattita-pāvana-sanctifier of sinful; tini-he; jagatete-in the universe; khyāti-famous; ei-this; patite-this fallen soul; uddhāraha-deliver; tabe-ta-then; sukhyāti-very happy.
The uttama-adhikāri pure devotees of the Lord are glorified all over the universe for being the deliverers of the most fallen souls; therefore, this most fallen soul prays to be delivered out of causeless mercy, for only then shall I achieve real happiness.

Text 4
kalikālera jīva saba patita adhāma
dekhiyāo nāhi dekhe ihā ki rakama
kalikālera-of Kali-yuga; jīva-the jīvas; saba-all; patita-fallen; adhāma-low; dekhiyāo-seeing even; nāhi dekhe-does not consider; ihā-this material world; ki rakama-how terrible it is.
The conditioned souls in this iron age of Kali are all fallen and the lowest of mankind. Even if they see such an uttama-adhikāri pure devotee of the Lord, they can never understand his actual transcendental position due to their degraded condition.

Song 22

Text 1
mahāvadāny īśvara-śrī gaurasundara
tāṅhāra amṛtavāṇī madhura mukhara
mahā-vadāny-most generous; īśvara-the Lord; śrī gaurasundara-Śrī Caitanya; tāṅhāra-his; amṛtavāṇī-nectarian message; madhura mukhara-sweet and resounding.
The beautiful golden Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, is the most merciful of all incarnations of Godhead. Lord Śrī Caitanya’s immortal nectarian instruction is sweeter than honey, and supreme.

Text 2
bhārata bhūmite janma haila yāṅhāra
tāṅhāra vāṇīte kara para-upakāra
bhārata bhūmite-in the land of Bharata; janma haila-have taken birth; yāṅhāra-those who; tāṅhāra-his; vāṇīte-by the teachings; kara-perform; para-upakāra-welfare activity for others.
“Those persons who have taken birth in the sacred land of Bharata (directly India or generally this planet) are to realize the teachings of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu and to help others achieve the perfection of life.”

Text 3
nirjane āsvādana se ta’ prabhura līlā
līlā anukaraṇa nahe vaiṣṇavera khelā
nirjane-alone; āsvādane-taste; se ta-that; prabhura-the Lord’s; līlā-pastime; līlā anukaraṇa-imitation of His pastime; nahe-not; vaiṣṇavera-of the devotee; khelā-activities.
To engage in relishing the nectar of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s confidential pastimes alone or amongst an intimate circle of devotees was Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s personal līlā, or transcendental pastime. But Lord Caitanya is the golden incarnation of Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself. To engage in imitating the Lord’s līlā or transcendental eternal pastimes is hardly an authorized activity for any bonafide devotee of the Lord. A vaiṣṇava devotee of Lord always serves to satisfy the transcendental desires of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Neglecting the Lord’s order and instead simply trying to directly enjoy “tasting the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s confidential pastimes” is against the principle of selfless service in pure devotion, and therefore is not an authorized activity for a bonafide devotee of the Lord.

Text 4
sevākārya vaiṣṇavera nahe āsvādana
jaḍa dehe āsvādana nahe sambhāvana
sevākārya-activity of service; vaiṣṇavera-of the devotee; nahe-may not have; āsvādana-taste; jaḍa dehe-in the material body; āsvādana-taste; nahe-not; sambhāvana-possible.
It is never possible to experience the real “taste” or to actually realize the eternal pastimes of the Lord on the transcendental platform so long as one is conditioned by material bodily identification.

Song 23

Text 1
dehātmabuddhi yāra sei jaḍa deha
sei dehe āsvādana nāhi kare keha
dehātma-buddhi-thinking that one is the material body and mind; yāra-who has; sei-that; jaḍa deha-material body; sei dehe-in that body; āsvādana nāhi kare-cannot taste; keha-anyone.
One who falsely considers his body to be the self, or practically acts in that bodily consciousness by accepting bodily characteristics or qualities as transcendental qualifications, such a deluded soul has lost their spiritual vision and is no better than the material body they identify with. Therefore, no one in such material bodily consciousness and misidentification can relish the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme Lord, Which are all transcendental, beyond the range of perception by material senses.

Text 2
vaiṣṇavete jātibuddhi pravala pracura
līlā-āsvādane kintu baḍa bāhādura
vaiṣṇavete-in the devotees; jāti-buddhi-respecting according to family birth; pravala-pervasive; pracura-very; līlā-āsvādane-for tasting pastimes; kintu-but; baḍa-very; bāhādura-valiant.
A real Vaisnava is transcendental to all material conceptions, yet today those who claim to be Vaisnavas generally are filled with an almost unlimited variety of bodily conceptions due to caste consciousness and caste distinction, and these caste prejudices and disqualifications, the so-called Vaisnavas always take the lead like big heros when it comes to engaging in “relishing the nectar of Lord’s intimate pastimes.”

Text 3
ḍāhagharera kerāṇi (eka) goṅsāi ṭhākura
bābājī praṇāma kare tāhāre pracura
ḍāhagharera-post office; kerāṇi-clerk; eka-one; goṅsāi-ṭhākura-family descendent from an associate of Lord Caitanya; bābāji-renounced Vaisnava; praṇāma kare-pays respect; tāhāre-to him; pracura-very much.
For example, on post clerk has somehow or other become recognized as a “Gosai Thakur,” or a liberated pure Vaisnava. This way he receives so many obeisances from the babaji mendicants of vṛndāvana.

Text 4
goṅsāi ṭhākura kare jāti-abhimāna
nityānanda prabhuvare kare khāna khāna
goṅsāi-ṭhākura-goswāmī; kare-does; jāti-abhimāna-identification through his birth rather than qualities; nityānanda prabhuvare-the blessings of Nītyānanda Prabhu; kare khāna khāna-cut in pieces.
The so-called “Gosai Ṭhākura” is falsely proud on the basis of bodily distinction, and as a result Lord Nītyānanda Prabhu does not empower him as a bonafide spiritual master, but rather cuts him down into little pieces because of his offensive activities.

Song 24

Text 1
ei kārya dekhitechi vṛndāvana mājha
ataeva bhujhi hethā āche kichu kāja
ei kārya-this type of activity; dekhitechi-I am seeing; vṛndāvana mājha-within vṛndāvana; ataeva-therefore; bhujhi-I understand; hethā-here; āche-there is; kichu-some; kāja-work.
I am seeing all of these different material activities being performed here amidst the holy land of Śrī vṛndāvana-dhāma, and I can understand from seeing this that here there is a need for some work to be done to rectify the discrepancies and to establish real spiritual purity.

Text 2
prākṛta-sahajiyā saba vyabhicār kare
parastrī la’ye līlā āsvādana kare
prākṛta-sahajiyā-unauthorized performer; saba-all; vyabhicār kare-deviate; parastrī-others women; laye-accepting; līlā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes; āsvādana kare-taste.
Here the “prākṛta-sahajiya” persons who take the highest transcendental confidential devotional truths cheaply and mix their practices with material concepts and activities, are all engaging in illicit sexual activities.

Text 3
e nahe vṛndāvana-dhāma bhāva sadā mana
goswāmīra pādapadma karaha smaraṇa
e-this; nahe-not; vṛndāvana-dhāma-the realm of vṛndāvana; bhāva-think; sadā-always; mana-mind; goswāmīra-goswāmī; pādapadma-lotus feet; karaha-do; smaraṇa-remember.
This is not vṛndāvana-dham, nor do these material activities form a part of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal abode, Śrī vṛndāvana-dhāma. O my dear mind, always remember that and constantly think of the six Goswāmīs of vṛndāvana-dhāma: Śrī Rupa Goswāmī, Śrī Sanatana Goswāmī, Śrī Raghunatha Das Goswāmī, Śrī Gopala Bhatta Goswāmī, Śrī Raghunatha Bhatta Goswāmī and Śrī Jiva Goswāmī, and remember their lotus feet.

Text 4
chhaya goṅsāi āsi yathā dharma pracārila
mahāprabhu-ājñāya saba bhakti vistārila
chhaya goṅsāi-six Goswāmī; āsi-coming; yathā-where; dharma-dharma; pracārila-preached; Mahāprabhu-ājñāya-on the order of Śrī Caitanya; saba-all of them; bhakti-devotional service; vistārila-spread.
Remember how these, the six real “Goswāmīs”, came here to vṛndāvana-dhāma on the direct order of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu and preached the glories of the eternal religious principles of devotional service. By their personal preaching and pure example, all of them were able to spread widely the principles of the pure bhakti-yoga, or pure devotional service of Lord Kṛṣṇa, throughout the world.

Song 25

Text 1
nityasiddha pārṣada saba rādhākṛṣṇa smare
tāṅdera smaraṇa jīvera sarva pāpa hare
nitya-siddha-eternally liberated; pārṣada-associates; saba-all; rādhākṛṣṇa smare-remember Radha and Kṛṣṇa; tāṅdera-of them; smaraṅa-remembrence; jīvera-of the conditioned souls; sarva-all; pāpa-sin; hare-takes away.
These eternally liberated associates of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who have descended from the spiritual world, are always absorbed in pure transcendental remembrance of Their Lordships Śrī Śrī Radha-Kṛṣṇa. The transcendental position of these eternally liberated associates is so spiritually elevated that simply by remembering them a conditioned soul is freed from all of his accumulated sinful fruitive reactions.

Text 2
anukaraṇa kari’ yadi sei bhāva dhare
māyā-kabalita haya saṁsāra nā tare
anukaraṇa kari-imitating; yadi-if; sei bhāva-that sentiment; dhare-holds; māyā-kabalita-devoured by maya; haya-is; saṁsāra-material world; nā tare-does not trancend.
But if anyone tries to imitate these eternally liberated associates of the Lord by mimicking their transcendental activities or simply by putting on an outward show, instead of achieving pure devotion they will be brought under the tight grips of māyā, the Lord’s powerful illusory potency, and they will not even be delivered from the bondage of this material world of repeated birth and death.

Text 3
pracāra karaha sadā jīva ghare ghare
sphala haibe jīvana pracārena dvāre
pracāra-preaching; karaha-perform; sadā-always; jīva-oh jīve; ghare ghare-from house to house; sphala haibe-will be fruitful; jīvana-life; pracārena dvāre-by means of preaching.
“Preach the transcendental glories of Lord Kṛṣṇa to all the fallen souls, from house to house! By Kṛṣṇa-conscious preaching your life shall become perfect.”

Text 4
‘śrī dayita dās’ prabhu dena ei śikṣā
‘kara uccaiḥsvare nāma’ ei tāṇa dīkṣā
śrī dayita dās prabhu-Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura; dena-gives; ei-this; śikṣā-teaching; kara-perform; uccaiḥsvare-in a loud voice; nāma-the holy names; ei-this; tāṇa-his; dīkṣā-instruction.
This is the transcendental instruction of His Divine Grace Śrī Śrīmad 108 Om Visnupada Paramahamsa Parivrajakācārya Bhaktisiddhānta Saraswati Goswāmī Ṭhākura, intimately known as “Śrī dayita das,” the great spiritual master (in the line of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu).

Song 26

Text 1
kīrtanera aṅga śudhu nahe ḍhāka-ḍhola
ādhunika dhārāya nahe kīrtanera rola
kīrtanera-of chanting; aṅga-part; śudhu-just; nahe-not; ḍhāka-ḍhola-beating of drums; ādhunika-modern; dhārāya-as a custom; nahe-not; kīrtanera-rola-voice of kīrtana.
It is not that saṅkīrtana, unitedly spreding the glories of the Lord’s Holy name, is limited to only the beating of drums. In that the sound of the kīrtana cannot be spread by other methods (printing press and book, radio, television, video, tape recordings, cinema, etc.)…

Text 2
harisevāya anukūla sakalai mādava
trijagatera bhoktā haya ekalā yādava
hari-sevāya-in the service of the Lord; anukūla-favorably; sakalai-everything; mādava-oh! Kṛṣṇa; tri-jagatera-of the three worlds; bhoktā-enjoyer; haya-is; ekalā-only; yādava-Kṛṣṇa.
…whatever is favourable in the devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa is all madhava, ie., on the absolute platform. The enjoying master of the three worlds of this material universe is alone Yadhava, Lord Kṛṣṇa the master of yadu dynasty.

Text 3
māyāra vaibhava yata rediora sabda
kīrtanera dvārā sadā kara tāhā stabdha
māyāra-of māyā; vaibhava-opulences; yata-many; rediora śabda-sounds from the radio; kīrtanera dvārā-by kīrtana; sadā-always; kara-please make; tāhā-that; stabdha-silenced.
All of the current radio broadcasts are simply another feature of material illusion. Stop that forever by broadcasting the glories of the Lord’s holy name.

Text 4
māyāra kackaci saba saṁvādera patra
kīrtana karaha tāhe jagate sarvatra
māyāra-of maya; kackaci-qurrel; saba-all; saṁvādera-patra-newspapper; kīrtana-karaha-perform kīrtana; tāhe-in that; jagate-in the universe; sarvatra-every where.
The daily newspapers are simply publishing all the material squabbles and bickerings. Replace that by publishing transcendental news and glorification from spiritual worlds and distribute all those news papers all over the universe.

Song 27

Text 1
ghare vase’ ceṅcāiyā pittavṛddhi kari
koti janmeo santuṣta habe nā śrī hari
ghare-in a room; vase-sitting; ceṅcāiyā-calling out; pitta-vṛddhi kari-increasing ones anger; koti-ten million; janmeo-births; santuṣta-pleased; habe nā-will not be; śrī hari-the Supreme Lord.
In the name of devotional service, if one goes on sitting in one’s room, barking orders, nagging one’s relatives, and noisily making complaints, one’s valuable human life will be wasted with nothing more to show for it than an increase in the bile content of the body! Even of one does this kind of activity for ten million births he cannot satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Text 2
śrī hari nahe kāro bābāra sampatti
‘khoṅyāḍera’ bāhira hao, nā kara āpatti
śrī hari-the Lord; nahe-not; kāro-any; bābāra-of a father; sampatti-property; khoṅyāḍera bāhira-out side; hao-be; nā-not; kara-make; āpatti-objection.
The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa is not one’s personal hereditary property that can be claimed as one’s own without doing anything for attaining Him. Therefore, come out of the confinement of your self-imposed kennel! Don’t give any excuses!

Text 3
saba śrī harira, āra śrī hari sabār
kara uccaiḥsvare kīrtana e śikṣa tāṇra
saba-all; śrī harira-of the Lord; āra-and; śrī hari-the Lord; sabār-everyone’s; kara-perform; uccaiḥsvare-in a loud voice; kīrtana-chanting; e-this; śikṣa-teaching; tāṇra-His.
Everyone and everything belongs to the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa belongs to everyone as their eternal master. “Loudly chant the glories of the holy name in saṅkīrtan!” is the instruction of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Text 4
kīrtana-prabhāve ha’ve smaraṇa āpani
nirjana-bhajana sei hṛdaye takhani
kīrtana-prabhāve-by the influence of kīrtana; have-will be; smaraṇa-rememberance; āpani-spontaneously; nirjana-bhajana-bhajana in a secluded place; sei-that; hṛdaye-within heart; takhani-then.
Under the transcendental influence of propagating and glorifying the Lord’s holy name, one will spontaneously achieve transcendental remembrance of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and one’s eternal relationship with Him. At that time, intimate personal worship of the Lord is established irrevocably in the heart.















